

Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia

by Maxime Kovalevsky

1891



Lecture IV

Old Russian Folkmotes


    It is a common saying among the Russian Conservatives, who
have lately been dignified in France by the name of
"Nationalists," that the political aspirations of the Liberals
are in manifest contradiction with the genius and with the
historical past of the Russian people.
    Sharing these ideas, the Russian Minister of Public
instruction Count Delianov, a few years ago ordered the
Professors of Public Law and of Legal History to make their
teaching conform to a programme in which Tzarism, the unlimited
power of the Russian emperors, was declared to be a truly
national institution.
    Some of the professors who refused to comply with this order
were called upon to resign, others were simply dismissed from
their chairs. The question I am about to discuss in this and the
following lecture is, whether this theory bears the test of
history. Is it true that Russian autocracy is a thoroughly
national institution, the roots of which are found in the
remotest period of Russian history? Is it the fact that no
folkmotes and no representative institutions ever existed in the
eastern part of Europe, and that the Byzantine principle of an
unlimited monarchical power, having no other source but its
divine right derived from God himself and being responsible to no
one but Heaven, has been always recognised by my countrymen?
    I shall begin by saving that, had such been the case, the
historical development of Russia would form a monstrous anomaly
to the general evolution of political institutions, at least
among people of Aryan blood.
    It is not before an Oxford audience that I need recall this
well-established fact, that in earlier times the assembly of the
people, the Folkmote, shared in the exercise of sovereign power
side by side with the elected head of the nation, whatever may
have been his title. Professor Freeman and Sir Henry Maine have
left no possibility of doubt on this point; the first, when
treating of the Greeks, Romans, and Germans; the second, in
relation to the ancient Celtic population of Ireland. The barrier
of language, of which Sir Henry Maine so often complained to me,
prevented these two eminent scholars from completing their
comparative study of early political organisation by a minute
investigation of that of the medieval Slavs; but recent
researches, carried on both in Russia and in Poland, Bohemia and
Servia, permit us to extend to Slavonic nations the general
conclusions which have been arrived at by those English scholars,
who have taken as their basis a careful study of Hellenic,
German, and Celtic law.
    Byzantine chronicles, which contain the earliest information
on the social and political condition of the assertion that the
the Slavs, are unanimous in Slavonic people knew nothing of a
strongly centralised autocratic power. "From the remotest
period," says Procopius, a writer of the sixth century, "the
Slavs were known to live in democracies; they discussed their
wants in popular assemblies or folkmotes" (chapter xiv of his
"Gothica seu Bellum Gothicum"). Another authority, the Byzantine
Emperor Mauriquius, when speaking of the Slavs, writes as
follows: "The Slavs like liberty; they cannot bear unlimited
rulers, and are not easily brought to submission" ("Strategicum,"
chap. xi). The same language is used also by the Emperor Leo.
"The Slavs," says he, "are a free people, strongly opposed to any
subjection" ("Tactica seu de re militari," ch. xviii. 99).
    Passing from these general statements to those which directly
concern some definite Slavonic people, we will first of all quote
the Latin Chronicles of Helmold and Dithmar of Merseburg, both of
the eleventh century, in order to give an idea of the political
organisation of the Northern Slavs dwelling on the south-eastern
shore of the Baltic. Speaking of one of their earliest chiefs
named Mistiwoi, Helmold says that he, the chief, once complained
to the whole assembly of the Slavs of an injury he had received
(Convocatis omnibus Slavis qui ad orientem habitant, intimavit
eis illatam sibi contumeliam).
    The Russian scholars who have made a special study of the
history of those Slavonic tribes who were so early Germanised,
give us a description of the proceedings and functions of their
popular assemblies. The folkmote was convened in an open place.
In Stettin the market-place was furnished for this purpose with a
kind of stand from which the speakers addressed the multitude.
The folkmotes were not periodical assemblies, but were convened
as often as there was some question of State which needed public
discussion.
    It is well known that the privilege enjoyed in our days by
the majority was quite unknown to the primitive folkmotes. In
early times the decisions of the people were unanimous. This does
not mean that it was always easy to arrive at a general
agreement. Opinions were certainly as divided then as they are
now. What is meant is only this -- that, in case of difference of
opinion, the minority was forced to acquiesce in that of the
majority, unless it could succeed in persuading the majority that
they were in the wrong. In the Chronicle of Dithmar of Merseburg
the "unanimous vote" is distinctly stated to be a peculiarity of
the primitive Slavonic folkmotes:
    "Unanimi consilio," says this author, "ad placitum suimet
necessaria discutientes in rebus efficiendis omnes concordant."
In case some one refused to acquiesce in the common decision, he
was beaten with rods. If any opposition to the vote of the
majority arose after the assembly had been held, the dissentient
lost all his property, which was either taken from him or
destroyed by fire, unless he was ready to pay a certain amount of
money, varying according to his rank. The unanimous vote is very
often mentioned by contemporary chroniclers, who for this purpose
employ the following expressions: "Remota controversia," or
"quasi unus homo."(1*) The matters discussed at these early
Slavonic folkmotes were of a great variety: the election or the
dethroning of a prince, decisions about going to war or making
peace, are more than once mentioned by contemporary authors as
the direct work of these assemblies.
    If we turn our attention to the study of the earliest period
in the history of Bohemian political institutions, we shall see
the development of facts similar or quasi-similar to those just
mentioned. The Bohemian folkmote, the "snem," as it was called,
is known to Latin chroniclers under the names of conventus,
generale colloquium, or generalis curia. Persons of different
estates or orders constituted the assembly. The chronicles
mention, as a rule, the presence of the majores natu, of the
proceres and comites, as also that of the higher clergy, in clero
meliores; but in addition we find at these meetings, at least as
far back as the end of the eleventh century, the common people,
the populus, Bohemorum onmes, Bohemicae gentis magni et parvi,
nobiles et ignobiles. In the year 1055 the people are especially
mentioned as taking part in the election of a duke, and in 1068
and 1069 as engaged in the nomination of a bishop. In 1130 the
Duke Sobeslav convened an assembly of 3000 persons, nobiles et
ignobiles, to judge those who had conspired against him. At a
later period, after the beginning of the twelfth century, the
common people disappear from these assemblies, and the proceres
and majores natu remained alone with the high clergy to discuss
the affairs of the State. But in the early days with which we are
at present concerned the constitution of the Bohemian snem was
not very unlike that of an ordinary folkmote, to which all
classes of society were equally summoned. Like the folkmotes of
the Baltic Slavs, the Bohemian generalis conventus was not a
periodical assembly. Like them also, its decisions were the
result of a unanimous consent, a fact which is shown by the
contemporary documents, when they state that this and that matter
have been settled at the assembly "communio consilio et voluntate
pari" (Cosmus of Prague, ii. 87), or even more explicitly, "de
consensu omnium," "unanimiter."
    The election first of the duke and later on of the king, the
nomination of the bishop, the confirmation or rejection of the
laws proposed by the king and his council, the judicial decision
of certain exceptionally important cases, such were the regular
functions of the Bohemian folkmote. You will have no difficulty
in seeing that these functions are the same as those of the
popular assemblies of the Baltic Slavs.
    In Poland, the folkmotes, known under the name of
congregationes generales, sometimes also under that of conciones,
coltoquia, or consilia, were in early days composed not only of
the higher orders of society, but also of the common people. The
Latin Chronicle of Gallus mentions an occasion on which king
Boleslaus "imprimis majores et seniores civitatis, deinde totum
populum in concionem advocavit." The meaning of this quotation
leaves no doubt as to the popular character of these early Polish
political assemblies. In no Slavonic state was this popular
character so early lost as in Poland. As early as the beginning
of the thirteenth century the higher nobility and clergy, the
"milites" and the knights, begin to be the only constitutive
parts of the Polish "general council."
    The other feature of the primitive folkmote, the unanimous
vote, was much better preserved by the Polish parliament. From
the earliest times down to the fall of their political
independence, the Poles remained faithful to this very
incongruous system. The "liberum veto," the right of each member
to make null and void by his single opposition the decisions of
the entire assembly, became through the interference of foreign
States one of the best means of keeping in check the political
activity of the nation. By this veto, Russian, Austrian, and
Prussian intrigues more than once prevented the passing of laws
and measures, which might have preserved the independence of the
country. That the liberum veto had its roots in the most remote
period of Polish history may be shown by quotations like the
following. According to the chronicle of Cromer, the Polish
throne had been offered to the half mythical Cracus, "una
sententia," i.e., by the unanimous decision of the people, who
had, as we know, no other means of manifesting their feeling than
the folkmote. The same unanimous consent is mentioned by another
chronicle on the occasion of an election which took place in
1194.
    The legal power of the Polish general council was identical
with that of the Bohemian snem. It elected the chief ruler of the
land and entered into written covenants with him; it discussed
questions of international policy, expressed its opinion on
matters of taxation, gave its sanction to the legal enactments of
the king, the so-called statuta and con stitutiones, and from
time to time it exercised judicial authority in certain
exceptionally important civil cases. In a word, it possessed the
same multiplicity of powers which we have noticed when studying
the powers of the Bohemian folkmote.
    Hitherto we have consulted only the history of the Northern
and Western Slavs. Let us now turn to that of the Southern Slavs.
The democratic element is less prominent in the constitution of
the ancient Servian and Croatian folkmotes. At a very early
period the high nobility and clergy took possession of the
various powers of the popular assembly. But this does not mean
that no documentary evidence has reached us concerning the part
which the lower classes of society at least in Croatia, were
anciently called upon to play in the political organisation of
the country. The old Croatian chronicle explicitly states that in
the time of Svonomir, the first elected Croatian chief, the
"Ban," the national assembly known in later times under the name
of "Sobor," was composed not only of the higher orders (viteze,
barune, vlasnike), but also of the common people (puk zemlie).
The same common people is mentioned by the Latin chronicle as
having had its share in the election of this first Ban, who was
chosen "concordi totius cleri et populi electione." This happened
in the second half of the eleventh century (1076). During the
following centuries the nobility, and among them the higher class
of nobles represented by seven Bans, alone had a direct influence
on the nomination of the Croatian king. But the memory of old,
days, when the people chose their rulers, was still preserved
down to the end of the fifteenth century, as may be seen from the
following words of a charter issued in 1490 by King Vladislas the
second: "Domini, prelati et barones, caeterique pri mores et
universi incoloe regni, ad quos scilicet jus eligendi novum regem
ex vetustissima regni ipsius liberate et consuetudine devolutum
exstiterat... oculos mentis ipsorum in nos conjecerunt."
    The texts already quoted establish the fact that like other
Slavonic assemblies, the Sobors of Croatia were ignorant of the
rights of the majority and insisted on the necessity of a
unanimous decision. Expressions like "concordi electione,"
"omnibus collaudantibus," and the complete absence of any
information concerning decisions taken by a majority of voters,
leave no doubt on this point. The same texts mention several of
the functions which the Sobor was called upon to exercise. and
first among these was the election of the political heads of the
nation, who might be simple bans or kings. Questions of peace and
war were also settled by this assembly.
    But the chief occupation of the Sobor was of a legislative
character. From time to time the Chronicles state that "many good
laws have been made" by this or that assembly, and Professor
Bogisic has succeeded in tracing a whole list of the different
statutes resulting from their deliberations.
    The existence of these national councils did not prevent the
people of different localities from meeting in some kind of
provincial assemblies, and from exercising in them even
legislative functions. An instance of this fact is presented by
the island of Vinodol, the inhabitants of which in 1288 met in a
kind of local folkmote -- at which certain men were chosen to
make a general codification of old laws, the memory of which was
still preserved. In this way was formed the celebrated statute of
Vinodol, one of the chief sources of information as to the early
law of the Southern Slavs.
     The Servian States-General, although much less democratic
than the Croatian, merit our attention on account of the great
influence which they exercised on the management of public
affairs. It is true that the Servian Sobor is rather a council of
the higher orders, a sort of Anglo-Saxon Witenagemote, than a
folkmote or popular assembly. The third estate was not admitted
to its meetings either as a body or by representation, and one of
the paragraphs of the celebrated code of Stefan Douschan
(fourteenth century) even strictly forbids the peasants to meet
in political assemblies. But the lower nobility, who afterwards
played such a prominent part in the destinies of the Polish
nation, regularly sat in those meetings side by side with the
king, his council, the superior officers of State, the patriarch,
the ecclesiastical synod, and the members of the higher nobility.
These orders taken together exercised pretty neatly all the
functions of sovereignty. They made legal enactments, such as the
code just mentioned, and they were the authors of the different
amendments introduced into it in the course of time. They very
often elected the king, and sometimes dethroned him. The
archbishop and the provincial governors were also chosen by the
Sobor, which likewise disposed of the public lands, and discussed
the most important matters of civil and ecclesiastical
government.
    This rapid and rather superficial sketch of the early
political institutions of the Slavs, may at least serve to show
how considerable was the influence which the higher orders of
society, and very often the common people, exercised in the
management of the Slavonic State. My necessarily dry exposition
of ancient chronicles and charters, cannot fail to recall the
well-known passage in the "Germania" of Tacitus: "De minoribus
principes consultant, de majoribus omnes." Like the old Germanic
folkmote the Slavonic was a sort of supreme council, convened on
certain exceptionally important occasions. During an interregnum
all authority passed into its hands, and it was accordingly
empowered to choose the future ruler of the land, and to declare
under what conditions he was to be admitted to the exercise of
the sovereign power. In the ordinary course of public affairs,
the folkmote discussed important matters of civil, and in some
countries even of ecclesiastical government. It pronounced on
questions of war and peace, controlled the exercise of the
legislative authority, and was sometimes even directly engaged in
the making of new, and the codifying of ancient laws. Although
its authority was less prominent in executive and judicial
matters, yet it very often exercised the supreme right of
dethroning a king, and of judging persons accused of high
treason.
    When we call to mind these facts, the idea of an early
Russian autocracy, admitting of no control on the part of the
governed, will certainly appear to us to be in direct
contradiction not only of the general evolution of political
institutions, but also of its usual form among Slavonic nations.
We must refuse to accept an anomaly unless it is established on
the authority of well-authenticated historical facts. But no such
facts can be produced. The Russian chronicles, in which, from the
want of other sources of information, we are obliged to seek for
the chief elements of a general theory of ancient Russian
political institutions, show us a state of things, which has
nothing in common with absolute monarchy. On the first pages of
the chronicle attributed to the monk Nestor, the Eastern Slavs
are spoken of as possessing a sort of "gens" organisation; "each
one living with his kindred, and these kindreds occupying
distinct territorial districts." (Kojdo s svoim rodom i na svoich
mestech, kojdo vladeiusche rodom svoim.) in the sentence just
quoted, the chronicler describes the social organisation of the
most enlightened tribe of the Eastern Slavs, the Polians, and
immediately afterwards he speaks of three brothers and their
sister, who exercised in common some sort of political authority
over the tribe. According to this chronicler, the direct
descendants of these brothers ruled over the Polians. It is also
recorded of the Drevlians, another Slavonic tribe, that it had
its own prince, Mal. but the Polians and the Drevlians seem to
have been the only tribes living under monarchical rule. The rest
of the Slavonic tribes established in Russia are represented to
us as having no princes, but as living divided into clans or
"gentes," which were often at war one with another (vsta rod na
rod), a state of things which at length induced them "to seek a
foreign prince (kniaz) to command and judge them according to
justice." The establishment of monarchical power thus appears to
have been the direct result of a free decision on the part of the
people. The chronicle speaks of the tribes, which sent for a
foreign prince, as having previously assembled together
(snidoschasia vkoupe, sobravschesia). This means that the
decision to call in a foreign prince was the work of a folkmote.
Such is the first mention we possess of a Russian popular
assembly. The facts I have recorded happened in the second half
of the ninth century, in the year 862. Alluding to them, the
chronicle of Sousdal, under the year 1176, makes the following
general statement. "The inhabitants of Novgorod, of Smolensk, of
Kiev, and of Poloczk, and of all the principalities (volosti) of
Russia, were from the beginning, and are still, in the habit of
meeting at folkmotes as at a sort of council." The term employed
to designate the folkmote is that of veche from the verb veschat,
to announce, to declare. According to the sentence just quoted,
the veche may be traced from the oldest period of our national
existence. This is directly confirmed, in relation to the
Polians, by the following statement: "In the years next
following," says Nestor, speaking of the end of the ninth
century, "they thought in common (sdoumavsche) and decided to pay
to the Chasars a certain tax, the amount of which was one sword
from every hearth." The Drevlians are also spoken of by the
chronicle as having on one occasion "thought in common with their
prince Mal," and decided to slaughter the son of Rurik, Igor.
Now, this "thinking in common" of a whole tribe with its
political head, can only mean that the prince consulted the
folkmote, and with its help arrived at a definite decision.
    A peculiar feature of the oldest Russian folkmotes, a feature
which totally disappears by the end of the tenth century, is,
that they are the assembly of a whole tribe, sometimes even of
several tribes, and not of the inhabitants of one single urban
district. The Chronicle of Nestor speaks of the Polians, the
Drevlians, the Krivichs, the Sever, and such like people, as of
persons coming together, consulting one another and
"accomplishing certain acts in common." I have already said that
these were separate tribes, each one subdivided into kindreds or
"gentes" (rodi). Such being the case, the veche of the early days
of Russian historical development, was a kind of tribal assembly
very like those which Caesar and Tacitus found among the ancient
Germans.
    With the beginning of the eleventh century, the Russian
folkmote or veche acquired a new character, when the thief cities
of Russia, the political centres of more or less independent
states, obtained their separate assemblies. The chronicles
mention on different occasions the veches of Belgorod, of
Vladimir in Volhynia, of Berestie, of Riazan, Mourom, and Pronsk,
of Smolensk, Poloczk and Koursk, of Rostov, Sousdal, Pereiaslavl
and Vladimir on the Kliasm, besides those of Kiev, Novgorod,
Pscov, and Viatka.
    If we inquire into the internal constitution and functions of
the veche, we shall have no difficulty in ascertaining that in
both these points the Russian folkmotes did not essentially
differ from those of other Slavonic nations.
    The chronicles, when they speak of those summoned to these
assemblies, briefly note the presence of all the citizens of a
definite urban division. Expressions such as the following are
also more than once met with in the course of the narrative: "the
men of our land," "the whole land of Galich," and so on. Hence,
it is evident that we have to deal with a thoroughly democratic
assembly. But it does not follow that all the inhabitants of the
city were summoned. The veche was not so much an assembly of the
whole people as that of the heads of families, or rather of the
natural chiefs of Slavonic house communities known to the
earliest code of Russia, the pravda of Jaroslav, under the name
of "verv."
    On several occasions the unknown authors of Russian
chronicles seem to imply that the men assembled at the folkmote
made certain engagements, not only on their own behalf but also
on that of their children. For instance, "the men of Kiev, in
folkmote assembled," declare in 1147, that they will fight
against the House of Oleg, one of the branches of the dynasty of
Rurik, not by themselves alone, but also by their children. This
declaration clearly shows that children did not appear at a
Russian folkmote, but that their absence was solely caused by
their personal dependence on the head of the undivided family. We
may, therefore, infer that all those who were not free to dispose
of themselves were excluded from the veche; and such was the case
as regarded certain members of undivided households and those who
had forfeited their liberty through war or debt. In a society
based, like the old Russian, on the principle of blood
relationship, undivided households must have been numerous, and
the fact that the heads of these households were alone summoned
naturally diminished the number of persons composing the veche.
It may, therefore, be easily understood how a large square such
as those on which the princely palaces of Novgorod or of Kiev
were built, was quite able to contain an entire assembly,
notwithstanding the fact that the citizens were not the only
persons admitted to the meetings of the veche, for the suburbs
and even the neighbouring townships had the right to have an
equal share with them on the management of public affairs. The
chronicles very often mention the fact of the "black people,"
"the smerds," and the so-called "bad peasants" (terms designating
the agricultural population of the country) being present at the
veche. The urban district was as a rule very large, the lands
owned by the citizens in some cases extending to hundreds and
even thousands of miles outside the city wall. In order to
preserve these widely scattered possessions, the city often built
fortresses, which in case of war offered a refuge to the
inhabitants of the surrounding country. In time of peace these
fortified places answered another purpose; markets were regularly
held in them and hence in course of time artisans and merchants
were induced to choose them for their settled abode. The
population increased day by day, the fortress became surrounded
by suburbs, and a new city appeared where originally there had
been nothing but a wooden fence with a moat or ditch around it.
The inhabitants of this new city had generally the right to
appear at the veches of the metropolis, but they usually
preferred meeting at assemblies of their own. The roads being had
and not always safe, they did not see what was to be gained by a
long journey, but chose rather to stay at home and hold their own
folkmotes from time to time.
    The chronicles of Sousdal seem to imply that the decisions of
the local folkmotes did not, as a rule, differ from those of the
metropolis. "What has been established by the oldest city, is
maintained by its boroughs." Such are the words in which the
chronicle expresses the mutual relations of the metropolis and
the daughter towns. The real meaning of the sentence is not at
all that of dutiful subjection on the part of the new town
towards the mother city. The writer merely wishes to suggest the
idea of a good understanding between the metropolis and the
boroughs it has built. This good understanding was not always
maintained, and on more than one occasion the borough came to a
decision the reverse of that of the chief city. A similar
disagreement occurred more than once between different quarters
(konzi) of the same city. Such was often the case at Novgorod,
divided as it was into five different administrative districts or
wards, which more than once held their own separate folkmotes and
opposed the decisions of the general assembly. Such a
misunderstanding sometimes ended in open war, the minority
refusing to submit to the decision of the majority.
    This fact alone shows that the Russian veches admitted no
other mode of settling public affairs than that of unanimous
decision. It has been already shown that this mode was general
amongst Slavonic peoples. A few quotations will prove its
existence among the Eastern Slavs. Whenever the chronicler has
occasion to speak of one of their decisions he employs such
expressions as the following: "It was established by all the
oldest and all the youngest men of the assembly that," &c.; "all
were unanimous in the desire"; "all thought and spoke as one
man," &c.
    If unanimity could not be arrived at, the minority was forced
to acquiesce in the decision of the greater number, unless it
could persuade the members of the majority that they were wrong
in their opinion. In both cases the veches passed whole days in
debating the same subjects, the only interruptions being free
fights in the street. At Novgorod, these fights took place on the
bridge across the Volchov, and the stronger party sometimes threw
their adversaries into the river beneath. A considerable minority
very often succeeded in suspending the measure already voted by
the veche, but if the minority was small, its will had soon to
yield to open force.
    The competence of the Russian folkmote was as wide as that of
similar political assemblies among the Western and Southern
Slavs. More than once it assumed the right of choosing the chief
ruler of the land; but it was not an unrestricted right which
they enjoyed, the choice being confined to members of the family
of Rurik; for the Russians considered that outside Rurik's
dynasty, no one had a right to exercise sovereign power. The
folkmote was merely empowered to give its preference to some
district line of the house of Rurik, for instance to that
directly descending from Vladimir Monomach, from which the veche
of Kiev elected its rulers. It was also free to pronounce in
favour of a younger member of Rurik's family, notwithstanding the
candidature of an older one. The choice made was often in open
contradiction of the legal order of succession maintained by the
dynasty of Rurik. This order was very similar to the Irish law of
tanistry, according to which the Irish crown devolved upon the
oldest representative of the reigning family. In practice it
generally meant the succession of the deceased's next brother,
not that of his eldest son. The strict application of this law of
tanistry would have necessitated a constant change in the person
of the ruler, not only in Kiev, which was for a long time
considered the most important principality of Russia, and which
was, therefore, the appanage of the chief representative of the
dynasty, but also in the other Russian dukedoms, which were
subdivided into a great number of secondary principalities. Open
force had very often to decide which of the two systems, that of
free election or that of legal succession, was to prevail.
    Whatever was the issue of such a struggle the new ruler was
only admitted to the exercise of sovereign power after having
subscribed a sort of contract by which he took upon himself the
obligation of preserving the rights of those over whom he was
called to rule. These very curious documents, known under the
name of "riad," have unfortunately been preserved in only one of
the Russian principalities, that of Novgorod, -- a fact which has
induced many scholars to believe that this right of covenanting
with the duke was limited to this Northern principality.
Professor Sergievitch,the well-known Professor of Legal history
in the University of St. Petersburg, was the first to prove by a
considerable number of quotations from Russian chronicles, that
covenants like that of Novgorod were known all over Russia. More
than once mention is made of a prince securing the throne by a
compromise with the men of Kiev (s liudmi Kieva outverdisia).
These compacts or covenants between prince and people, so far as
they are known to us by the few examples among the archives of
Novgorod, were a kind of constitutional charter securing to the
people the free exercise of their political rights, such as the
right of the folkmote to discuss public affairs and to elect the
ruler of the State. This latter right had been already guaranteed
to Novgorod by a general assembly of Russian dukes held in 1196.
We read in the text of the decisions come to by this princely
congress; "All the dukes recognise the liberty of Novgorod to
choose her ruler wherever she likes." Other constitutional
restraints on princely power are -- no declaration of war without
"Novgorod's word"; no foreigner to be nominated to the post of
provincial governor (volostel); no public official to be
dismissed without legal cause, acknowledged to be such by the
decision of a Court of law. Thus the principle according to which
most English officials hold office "during good behaviour" was
already recognised in Russian principalities in the middle of the
thirteenth century. This efficient mode of securing the
independence and dignity of public officials has been completely
abolished in later days under the Tzars and Emperors, although
once more in 1863 its necessity was admitted by the legal
enactments of Alexander II. Unfortunately no attention is any
longer paid to the promises given to this effect by the codes of
civil and criminal procedure, and many a judge has been removed
in recent times by a simple order of the Minister of Public
Justice.
    Returning to the constitutional guarantees secured. by the
new ruler to his future subjects, I must point out that those
already mentioned seem to have been common to all the different
principalities of Russia. The same cannot be said of the
following two: first, the obligation to judge nobody without the
assistance of a special officer, called the posadnik, and
secondly, the right of the folkmote to choose this official, a
right which first appeared in the beginning of the twelfth
century. These exceptions once made, we have the right to say
that the compacts entered into by the people of Novgorod with
their future ruler, give us a fair idea of the relative strength
of the prince and of the popular assembly all over Russia.
    Our review of the agreement signed by the prince on his
accession to the throne has already reveaLed to us some of the
functions of the veche. Questions of war and peace were regularly
decided by it. No war could be begun but with the consent of the
people, because, in the absence of a regular army, the prince
could levy no other force but that of the militia. Treaties of
peace and alliance were also signed in the name of the prince and
people, as may be seen from the following words used in the
treaty of Igor with the Byzantine empire in 945; "This treaty has
been concluded by the Grand Duke of Russia, by all the dukes
whatsoever and by all the people of the Russian lands."
Sometimes, it is true, the duke decided on going to war against
the wish of his people, but in such a case he had to rely
exclusively on his own military followers, his so-called
"drougina," an institution very like the old German "comitatus"
(Geleit). As long as the system of land donations remained
unknown, and the duke had no other property to distribute among
his followers but that taken in time of war, the drougina or
comitatus was far from being numerous. Hence the duke was forced
to ask the veche for assistance whenever he thought himself
obliged to go to war. The veche either agreed to his demand and
ordered the levy of military forces, or refused all help; in the
latter case the duke had no other alternative but to abandon his
project entirely, or to resign his throne. The control in matters
of peace and war was maintained by the people so long as the duke
had no other troops than the militia. But a kind of regular army
had been created by the end of the thirteenth century, owing to
the custom of rewarding military service by grants of land. The
so-called "pomestnaia" system, which was similar to the
Carlovingian system of "benefices," produced in Russia effects
similar to those produced in France. The popular militia was
superseded by a sort of feudal army, paid not in money but in
land. In case of war the duke was not so much interested in
having the acquiescence of the people as that of the "men of
service," slougilii liudi, who constituted his military force,
and corresponded somewhat to the knights in Feudal England. This
change, as we shall hereafter see, had a great influence on the
future destiny of the Russian folkmote.
    Another function of the folkmote, which appears to be
peculiar to the Northern principalities, and especially to those
of Novgorod and Pscov, is that of legislation. That the
legislative functions of the veche were unknown in the Southern
principalities of Russia may be seen from the fact, that no
mention is made of them in the most ancient code of the country.
The Pravda of Jaroslav in its different versions shows no trace
of the interference of the people in matters of legislation; it
is the exclusive work of the duke and his councillors. The few
amendments introduced into this legal code during the first part
of the twelfth century have also no other source but the express
desire of the dukes and the decisions of their Doumas or
Councils.
    The exercise of legislative power by the veches of Novgorod
and of Pscov, at least during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, is illustrated by two judicial charters, those of 1397
and of 1471, which, as is evident from their contents, were drawn
up by the popular assembly. The charter of Pscov plainly states
in one of its later versions (that of 1467 whenever the posadnik,
the supreme judge by the people, has to decide a case to which no
existing law applies, he must consult the assembly of the people.
The same veche had the right to annul every article of the
judicial charter which no longer met with its approval. Mention
of this right is made in the charter itself.
    As to judicial powers, they remained unknown to. the Western
and Southern the veche, at least in principalities of Russia,
which knew no other judges than the duke and the officers whom he
appointed. I do not allude to those arbitrators to whom private
persons frequently had recourse to settle their differences.
    But in Novgorod, the fact of the election of the chief judge,
the posadnik, by a popular vote, shows that the people were not
indifferent to the exercise of judicial power. Appointed as he
was by the folkmote, the posadnik could be judged by no other
tribunal than the folkmote itself. Cases of high treason were
also referred to the popular assembly just as they were in Poland
and Bohemia.
    What has been stated establishes beyond a doubt the great
extent of the rights and privileges belonging to the folkmote in
the Northern principalities of Russia. The same cannot be said of
some Western principalities, such as those of Volhynia and
Galicia. The example of Poland, where the aristocracy was very
powerful, induced the boyars of those two countries to make more
than one attempt to concentrate in their own hands the chief
rights of sovereignty. The large estates which they possessed and
the considerable revenues, which the rich black soil of the
country yearly secured to them, greatly favoured their
oligarchical aspirations. In 1210, they seem to have attained
their ends. The dynasty of Rurik had ceased to rule over the
country, and a boyar, a member of the local aristocracy, had been
raised to the throne. But his rule did not last long. His
contemporaries, the other rulers, looked upon his elevation as
illegal, and the King of Poland was the first to declare that a
boyar had no right to occupy a throne. To oppose the oligarchy of
the boyars Duke Daniel, in 1230, convened the popular assembly,
the veche and with the help afforded him by people, fought the
army of the boyars and reduced them to obedience. This is,
however, the only case in which the veche seems to have played
any part in the political history of the country. The power of
the nobles prevented any further development in that direction,
and when the principality passed into the hands of the King of
Poland, it was already under the yoke of the aristocracy.
    Nevertheless, even under Polish rule, the memory of the old
folkmotes was preserved by the country. Documents of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries sometimes mention the existence
of the veche as of a local assembly with very considerable
executive and judicial rights.
    Of all the principalities of Russia those of the North-East
seem from the most remote times to have been unfavourable to the
growth of popular assemblies. In those of Sousdal and of Riasan,
the dukes early freed themselves from the necessity of election
by the people by establishing primogeniture as the law of
succession to the crown. The way in which the eldest son was
admitted to succeed to the throne was by associating him, during
his father's lifetime, in the exercise of sovereign powers.
Vsevolod III was the first prince who benefited by such a course.
He secured the throne to his descendants and thus annulled one of
the most important rights of the folkmote, that of choosing the
ruler of the land. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that
from the middle of the thirteenth century no mention is made of
the popular assemblies of Sousdal.
    Up to this point we have tried to show that during the Middle
Ages Russia was a loose federation of principalities, in which
the people were wont to exercise, on a larger or smaller scale,
legislative, executive, judicial, and even political power. By
political power I mean the right of electing and dismissing the
ruler, of declaring war and making peace. The people exercised
their right side by side with the prince, the "knias," who
gradually increased his own power to the prejudice of the power
of the folkmote or veche. At the end of the fifteenth century
Novgorod and Pscov alone maintained the primitive relations
between the prince and the popular assembly, for they still kept
the power of electing and dismissing the chief magistrate of the
state, as well as the highest officials, the posadnik, and the
"head of thousands." In the south-western part of Russia the
popular assembly became, during the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, a local administrative, financial, and judicial body,
but it lost all political power. In the northern principalities,
and especially in Vladimir and Moscow, the folkmotes totally
ceased to exist. The growth first of Vladimir and then of Moscow
was followed by the complete annihilation of the political rights
of the people, and this seems to have been recognised by the
writers of the day. Describing the proceedings by which the
republic of Novgorod was subjected by the Tzar, Ivan the Third,
the chronicle, known under the name of the Patriarch Nikon, says:
"In the year 1478 the Tzar declared to the republic "that he
wanted Novgorod to be in the exercise of the same power as that
which he possessed at Moscow." The inhabitants agreed to comply
with his wishes on certain terms, whereby his autocracy would be
limited. The Tzar immediately sent the following reply: "I told
you that I wanted in Novgorod a state similar to that of Moscow;
and instead of that I hear you teaching me how I ought to
organise my state in a way different from what it is at present."
On hearing this, the citizens sent another embassy to ask what
the Tzar meant by saying that he wanted in Novgorod a government
like that of Moscow. He answered: "No popular assembly, veche; no
elected magistrate; and the whole state in the power of the
Tzar."(2*) This answer left no doubt as to his autocratic
intentions and their accomplishment in the Moscovite state.
    Let us now inquire into the causes which produced this
increase of monarchical power. The first seems to have been the
great change which had been brought about in the relations
between the prince and the popular assembly by the subjection of
the prince to the power of the Khans. It is well known that the
Tartars, after having established the centre of their European
empire on the shores of the Volga, not far from where it joins
the Caspian Sea, in the neighbourhood of the modern city of
Astrachan, reduced the different principalities of Russia to the
condition of vassal states. Leaving the government in the hands
of the dynasty of Rurik they forced the Russian princes to
receive investiture at the hands of their khans. In such a state
of things the prince had no longer any need to trouble himself
about his acceptation by the popular assembly of the principality
that he intended to govern In order to secure the throne to
himself and his heirs, all that he had to do was to undertake a
journey to the southern parts of the Volga and make his
appearance at the court of his suzerain -- the Khan. Here he had
to lay out large sums of money in presents and bribes, until at
last the Khan was induced to grant a charter, "jarlik,"
acknowledging the right of the claimant to occupy the throne of
his ancestors. From the beginning of the fourteenth century the
Moscovite princes had no longer. to undertake the journey in
person, as the khans had consented to forward the charter of
confirmation direct to Moscow on condition that they first
received large sums of money from the prince who claimed the
throne. The succession was settled at each vacancy by an
agreement between the suzerain and the vassal, and the popular
assembly had no opportunity of interfering.
    Foreign events, especially the rise of the Florentine Union
and the capture of Constantinople by the Turks, also largely
contributed to the increase of the Moscovite autocracy.
    During the period which began with the acceptance of the
tenets of the Greek Church by the Russian duke, Vladimir, at the
end of the eleventh century, and which ended with the decision of
the Byzantine Emperor to subscribe the act of union with the
Roman Church, the Russian State as well as the Russian Church
remained to a certain extent dependent on the Greek Patriarch and
Emperor at Constantinople. In ecclesiastical matters this
dependence was manifested in the direct nomination of the Russian
Metropolitan by the Byzantine Patriarch, very often not without
interference on the part of the Emperor. In secular matters it
was rather theoretical than practical. The Russian clergy more
than once advised the Grand Duke of Moscovy to recognise the
"Tzar of the Greeks" as his lord paramount, and each time they
repeated the popular theory that the Byzantine Emperor was the
chief of the whole Christian world and therefore the sovereign
lord of all Christian kings and potentates. This theory had been
first brought forward by Byzantine writers, who actually declared
that Constantine the Great had conferred the title of Tabularius
on the ruler of Russia as a recompense for his allegiance to the
Greek Empire. Up to the end of the fourteenth century the title
of "Tzar" was exclusively applied in Russia to the Emperor of
Constantinople, and no Russian prince was allowed to dignify
himself with it. The Russian clergy, in offering public prayer
for the health of the Emperor at Constantinople, spoke of him as
of "the Emperor of the Romans and Ruler of the Universe."(3*)
    The attitude of Basileus III, Grand Duke of Russia, during
the time of the Florentine Union, his bold opposition to the
Patriarch Photius and to any compromise with the Romish Church,
led the Russian clergy to look upon him and his heirs as the
champions of orthodoxy in religion. While the Duke of Moscovy was
considered the sole protector of the Greek Church, the Emperor at
Constantinople had become, in the eyes of the Russians, a
schismatic. It was in order to free Moscovy from all dependence
on a schismatic Emperor that the account of the conversion of the
Eastern Slavs to Christianity was altered. The apostle St.
Andrew, who, according to Armenian and Georgian traditions had
been the first to preach the Gospel in the Caucasus, was
officially declared to have been the St. John the Baptist of the
Russians; Constantinople, being thus deprived of the honour of
being the birthplace of Russian Christianity, was accordingly
dispossessed of any right to exercise ecclesiastical supremacy
over the Russian Church.
    The fall of Constantinople, which closely followed the
Florentine Union, settled the question of the ecclesiastical
autonomy of Russia, and contributed at the same time to
strengthen the power of the Moscovite Duke. The Greek Church had
lost her secular head in the person of the last Emperor of
Constantinople, and the Slavonic principalities of the Balkan
Peninsula, as well as the subjugated Greeks, naturally turned
their eyes towards the most powerful of the Orthodox rulers. This
was the Grand Duke of Moscovy, whose firm allegiance to the
ancient creed, and uncompromising attitude towards the Florentine
Union, contrasted favourably with the attitude of the last
Emperors towards the Popes of Rome. People were led to
acknowledge that the fall of Constantinople was a well-deserved
punishment on a schismatic ruler, and they were also induced to
believe that the conquest of that city by the Turks ought to be
the occasion for the transfer of civil supremacy over the Greek
Church from Constantinople to Moscovy, from the Emperor to the
Grand Duke.
    These ideas grew in strength when the last Emperor's sister,
Sophia Palaeologus, became by marriage the wife and mother of
Moscovite Princes. A report was spread that the imperial title
had been transferred to the Grand Duke Ivan by no less a person
than his wife's brother, the legal heir of the Byzantine Empire.
The Grand Duke was anointed with great solemnity, and received
the title of "Tzar," a title which, as we have seen, had hitherto
been exclusively given to the Greek Emperors. An offer which the
German Emperor made through his special envoy, Herbertstein, to
grant the title of "king" to the Moscovite Grand Duke on
condition of his recognising his dependence upon the Holy Roman
Empire, was solemnly rejected; and in order to confirm the new
theory of the complete autonomy of the Russian tzardom, a
genealogy was invented, showing the direct descent of the house
of Rurik from Augustus and his supposed brother Pruss, the
mythical founder of Prussia. One fact, however, stood in the way
of a universal recognition of these new pretensions to complete
autonomy; that was the continued dependence of the Moscovite
rulers on the khans of the Tartars. But this was put an end to by
Ivan III, who was consequently the first to adorn himself with
the title of "Autocrat" (Samoderjez), which to this day continues
to be the title of the Russian Tzars.
    As Greek monks, and among them the well-known Maxime, began
to settle in Russia, Byzantine ideas about the derivation of
monarchical power from God, which were already entertained by
some of our monkish writers, were rapidly spread among the
people. It is not without good reason that the celebrated
antagonist of Ivan the Terrible, Prince Kourbsky, accuses the
monks of having been the chief source of the servile theory,
according to which "the Tzar, in order to preserve his
independence, ought to have no counsellors more intelligent than
himself." This theory was accepted with avidity by such tyrants
as Ivan the Cruel, who refers to it more than once in his
correspondence with the Polish king, Stephen Bathory. The fact
that this prince was surrounded by a sort of parliament, the
Polish Seim, was declared by the Russian Tzar to be a manifest
proof of his political inferiority. "Autocracy (samoderjavsto),"
according to Ivan's idea, "was impossible with an elective
council; the autocrat must do everything by himself; he has to
give orders to his subjects, and these, last must obey like
serfs, and that according to the command of God."
    These ideas, which had been expressed centuries before by
monkish writers, who had found them set forth in Byzantine
treatises, were far from being those of the generality of Russian
statesmen and thinkers. When Prince Kourbsky advised the tyrant
Ivan to seek good and useful counsel, not only among the members
of his douma, a sort of curia regis -- but also among the
representatives of the people -- vsenarodnich chelovok -- he gave
utterance to an old political desire. Another contemporary
writer, the unknown author of The Sermon of the Saints of Walaam,
gives way to the same feeling in the following terms: "The clergy
ought to advise the Tzar to keep a constant general council,
composed of persons coming from all the cities and districts of
his dominions. Such a council must be kept, and their advice
taken day by day on every question which may occur." Two
different institutions were meant by those who advised the Czar
to rule by the advice of his councillors. One was as old as the
monarchy itself, and belonged to those old customs, which,
according to contemporary writers, had been scrupulously
maintained by former potentates. I refer to the council of the
Boyars -- the Douma. The other institution. the history of which
will form the principal subject of our next lecture, was, on the
contrary, quite recent -- the States-General of Moscovy, the
Zemskii Sobor.
    I will conclude what I have to say on the political
organisation of Russia during that intermediate period which
lasted from the fall of the ancient folkmotes to the convocation
of the States-General by a description of the first-named
council, the Douma.(4*) The study of the internal constitution of
the Douma is indispensable for the comprehension of the Part
which the higher nobility were called upon to play in the
management of the Moscovite State. It will show that the power of
the Moscovite princes, absolute as it was, was yet to a certain
extent limited by the power of the nobility. Up to the middle of
the sixteenth century the Boyars were the only persons admitted
to the exercise of executive, military, and judicial authority.
Under the name of voevods we find them at the head of provinces,
commanding their military forces and managing their
administrative interests. As members of the Douma, they had to
advise the Tzar on all kinds of political, executive, military,
and financial questions. No law was promulgated until after
previous deliberation on it by the Douma. The same Douma
furnished the chief rulers of the State during the minority of
the Tzar, and it was in this way that the power of the Boyars
made itself felt among the lower classes of the population, who
soon came to look upon them as the chief cause of their misery.
    The composition of the Moscovite council was at the beginning
very like that which we find in France under the early Capetian
kings. The curia regis was chiefly formed from among the high
court officials, such as the majordome, the marshal, the
constable, the chancellor or cancellarius, the camerer or
camerarius, etc. The same may be said of the Moscovite Douma of
the fourteenth century, as well as of the privy council of each
and every of the principalities into which medieval Russia was
divided anterior to the centralising growth of the Moscovite
power. The business transacted at the court of a Russian prince
being distributed among different departments, the heads of these
departments were summoned to sit in the council and received the
name of boyars. Money being scarce, the boyars were paid for
their services by the donation of crown lands, and this mode of
payment being known under the name of "pont," the surname of the
boyars was "poutevii boyari." Most of the boyars summoned to sit
in the Douma were exempted from military service, and especially
from the duty of opposing the enemy at the head of their own
retainers, not so much in the open country as in their own
castles. Hence the origin of another surname "wedennii boiari"
which distinguished the most powerful members of the Russian
medieval nobility. If we inquire into the origin of those
admitted to the princely council, we shall see that they belonged
to the same class as that which furnished officers to the army
and the chiefs of the central and provincial administration. This
class is precisely that known to the Anglo-Saxons as Thanes, and
to the Merovingian kings under the title of Antrustions. The
peculiarity of medieval Russia consisted in this, that, being
divided into a great number of principalities, it left to the
knightly class the liberty of freely choosing the prince whom
they would like to follow. The Russian knightly class,
corresponding to the "ministeriels" of feudal Germany, the
so-called "slougili liudi" or "men of service," were authorised
by custom to remain in the service of any prince as long as they
pleased, and to change from one prince to another according to
their own pleasure. Before attaching himself to any prince the
"man of service" signed a sort of contract with the political
head of the country in which he intended to settle. On taking
service, a charter was delivered to the knight in which his
duties and rights were precisely stated, and the prince had no
right to infringe these conditions. In case of bad treatment, the
knight found no difficulty in leaving the prince whom he was
serving and in entering into similar relations with some other of
the numerous petty potentates, who ruled over medieval Russia.
This right of freely passing from the service of one prince to
that of another was clearly recognised by the following sentence
in a treaty signed by the prince of Tver with the Grand Duke of
Lithuania, Kasimir, as late as the middle of the fifteenth
century, 1449; "Our bovars and men of service may freely withdraw
from one of us to the other." This document is probably the last
recognition of the liberty of removal once enjoyed by the
knightly class.
    The increasing power of the Grand Duke of Moscovy could not
tolerate this survival of federal autonomy. This prince did not
object to the liberty of removal as long as it served his own
purposes by increasing the number of persons seeking service in
the Moscovite army and Moscovite civil service, but as soon as
the tyranny of some of the Grand Dukes caused their own knights
to withdraw to Poland and Lithuania, severe measures were taken
to put a stop to this movement of emigration. The Grand Duke
began to confiscate the grants of land ("po mestie") of the
departing knights, and every time he could lay hands on one of
these seceders he was sure to throw him into prison, very often
together with his wife and children. The clergy, always on the
side of the secular power, more than once likened the behaviour
of a seceding knight to the conduct of Judas, and declared it to
be not only treason against the State but also a sin in the eyes
of God.
    Keeping in mind the facts just mentioned, we shall have no
difficulty in explaining the Concourse of knights and men of the
sword in the grand duchy of Moscovy. The territorial extension of
the duchy had necessitated the abolition of a great number of
small principalities, and persons formerly belonging to the
ruling dynasties and united by ties of blood to the Tzar, were
anxious to enter his service. In this manner the knightly class
began to number in its ranks a whole group of princely families
who were the descendants of those potentates whose dominions had
been conquered and annexed by Moscow. Before long the number of
persons desirous of taking service under the Grand Duke totally
excluded the possibility of personal and separate conventions,
such as those which settled the mutual rights and duties of
prince and knight in the other principalities of Russia. These
personal agreements were superseded by a general enactment, which
declared that the man of service occupied a higher or lower rank
in the political hierarchy according, first, to the dignity of
the family to which he belonged, and, secondly, to the number of
years his family had been engaged in the Moscovite service.
    It was generally acknowledged that a princely family -- that
is, a family that had once belonged to the number of ruling
dynasties, ought to have precedence over all others among
untitled nobles. Whoever could show among his ancestors persons
in a high official post had the right to refuse any inferior
situation, especially in those cases in which a person of a
comparatively new family was to be set over him as his superior.
This order of precedence was more than once set aside in
consequence of the low condition to which this or that wealthy
family had been reduced by the loss of its estates. A Russian
noble in a miserable state of poverty was as little entitled to
occupy a high official position, as was a penniless English duke,
or earl, to take his seat in the House of Lords in the fifteenth
century, in the reign of Edward IV.
    The rules of precedence, constituting what our ancestors of
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries called "mestnichestro,"
were scrupulously observed both in the army and in the civil
service. They also found expression in the constitution of the
Council or Douma. The titled nobility, the princely families, as
a rule, occupied the highest rank in the hierarchy of the
councillors, the rank of "doumn iboyars," or boyars of the
Council.
    A certain number of the old Moscovite nobility were allowed
to retain their original rank, but the rest of the nobles were by
degrees lowered to that of persons whose only distinction was to
be "the children of ancient boyars." The documents of the time
speak of them in precisely these terms, calling them "boiarski
dieti," children of the boyars.
    The second rank among the members of the Douma was occupied
by those known under the name of "ocolnichii," or persons living
immediately about the Duke. This rank in the Douma belonged, as a
rule, to members of the old Moscovite nobility, as well as to
some of the smaller princely families. The Duke had the right to
confer on his "ocolnichy" the higher title of boyar as a
recompense for his services. The rest of the knightly class were
either entirely unconnected with the Council or were simply
summoned to be present at some of its sittings. They were known
under the general name of "noblemen belonging to the Douma,"
"dumnii dvoriani," and formed the third rank of Councillors.
    The fourth or lowest rank in the Council was composed of
those members of the knightly class who condescended to hold
second-rate posts in the different executive bodies of the duchy,
such as the Foreign Office ("Posolsky prikaz"), or the board
presiding over temporary or life grants of land (Pomesini
prikaz). These second-rate bureaucrats, known under the name of
secretaries, diaki, were regularly admitted to the sittings of
the Council, where they formed the lowest but by no means the
least influential order.
    From what has been said it will be seen that autocratic power
in Russia had to deal with certain counterpoises and moderating
influences in the political constitution of the country even
after the fall of the ancient folkmotes. These checks and
restraints had their roots in the old political rights exercised
by the chiefs of the almost independent principalities which
constituted the unorganised federacy of Russian states. Whilst
submitting to the power of the Moscovite prince, these once
independent chiefs insisted on the recognition of their privilege
to be next after the Tzar, the principal ruler of the country.
The so-called mestnichestvo was, therefore, a sort of unwritten
constitution, recognising in each of the members of the higher
nobility his distinct right to a place in the machinery of the
State. The lover classes alone had no part in the conduct of
public affairs. An end was put to this anomalous situation by the
convocation of the States-General. The origin of these
States-General, or Sobors, and their further development, will
form the subject of our next lecture.

NOTES:

1. Herbord, ii. 15-30.

2. "Complete Collection of Russian Chronicles," vi. 213.

3. Compare Diakonov, "The Supreme Power of the Moscovite Tsars,"
Petersburg, 1889.

4. This subject has been very ably discussed by Professor
Kluchovsky.

