


Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia
by Maxime Kovalevsky
1891


Lecture I

The Matrimonial Customs and Usages of the Russian People, and the
Light They Throw on the Evolution of Marriage


    The wide historical studies pursued by members of the
University of Oxford necessarily include the study of the
Slavonic race. The part which this race is beginning to play in
the economic and social progress of our time, and the
considerable achievements which it has already made in the fields
of literature and science have attracted the attention even of
those nations whose political interests are supposed not to
coincide precisely with those of the Slavs. The Ilchester
Lectures were, I believe, founded in order to make known to
Oxford students the present and past of this undoubtedly Aryan
branch of the human race. A good deal of work has already been
done by my predecessors. Professor Thomson, of Copenhagen, by his
careful study of the Norman origin of the Russian State, has
greatly contributed to unveil even to Russians the mystery of
their far-distant past, while Professor Turner, in the course of
his brilliant lectures last year, made you acquainted with our
best modern novelists. I do not know if my friend, the late Mr
W.R.S. Ralston, ever lectured in the Taylor institute, but the
accurate and lively accounts he has given of Russian epic poems
and popular tales were undoubtedly written under the influence of
the same feelings as those which inspired the founder of these
lectures.
    In England the works of Ralston were the first to deal with
the vast field of Slavonic, and more especially of Russian,
folk-lore. His chief endeavour was to show the great amount of
information which the unwritten literature of Russia contains as
to the early stages of religious development. But Russian
folk-lore may interest a lawyer as well as a mythologist; its
study may enrich comparative jurisprudence with new material not
less than comparative mythology. It can no doubt unveil more than
one mystery concerning the early state of European family law,
and the various modes in which land was held by our remotest
ancestors. The first stages in the history of political
institutions, and more particularly the part which the common
people were called upon in old days to play in the management of
public affairs, can be illustrated by the history of Russian
folk-motes and Russian national councils, much better than by
reference to the short notices left by Caesar or Tacitus of the
popular assemblies of the Germans. Russian serfdom, and the
history of its abolition, may also be instructive in more than
one point, even to those whose chief purpose is to study the
origin, the growth, and the abolition of personal servitude in
England, France, or Germany.
    When I look to the great importance of the modern customs and
ancient laws of Russia as regards the comparative history of
institutions, I confidently hope to meet on your part with the
indulgence which the lecturer needs who addresses his audience in
a foreign tongue. I think that the study of Russian legal
antiquities may to a certain extent be considered as a necessary
appendage of those exhaustive inquiries in Indian and old Celtic
institutions for which we are indebted to one of your most
celebrated writers, the late Sir Henry Maine. I feel the more
pleasure in mentioning his name, as it was by him that my first
works in the field of comparative jurisprudence were inspired.
His lectures have found readers in the remotest parts of the
world, and have suggested to more than one foreign scholar the
idea of re-writing the legal history of his own country.
    Although recognising in him the chief representative of the
legal school to which I belong, I shall more than once put
forward theories which are altogether opposed to his: such an
occasion presents itself at once in the study of early Russian
family law. 
    This study will, I have no doubt, throw a clear light on the
earliest period in the evolution of marriage -- that of the
matriarchate. I insist the more on this point because in England
an opinion has been expressed that the customary law of Russia
might be expected to give another illustration of the general
prevalence of the patriarchal family even in the first stages of
social development. Sir Henry Maine has more than once(1*)
expressed this opinion, and has found confirmation for it in
certain quotations made chiefly from the well-known works of
Haxthausen and Mackenzie Wallace. Both these authors, making a
large use of the rich ethnographical literature of Russia, have
correctly described the prevailing system of Russian joint
families, or house communities, and their account may be taken
generally as a good illustration of the old patriarchal family of
the Germans and Celts. But neither of them had any opportunity of
studying in detail the numerous survivals which we still find of
a state of things which had nothing in common with agnatism, or
even with a firmly established "patria potestas." Such was not,
after all, the purpose that they had in view. Theirs was the
study of contemporary life in Russian society, and the question
of the primitive state of family relations in Russia cannot be
settled by reference to works which do not deal with the subject.

    Sir Henry Maine was also misled in his survey of Slavonic
family law by the well-known Bohemian or Czech poem, "The Trial
of the Princess Liuhouscha." This poem he quotes at great length,
and he states that it leaves no doubt as to the existence of a
sort of undivided family or house-community in the most remote
period of Bohemian history. Unfortunately, the poem on which he
builds his conclusion is now unanimously declared both by
Slavonic and German scholars to be a forgery by the well-known
Bohemian philologist, Hanka. It is clear, therefore, that the
whole of his theory, so far as it deals with Slavonic law and
usage, is based either on facts which concern modern times alone,
and have nothing to do with ancient times, or on documents
manifestly false. 
    Now let us see what evidence we possess as to the character
of early Slavonic family law. We shall first give our
authorities, and then proceed to draw our general conclusions. 
    The earliest evidence which we possess as to the social
relations of the Eastern Slavs, whose confederacy was the
beginning of the Russian State, is contained in the so-called
Chronicle of Nestor. Nestor is supposed to have been a Russian
monk of the eleventh century. 
    Contrasting the mode of life of the most civilised Slavonic
nation, the Polians, who were established on the banks of the
Dnieper, with that of the more barbarous tribes of Russia,
Nestor, or perhaps it is better to say, the unknown author of the
Chronicle which bears this name, states as follows (I translate
literally): "Each tribe had its own customs, and the laws of its
forefathers and its own traditions, each its own manner of life
(nrav). The Polians had the customs of their fathers, customs
mild and peaceful (tichi); they showed a kind of reserve
(stidenie) towards the daughters of their sons and towards their
sisters, towards their mothers and their parents, towards the
mothers of their wives, and towards the brothers of their
husbands; to all of the persons named they showed great reserve.
Amongst them the bridegroom did not go to seek his bride; she was
taken to him in the evening, and the following morning they
brought what was given for her."
    "Another Slavonic tribe, the Drevlians, according to the same
chronicler, lived like beasts; they killed one another, they fed
on things unclean; no marriage took place amongst them, but they
captured young girls on the banks of rivers."
    The same author narrates that three other Slavonic tribes,
the Radimich, the Viatich, and the Sever, had the same customs;
they lived "in forests, like other wild animals, they ate
everything unclean, and shameful things occurred amongst them
between fathers and daughters-in-law. Marriages were unknown to
them, but games were held in the outskirts of villages; they met
at these games for dancing and every kind of diabolic amusement,
and there they captured their wives, each man the one he had
covenanted with. They had generally two or three wives."
    I have tried to give you the nearest possible translation of
this old Russian text, the interpretation of which, however,
gives rise to certain difficulties not yet quite settled. I will
now classify, to the best of my power, the various facts which we
can infer from this text. First of all, it establishes the fact
that marriage in the sense of a constant union between husband
and wife, was not a general institution among the Eastern Slavs.
With the exception of the more civilised Polians, no other tribe
is stated to have any notion of it. Of course this does not mean
that all alike were entirely ignorant of the meaning of family
life. It only weans that their mode of constituting a family did
not correspond to the idea which the author, who, as we have
said, was a monk, entertained as to matrimonial relations. The
Radimich, Viatich, and Sever captured their wives after having
previously come to an agreement with them. This certainly is a
method which cannot meet with the approval of a Christian, but
nevertheless it is marriage. We have before us an example of what
ethnologists have named "marriage by capture."
    The Drevlians were even less advanced as regards the
intercourse between the sexes. They also had games at which women
were captured; but not a word is said about any covenant entered
into by the captor and his supposed victim. Neither is any
mention made of these games being held on the boundaries or
outskirts of villages, a fact which would point to the existence
of a sort of exogamy forbidding unions between persons of the
same gens. In the description which the chronicler gives of the
Drevlians we have an instance of an almost unlimited licence,
whilst in that of the Radimich, Viatich and Sever we find a
picture of an exogamous people; contracting marriage by capture,
and yet retaining from the period of almost unlimited licence a
sort of family communism which appears in the relations between
fathers and daughters-in-law.
    No trace of this either limited or unlimited promiscuousness
is to be found among the Polians, who according to our old
Chronicler, "conducted themselves with much reserve" towards
daughters-in-law, and sisters-in-law, towards mothers and
fathers, towards fathers-in-law and brothers-in-law. They seem to
have been an exogamous tribe like the Radimich, Viatich and
Sever, their wives being brought to them from outside their own
gens. Unlike the tribes just mentioned they did not, however,
procure them by capture. It was not the custom for the
bridegrooms to go in search of their wives; they received them
from the hands of the parents of the women, and they then paid
the sum of money previously agreed upon. This means that their
mode of constituting marriage was by buying their wives. The
words of the Chronicler concerning these payments is far from
being clear, and Russian scholars have tried to interpret them in
the sense of "dower" brought by the relatives of the wife. But it
has been recently proved that no mention of "dower" is to be
found in Russian charters before the fifteenth century, and that
the word veno used  in mediaeval Russian to designate the payment
made on marriage, has no other meaning than that of pretium
nuptiale, or payment made by the bridegroom to the family of the
bride.(2*) The words of Tacitus concerning the dos paid amongst
the German tribes by the future husband to his wife's father give
precisely the meaning of the old Russian veno, and throw a light
on the sort of payment which the chronicle of Nestor had in view,
when speaking of the matrimonial customs of the Polians. 
    The testimony of our oldest Chronicle concerning the
different forms of matrimony among the eastern Slavs deserves our
closest attention, because it is, in all points, confirmed by the
study of the rest of our old written literature, of our epic
poems, of our wedding-songs, and of the matrimonial usages and
customs still or lately in existence in certain remote districts
of Russia. The Drevlians are not the only Slavonic tribe to which
the mediaeval chronicles ascribe a low state of morality. The
same is asserted of the old Bohemians or Czechs in the account
given of their manners and customs by Cosmas of Prague, a Latin
annalist of the eleventh century, who says: Connubia erant illis
communia. Nam more pecudum singulas ad noctes novos probant
hymenaeos, et surgente aurora.... ferrea amoris rumpunt vincula."
This means: "They practised communal marriage. For, like animals,
they contracted each night a fresh marriage, and as soon as the
dawn appeared they broke the iron bonds of love."
    This statement is directly confirmed by that of another
medieval author, the unknown biographer of St. Adalbert. This
writer ascribes the animosity of the Bohemian people towards the
saint to the fact of his strong opposition to the shameful
promiscuity which in his time prevailed in Bohemia. It is
confirmed, also, by the monk of the Russian Abbey of Eleasar,
known by the name of Pamphil, who lived in the sixteenth century.
Both speak of the existence of certain yearly festivals at which
great licence prevailed. According to the last-named author, such
meetings were regularly held on the borders of the State of
Novgorod on the banks of rivers, resembling, in that particular,
the annual festivals mentioned by Nestor. Not later than the
beginning of the sixteenth century, they were complained of by
the clergy of the State of Pscov. It was at that time that
Pamphil drew up his letter to the Governor of the State,
admonishing him to put an end to these annual gatherings, since
their only result was the corruption of the young women and
girls. According to the author just cited, the meetings took
place, as a rule, the day before the festival of St. John the
Baptist, which, in pagan times, was that of a divinity known by
the name of Jarilo, corresponding to the Priapus of the Greeks.
Half a century later the new ecclesiastical code, compiled by an
assembly of divines convened in Moscow by the Czar Ivan the
Terrible, took effectual measures for abolishing every vestige of
paganism; amongst them, the yearly festivals held on Christmas
Day, on the day of the baptism of our Lord, and on St. John the
Baptist, commonly called Midsummer Day. A general feature of all
these festivals, according to the code, was the prevalence of the
promiscuous intercourse of the sexes. How far the clergy
succeeded in suppressing these yearly meetings, which had been
regularly held for centuries before on the banks of rivers, we
cannot precisely say, although the fact of their occasional
occurrence, even in modern times, does not tend to prove their
complete abolition. More than once have I had an opportunity of
being present at these nightly meetings, held at the end of June,
in commemoration of a heathen divinity. They usually take place
close to a river or pond; large fires are lighted, and over them
young couples, bachelors and unmarried girls, jump barefoot. I
have never found any trace of licentiousness; but there is no
doubt that cases of licence do occur, though seldom in our time.
That a few centuries ago they were very frequent has been lately
proved by some curious documents preserved in the archives of
some of the provincial ecclesiastical councils, particularly in
those existing in the Government of Kharkov. According to these
documents, the local clergy were engaged in constant warfare with
the shameful licentiousness which prevailed at the evening
assembles of the peasants, and more than once the clergy
succeeded in inducing the authorities of the village to dissolve
the assemblies by force. The priests were often wounded, and
obliged to seek refuge in the houses of the village elders from
the stones with which they were pelted. These evening assemblies
are known to the people of Great Russia under the name of
Posidelki, and to the Little Russians by that of Vechernitzi. 
    The licentiousness which formed the characteristic feature of
these meetings throws light on the motives which induce the
peasants of certain Great Russian communes to attach but small
importance to virginity. Russian ethnographers have not
infrequently mentioned the fact of young men living openly with
unmarried women, and, even in case of marriage, of giving
preference to those who were known to have already been mothers. 
    However peculiar all these facts may seem, they are very
often met with among people of quite a distinct race. The
Allemanic populations of the Grisons, no longer ago than the
sixteenth century, held regular meetings which were not less
shameful than those of the Cossacks. The Kilbenen were abolished,
by law (3*) but another custom, in direct antagonism to morality,
continued to exist all over the northern cantons of Switzerland
and in the southern provinces of Wurtemberg and of Baden. I mean
the custom known under the name of Kirchgang or Dorfgehen, which,
according to the popular songs, consisted in nothing else than
the right of a bachelor to become the lover of some young girl,
and that quite openly, and with the implied consent of the
parents of his sweetheart. May I also mention a similar custom
amongst the Welsh, known as "bundling"? I am not well enough
informed as to the character of this custom to insist on its
resemblance to those already mentioned. The little I have said on
the German survivals of early licence may suffice to establish
this general conclusion: that the comparative immorality of
Russian peasants has no other cause than the survival amongst
them of numerous vestiges of the early forms of marriage.
    Another feature of the matriarchal family, the lack of any
prohibition as to marriages between persons who are sprung from
the same father or grandfather, is also mentioned more than once
by early Slavonic writers. Such marriages were not prohibited by
custom among the old Bohemians or Czechs. "Populus miscebatur cum
cognatis," says the biographer of St. Adalbert. They are also
frequently mentioned in the epic poems of our peasants, the
so-called bilini, of which the late W.R.S. Ralston has given to
English readers an accurate and profound analysis. I will quote
certain passages from these poems to give you the facts on which
my theory is based. 
    One of the most celebrated heroes of our popular ballads,
Ilia Mourometz. encounters one day a freebooter named Nightingale
(Solovei Razboinik). "Why," asks the hero, "do all thy children
look alike?" Nightingale gives the following answer: "Because,
when my son is grown up, I marry him to my daughter; and when my
daughter is old enough, I give her my son for a husband, and I do
so in order that my race may not die out." Another popular
ballad, representing the evil customs of former days, describes
them in the following manner:

    Brother made war upon brother,
    Brother took sister to wife. 

    Endogamous marriages still occur in a few very remote parts
of Russia. Such is the case in certain villages in the district
of Onega, and especially in that of Liamika, where the peasants
do their best to infringe the canonical prescriptions which
disallow marriage between blood relations to the fourth degree
inclusively. The same has also been noticed in certain parts of
the Government of Archangel, quite on the shores of the White
Sea, where the peasants are in the habit of saying that marriages
between blood relations will be blessed with a more rapid
increase of "cattle" - the word "cattle" standing in this case
for children. In some provinces of Siberia and in the district of
Vetlouga, which belongs to the Government of Nijni Novgorod,
endogamous marriages, though contrary to the prevailing custom
are looked upon with a favourable eye. (4*) 
    Another fact, which deserves the attention of all partisans
of the theory of the matriarchate, first promulgated by McLennan,
is, the large independence enjoyed by the Slavonic women of old
days. Let me first quote the words of Cosmas of Prague, which
relate to this subject, and then show you what illustration they
find both in written literature, and in popular ballads and
songs.

Non virgines viri, sed ipsoemet viros, quos et quando voluerunt,
accipiebant.

    Such is the statement of Cosmas Pragensis, (ch. xxi). This
means: "It is not the men who choose the maids, but the maids
themselves who take the husbands they like, and when they like."
    This freedom of the Bohemian girls to dispose of their hearts
according to their own wish shows the comparative independence of
the Bohemian women at that period. 
    The oldest legal code of this people, the sniem, seems to
favour this independence by recognising the right of the women to
be free from any work, except that which is connected with the
maintenance of the household.(5*)
    Confronted with the facts just brought forward, the popular
legend, reported by Cosmas in his chronicle, of a kind of
Bohemian Amazons, who took an active part in the wars of the
time, appears in its true light. Free as they were from the bonds
of marriage, not relying on husbands for the defence of their
persons and estates, the old Bohemian Amazons were probably very
similar to those warlike women who still appear in the King of
Dahomey's army, and who in the time of Pompey were known to exist
among certain autochthonic tribes of the Caucasus. A fact well
worth notice is that the memory of these bellicose women is still
preserved in the traditions of the Tcherkess, who call them by
the name of "emcheck." Giantesses, wandering by themselves
through the country and fighting the heroes they meet on their
way, are also mentioned more than once in our popular ballads, or
bilini. The name under which they are known is that of polinitzi,
the word pole meaning the field and in a secondary sense the
battle-field. 
    Like the Bohemian girls described by Cosmas of Prague, these
Russian Amazons chose their lovers as they liked. 
    "Is thy heart inclined to amuse itself with me?" such is the
question addressed to Ilia Mourometz by one of these Amazons, the
so-called Beautiful Princess. "Be my husband and I will be thy
wife," says another of these polinitzi, Anastasia the Beautiful,
to the paladin, Theodor Tougariu. It is not the freebooter
Nightingale who chooses his wife, nor the paladin Dobrinia who is
going in search of a bride; both are represented as accepting the
offers of betrothal made to them by the Russian Amazons, Zaprava
and Marina. (6*)
    Evidence of still greater importance is that of the French
writer, Beauplan, who, speaking of the manners and customs of the
inhabitants of Little Russia during his time, the latter half of
the seventeenth century, states as follows:
    "In the Ukraine, contrary to the custom of all other nations,
the husbands do not choose their wives, but are themselves chosen
by their future consorts."
    I hope I have now given an amount of information sufficient
to answer the purpose I have in view; which is no other, than to
show that, in a low state of morality, communal marriage between
near relations and endogamy went hand in hand amongst the early
Slavs with a considerable degree of independence among the weaker
sex. 
    To all these characteristic features of the matriarchate we
may add this very important one, that, according to the old
Russian law, the tie which unites a man to his sister and the
children she has brought into the world, was considered to be
closer than that which unites two brothers or the uncle and his
nephew. In a society organised on the principle of agnatism, the
son of a sister has no reason to interfere in the pursuit of the
murderer of his uncle. The brother belongs altogether to another
clan, and the duty of vengeance falls exclusively on the persons
of that clan. But such is by no means the point of view of the
old Russian law, recognising, as it does, the right of the
sister's son to avenge the death of his uncle.
    "In case a man shall he killed by a man," decrees the first
article of the Pravda of Yaroslav (the lex barborum of the
Russians), "vengeance may be taken by a son, in case his father
has been killed; by the father, when the son falls a victim; by
the brother's son and by the son of a sister." These last words
are omitted in the later versions of the Pravda, a fact which
shows the increase of agnatic organisation, but they are found in
the version generally recognised as the most ancient. 
    This close tie between brother and sister, between the uncle
and the sister's children, still exists among the Southern Slavs.
Professor Bogisic. and after him Mr Krauss, have illustrated this
fact by the epic songs of the Servian people. They speak of the
custom generally in use among the Southern Slavs of securing from
a person truthfulness in is statements by the invocation of the
name of the sister. They mention, too, that peculiar relation of
artificial brotherhood and sisterhood, into which young men and
young women belonging to different kindreds frequently enter, in
order to secure to the weaker sex protection and help. 
    I hardly need insist on the importance which all these facts
have with regard to the theory of an early matiarchate among the
Slavs, the more so because this has already been done in England
by Mr McLennan, in his well-known study on the Patriarchal
theory, and in Germany by Bachofen in one of his Antiquarian
Letters. (7*) But I shall complete the information which these
scholars have given by citing certain peculiar customs still in
use among Russian peasants. 
    Whilst the father is considered to be the proper person to
dispose of the hand of the bride, the brother, according to the
wedding ritual, appears as the chief protector of her virginity.
In more than one province of Russia the brother plays an
important part in that potion of the nuptial ceremony which may
be called by the Latin name of in domus deductio. As soon as the
bridegroom has made his appearance in the court-yard of the
family to which his bride belongs, the brother, in accordance
with an old custom, takes his seat next the bride with a naked
sword, or at least a stick, in his hand. The bridegroom, or the
groomsman, asking to be allowed to take his seat, receives as
answer, that the brother is there to keep ward over his sister,
and that he will not consent to leave his seat unless he be paid
for it. "Dear brother, don't give me away for nothing. Ask a
hundred roubles for me, for the veil which covers my head a
thousand roubles. Ask for my beauty -- God alone knows how much."
Such is the tenor of the song composed for the occasion. "The
brother, a true Tartar," we read in the text of another nuptial
song, "has sold his sister for a thaler, and her fair tresses for
fifty copecks."
    In Little Russia the drawn sword which the brother holds in
his hand on the occasion is ornamented with the red berries of
the guelderrose, red being the emblem of maidenhood among
Slavonic peoples. Other emblems are the binding of the bride's
tresses, and the veil which covers her head. The bridegroom is
not allowed to remove the veil, nor to unbind the tresses of his
future wife, unless he consents to pay a small sum of money to
her bother. 
    Hitherto we have considered the different aspects of the
earliest period in the evolution of the family -- that which is
known by the term of the matriarchate. The various features which
characterised the lowest state of the relations between the sexes
did not vanish all at once. The incestuous relations between
persons of the same blood seem to have been the first to
disappear. No further mention of these occurs in Nestor's
description of the Eastern tribes -- the Radimich, Viatich, and
Sever. Thog they practise communal marriage so far that fathers
and sons have wives in common, nevertheless fathers and
daughters, brothers and sisters, dare no longer cohabit with each
other, and if licence still occurs at some annual festivities, it
is kept under some check. 
    The bilini, or poplar ballads, as also the old legends and
folk tales, often represent that transient period of social
evolution, when endogamy was gradually giving way to exogamy, and
relations between persons of the same kin were forbidden. A
popular hero, known by the name of Michailo Kasarinov, and
belonging to a later series of Russian paladins, in one of these
ballads liberates a young Russian girl from the yoke of the
Tartars, and is on the point of becoming her lover, when she
discloses to him the secret of her birth, and proves that she is
his sister. The paladin immediately abandons his purpose. In
another popular tale, inserted by Afanasiev in his collection of
these curious monuments of our unwritten literature, a bother is
represented as insisting on marrying his sister, and the latter
as strongly protesting against his desire. "What do you propose
to do?" she asks. "Bethink you of God and of the sin? Is it right
that a brother should espouse his own sister?" The brother
persists, and the couple are on the point of retiring when the
earth opens, and the sister, unharmed, disappears from view. (8*)
In another popular legend, a husband, having discovered that his
wife is his own sister, finds no means of escape but that of
undertaking a pilgrimage in order to expiate his sins.(9*)
    The prohibition is gradually extended to all persons of the
same kin. A song(10*) in Vogue among the peasantry of Little
Russia speaks of a bird wishing to marry, and finding no bride at
his birthplace, all the females being his relations, there
remains nothing for him to do but to cross the sea, and seek a
bride of another kin than his own.
    The complete discomfiture of endogamy in its long struggle
with exogamous prescriptions is shown in the fact that in some
parts of Russia, as for instance in the government of Simbirsk,
in certain villages of the government of Olonizk, and of the
district of Schadrinsk, inhabited by the Cosacks of the Don, the
bride is always taken from another village than the bridegroom's.
Even in provinces in which no similar custom is known to exist,
the remembrance of the time when exogamy was considered a duty,
is preserved in the fact that the bridegroom is constantly spoken
of as a foreigner (choujoy, choujaninin), and his friends and
attendants are represented as coming with him from a distant
country, in order to take away the future spouse. 
    The origin of exogamy has been sought for in the fact of the
general prevalence, at a certain period of social development, of
the custom of capturing wives. The co-existence of both customs
has been already noticed by the old Russian chronicler in his
description of the manners and customs of the Radimich, Viatich,
and Sever. His testimony is corroborated by that of the nuptial
songs, and of the ceremonies still in use at country weddings.
The information which is derived from these sources as to the
general prevalence in past times of marriage by capture, I have
summed up in a work published in Russian under the title of "The
first Periods in the Evolution of Law." I shall take the liberty
of bringing forward to-day the facts there summarised. They
concern the Eastern as well as the Southern Slavs. 
    Amongst the Southern Slavs, marriage by capture was still in
existence no longer ago than the beginning of the present
century. A well-known Servian writer, Vouk Karadjich, gives the
following details about this peculiar custom, known under the
name of otmitza. "The Capture of girls in order to marry them is
still practised among the Servians. Young men very frequently
have recourse to this mode of procuring a wife. On such occasions
they are equipped and armed as if they were going out to do
battle. They conceal themselves, and quietly await the moment
till the girl passes near them on her way to look after the
cattle. Sometimes they make a direct attack on the homestead she
inhabits. In either case her resistance has no other result than
a direct appeal to physical force. The young men seize her by her
long plaited tresses, drag and push her along, and sometimes use
a whip or a stick to quicken her pace. The same custom prevailed
not long ago in Montenegro. It existed also for centuries in
Croatia, as may be seen from the mention made of it in the
statute of Politza, a legal code published in 1605. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina abductions still occur, but, as a rule, with the
previous consent of the supposed victim, and with the declared
intention of avoiding the expenses of a regular betrothal."
    So much as regards marriage among the Southern Slavs. 
    As to the Eastern Slavs, the early development of a strong
government, and of a powerful clergy, prevented the possibility
of a long continuance of this wild method of constituting a
family. An exception must, however, be made as regards the
Cosacks of Little Russia and the Ukraine; who, according to the
statement of Beauplan, continued to capture their wives no longer
ago than the seventeenth century. But the existence, probably in
Pagan times, of marriage by capture in Russia, as well as in
Poland, is still revealed by the old ballads, the wedding
ceremonies of the country people, and the songs in use on the
occasion of a betrothal. 
    The bilini more than once mention the cases of paladins like
Ilia Mourometz having a personal encounter with the Amazons they
meet on their way. As soon as the paladins have succeeded in
vanquishing the Amazons, they force them to become their wives.
Among the different ceremonies still in use at a country wedding,
one particularly deserves our attention, on account of the
symbolical representation of the means to which the family of the
bride once had recourse to prevent an abduction. On the day fixed
for the wedding the doors leading to the homestead of the bride
are closely shut. Sometimes a temporary wooden wall is erected to
preserve the family from intrusion. The wedding-songs still in
use in the Government of Toula speak of the necessity of
defending the approach to the bride's residence by oak trees, cut
down to block up the road, and by shields arranged before the
principal entrance of the homestead.
    The bridegroom and his friends wear a warlike dress; they are
mounted on horseback, and carry guns and pistols. Such, at least,
is the custom in the western provinces of Russia, whilst in the
southern the whip, carried by the bridegroom's best man, appears
to be the only weapon in use. The wedding-songs speak of arrows,
shot in the direction of the bride's home, and of stone walls
broken down, in order to take possession of her. The bridegroom
and his followers are regularly met like foes. In the Government
of Perm it is the custom for the father of the bride to fire a
pistol over their heads, of course a pistol charged only with
powder. The same custom is also in use in certain parts of the
Government of Archangel. The wedding-song speaks of the
bridegroom's train in the following terms:

They will come to the maiden's father
With war. 
They will rob him,
And imprison the mother. 
They will take the young girl away
To a strange land. 

    But capture, as we have already seen, was not the only mode
of contracting marriage among the Slavs, even in the earliest
period. According to the chronicle of Nestor, the Polians never
had recourse to it. Instead of carrying off his bride by force,
the Polian bridegroom preferred to pay to her father, or her
family, a sort of pretium nuptiale, or bride-price. This custom
of the Polians gradually became the general usage among all
Slavonic tribes. In Servia, according to Vouk Karadjich, the sums
of money paid to the bride's father by the bridegroom's family
were so exorbitant that Georgius the Black issued a proclamation
declaring it to be illegal to ask from the bridegroom more than a
single ducat. In our days, says Bogisic, wives, as a rule, cannot
be bought by their future husbands, but a reminiscence of this
old custom is still preserved in the fact that the bride's father
receives from the bridegroom a gift in money, varying from one to
six ducats, according to the fortune of the giver. 
    Wives were also bought and sold among the Slavonic tribes of
Austria. According to an old usage of the Loujichan, a Slavonic
people inhabiting certain districts of Hungary, the bridegroom,
on entering the homestead of his bride, apostrophised the father
thus: "Pray do tell me if you have a cow to sell? " A Bohemian
wedding-song puts into the mouth of the bridegroom's best man the
following sentence: "Please deliver to me the bride. I will give
you a good price for her. The only reason I have for being here
is that I may pay you in heavy thalers." No longer ago than the
beginning of the last century, young men wishing to marry were in
the habit of going to the fair at Krasni Brod, where unmarried
women and widows, surrounded by their relations, awaited their
coming. Each chose the woman he liked best, covenanted with her
parents as to the amount of money to be paid for her, and
proceeded to the ceremony of marriage. Polish wedding-songs also
mention the custom of buying wives. 
    In Posnau the following ceremony is still observed on the
occasion of a betrothal: The bridegroom puts a small piece of
money on the shoes of his bride, another on her knee, a third on
her shoulder, a fourth on her head. It is only when this ceremony
has been performed that the father delivers the maiden into the
hands of her future husband. 
    I have already mentioned the fact that the Payment made in
Old Russia by the bridegroom was known under the name of veno.
The true meaning of this word is revealed by the use which is
made of it by the translators of the Scriptures. In a Slavonic
version of the words addressed by Jacob to Laban, when he asked
him for the hand of his daughter Rachel, the translators write as
follows: Increase the sum of the veno as much as you like and I
will pay it to you, and you shall give me this maiden to
wife.(11*) 
    In modern times the veno is mentioned only in certain wedding
songs. Another term, kladka, has replaced it in most parts of
Great Russia. This payment, amounting in certain parts of Russia
to the sum of one hundred, and even of two or three hundred
roubles, is made to the father of the bride. As a rule, the
father disposes of the money in favour of his daughter, for he
gives her as dowry a larger or smaller sum, according to what he
has received from the bridegroom. But this fact cannot be brought
forward as a proof that the kladka belongs by right to the bride.
In more than one commune of the government of Tamboy, Riasan,
Vladimir, Moscow, Samara and Saratov, no mention is made of the
dowry given by the bride's father,  whilst the kladka is
regularly paid to the head of the family to which the bride
belongs.(12*) We must therefore consider these two payments, that
made by the bridegroom, and that made by the bride's father, as
quite different institutions. The one payment proves the
existence, at least in certain parts of modern Russia, of a mode
of marriage similar to that of the Indian Asura, the other shows
the way in which the pretium emptionis, to employ a term of Roman
jurisprudence, passed into the dos or dowry. The custom was the
same as that followed by the Germanic tribes. In saying this I
have particularly in view Tacitus's statement about the payment
made by the bridegroom at a marriage, and the more recent fact of
the conversion of this payment into a dowry given by the bride's
father. 
    That in former days in Russia wives were regularly bought
from their parents is plainly recognised by the wedding-songs
still in use among our peasants. 
    The boyars, a term by which people designate the companions
or followers of the bridegroom, who on his part is called "the
duke," kniaz, the boyars, says a wedding-song of the Government
of Saratov, "surround the yard of the bride's house on all sides;
they bargain for our Douniascha."
    "The boyars have covered the ground with gold," sing the
country people of White Russia. 
    The bridegroom is very often mentioned in the songs of the
peasants of Great Russia as the "merchant," whist the bride is
spoken of as "merchandise." In the Government of Jaroslav, for
instance, the bride, following an ancient usage, complains of the
treatment to which she will be subjected, saying that "unknown
merchants will take her away from her father and her dear
mother."(13*) 
    Now that we have carefully passed in review the different
aspects under which matrimonial relations have been viewed, or
still are viewed, by the country people of Russia, we may be
allowed to say, that Russian ethnography quite corroborates the
theory as to the evolution of marriage which English scholars
were the first to establish. The author of "Primitive Culture,"
as well as the great and powerful genius who has so marvellously
continued the work of Auguste Comte, and lastly the numerous
followers of the man, whose studies in ancient history have
unveiled for us the mysteries of the early family will, I have no
doubt, be pleased to see their views confirmed by the early law
and the still living custom of one of the principal branches of
the Aryan race. Nothing more, it seems to me, is wanting to the
modern theory of the matriarchate than a solid base of historical
facts. So long as obscure myths and the more or less superficial
observations of missionaries and tourists constituted the
materials for a theory whose chief purpose is to show us the
social state of our most remote ancestors, objections like those
of Sir Henry Maine or Mr Starcke found a ready ear. The fact that
among the Kamilaroi and the Kuruai the right of the husband is
ignored, does not necessarily imply that our ancestors had no
notion of marriage and the patria potestas; and the numerous
Greek myths on which Bachofen has established his hypothesis of
any early Greek gyneocracy may possibly belong to the number of
those wandering legends on which it is very difficult to found an
opinion as to the social state of this or that particular people.
    Consult the "Sociology" of Herbert Spencer, and especially
the chapters in which he treats of the early forms of marriage,
and you will, I am sure, be surprised at the discovery that
scarcely any mention is made of the legal antiquities of peoples
belonging to the Aryan race. This is a serious defect, and the
sooner it is remedied the better. Some measures have already been
taken to this end by the modern school of German jurists who,
under the able guidance of Professor Kohler, publish a most
interesting periodical call ed the Zeitschrift fur die
vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft. It is with an object similar to
theirs that I have undertaken my researches in the vast field of
Slavonic law and custom. What I have said about it in this
lecture, little though it has been, may, perchance, induce some
of you to undertake fresh studies in this region which is still
so little explored. I can promise all who will venture, the most
abundant and happy results. 

NOTES:

1. The last time in an article on the patriarchal family
published in the Quarterly Review.

2. Compare Lange, "On the Mutual Rights, according to Old Russian
Law, of Husband and Wife as regards Fortune." Petersburg, 1886.

3. "Das Landrecht von Kloster." (XVIc.) ed. by Mohr.

4. Smirnov, "Sketches of Family Relations according to the
Customary Law of the Russians" (Moscow, 1877) pp. 105, 106.

5. Ivanischev, "Dissertation on the Rights of the Individual
according to the Old Laws of the Bohemians." Complete Works, p.
92.

6. Ribnikov, "The Songs of the Russian People." vol. i, p. 64.
Kirscha Danilov, "Old Russian Poems" pp. 9 and 70. Afanasiev,
"Tales of the Russian People." vol. i, p. 484.

7. "Antiquarische Briefe," 1880, p. 167. McLennan, "The
Patriarchal Theory," ch. vi. p. 71.

8. Afanasiev "Folk-tales" vol. i, pp. 211, 212.

9. Schein, "Songs of the White Russians."

10. Tereschenko, "Social Life of the Russians,: vol. iv, p. 280.

11. Genesis, xxix.

12. Lange, p. 86.

13. Titov, "Customary Village Law." Nicola Perevos in the
District of Rostov (Jaroslav, 1888), Appendix N. 5.
