





PART II



POLITICAL LIFE







CHAPTER III



FROM JACKSON TO FILLMORE--1832-1851



My arrival in this world took place at one of the

stormy periods of American political history.  It

was on the third of the three election days which carried

Andrew Jackson a second time into the Presidency. 

Since that period, the election, with its paralysis of

business, ghastly campaign lying, and monstrous vilification

of candidates, has been concentrated into one day; but at

that time all the evil passions of a presidential election

were allowed to ferment and gather vitriolic strength

during three days.



I was born into a politically divided family.  My

grandfather, on my mother's side, whose name I was destined

to bear, was an ardent Democrat; had, as such, represented

his district in the State legislature, and other public

bodies; took his political creed from Thomas Jefferson, and

adored Andrew Jackson.  My father, on the other hand,

was in all his antecedents and his personal convictions, a

devoted Whig, taking his creed from Alexander Hamilton,

and worshiping Henry Clay.



This opposition between my father and grandfather did

not degenerate into personal bitterness; but it was very

earnest, and, in later years, my mother told me that when

Hayne, of South Carolina, made his famous speech,

charging the North with ill-treatment of the South, my

grandfather sent a copy of it to my father, as unanswerable;

but that, shortly afterward, my father sent to my

grandfather the speech of Daniel Webster, in reply, and

that, when this was read, the family allowed that the

latter had the better of the argument.  I cannot help thinking

that my grandfather must have agreed with them, tacitly,

if not openly.  He loved the Hampshire Hills of

Massachusetts, from which he came.  Year after year he took

long journeys to visit them, and Webster's magnificent

reference to the ``Old Bay State'' must have aroused his

sympathy and pride.



Fortunately, at that election, as at so many others since,

the good sense of the nation promptly accepted the result,

and after its short carnival of political passion, dismissed

the whole subject; the minority simply leaving the responsibility

of public affairs to the majority, and all betaking

themselves again to their accustomed vocations.



I do not remember, during the first seven years of my

life, ever hearing any mention of political questions.  The

only thing I heard during that period which brings back a

chapter in American politics, was when, at the age of five

years, I attended an infant school and took part in a sort

of catechism, all the children rising and replying to the

teacher's questions.  Among these were the following:



Q.  Who is President of the United States?



A.  Martin Van Buren.



Q.  Who is governor of the State of New York?



A.  William L. Marcy.



This is to me somewhat puzzling, for I was four years

old when Martin Van Buren was elected, and my father

was his very earnest opponent, yet, though I recall easily

various things which occurred at that age and even earlier,

I have no remembrance of any general election before

1840, and my only recollection of the first New York

statesman elected to the Presidency is this mention of his

name, in a child's catechism.



My recollections of American polities begin, then, with

the famous campaign of 1840, and of that they are vivid. 

Our family had, in 1839, removed to Syracuse, which,

although now a city of about one hundred and twenty

thousand inhabitants, was then a village of fewer than six

thousand; but, as the central town of the State, it was

already a noted gathering-place for political conventions

and meetings.  The great Whig mass-meeting held there,

in 1840, was long famous as the culmination of the

campaign between General Harrison and Martin Van Buren.



As a President, Mr. Van Buren had fallen on evil times. 

It was a period of political finance; of demagogical

methods in public business; and the result was ``hard

times,'' with an intense desire throughout the nation for a

change.  This desire was represented especially by the

Whig party.  General Harrison had been taken up as its

candidate, not merely because he had proved his worth

as governor of the Northwestern Territory, and as a

senator in Congress, but especially as the hero of sundry

fights with the Indians, and, above all, of the plucky little

battle at Tippecanoe.  The most popular campaign song,

which I soon learned to sing lustily, was ``Tippecanoe and

Tyler, Too,'' and sundry lines of it expressed, not only

my own deepest political convictions and aspirations, but

also those cherished by myriads of children of far larger

growth.  They ran as follows:



     ``Oh, have you heard the great commotion-motion-motion

       Rolling the country through?

       It is the ball a-rolling on

       For Tippecanoe and Tyler, too,

       For Tippecanoe and Tyler, too;

       And with them we 'll beat little Van;

       Van, Van is a used up man;

       And with them we 'll beat little Van.''





The campaign was an apotheosis of tom-foolery. 

General Harrison had lived the life, mainly, of a Western

farmer, and for a time, doubtless, exercised amid his rude

surroundings the primitive hospitality natural to sturdy

Western pioneers.  On these facts the changes were rung. 

In every town and village a log cabin was erected where

the Whigs held their meetings; and the bringing of logs,

with singing and shouting, to build it, was a great event;

its front door must have a wooden latch on the inside;

but the latch-string must run through the door; for the

claim which the friends of General Harrison especially

insisted upon was that he not only lived in a log cabin, but

that his latch-string was always out, in token that all his

fellow-citizens were welcome at his fireside.



Another element in the campaign was hard cider. 

Every log cabin must have its barrel of this acrid fluid,

as the antithesis of the alleged beverage of President Van

Buren at the White House.  He, it was asserted, drank

champagne, and on this point I remember that a verse

was sung at log-cabin meetings which, after describing,

in a prophetic way the arrival of the ``Farmer of North

Bend'' at the White House, ran as follows:



   ``They were all very merry, and drinking champagne

     When the Farmer, impatient, knocked louder again;

     Oh, Oh, said Prince John, I very much fear

     We must quit this place the very next year.''





``Prince John'' was President Van Buren's brilliant

son; famous for his wit and eloquence, who, in after years,

rose to be attorney-general of the State of New York, and

who might have risen to far higher positions had his

principles equaled his talents.



Another feature at the log cabin, and in all political

processions, was at least one raccoon; and if not a live

raccoon in a cage, at least a raccoon skin nailed upon the

outside of the cabin.  This gave local color, but hence

came sundry jibes from the Democrats, for they were

wont to refer to the Whigs as ``coons,'' and to their log

cabins as ``coon pens.''  Against all these elements of

success, added to promises of better times, the Democratic

party could make little headway.  Martin Van Buren,

though an admirable public servant in many ways, was

discredited.  M. de Bacourt, the French Minister at

Washington, during his administration, was, it is true, very

fond of him, and this cynical scion of French nobility

wrote in a private letter, which has been published in these

latter days, ``M. Van Buren is the most perfect imitation

of a gentleman I ever saw.''  But this commendation had

not then come to light, and the main reliance of the Democrats

in capturing the popular good-will was their candidate

for the Vice-Presidency, Colonel Richard M. Johnson,

of Kentucky.  He, too, had fought in the Indian wars,

and bravely.  Therefore it was that one of the Whig songs

which especially rejoiced me, ran:



     ``They shout and sing, Oh humpsy dumpsy,

       Colonel Johnson killed Tecumseh.''





Among the features of that period which excited my

imagination were the enormous mass meetings, with

processions, coming in from all points of the compass, miles

in length, and bearing every patriotic device and political

emblem.  Here the Whigs had infinitely the advantage. 

Their campaign was positive and aggressive.  On platform-

wagons were men working at every trade which expected

to be benefited by Whig success; log cabins of all

sorts and sizes, hard-cider barrels, coon pens, great

canvas balls, which were kept ``a-rolling on,'' canoes, such

as General Harrison had used in crossing Western rivers,

eagles that screamed in defiance, and cocks that crowed

for victory.  The turning ball had reference to sundry

lines in the foremost campaign song.  For the October

election in Maine having gone Whig by a large majority,

clearly indicating what the general result was to be in

November, the opening lines ran as follows:



   ``Oh, have you heard the news from Maine--Maine--Maine?

     Rolling the country through?

     It is the ball a-rolling on

     For Tippecanoe and Tyler, too.''

                  &c., &c., &c.





Against all this the Democrats, with their negative and

defensive platform, found themselves more and more at

a disadvantage; they fought with desperation, but in vain,

and one of their most unlucky ventures to recover their

position was an effort to undermine General Harrison's

military reputation.  For this purpose they looked about,

and finally found one of their younger congressional

representatives, considered to be a rising man, who, having

gained some little experience in the Western militia, had

received the honorary title of ``General,'' Isaac M. Crary,

of Michigan; him they selected to make a speech in Congress

exhibiting and exploding General Harrison's military

record.  He was very reluctant to undertake it, but

at last yielded, and, after elaborate preparation, made an

argument loud and long, to show that General Harrison

was a military ignoramus.  The result was both comic

and pathetic.  There was then in Congress the most famous

stump-speaker of his time, and perhaps of all times,

a man of great physical, intellectual, and moral vigor;

powerful in argument, sympathetic in manner, of infinite

wit and humor, and, unfortunately for General Crary,

a Whig,--Thomas Corwin, of Ohio.  Mr. Crary's heavy,

tedious, perfunctory arraignment of General Harrison

being ended, Corwin rose and began an offhand speech

on ``The Military Services of General Isaac M. Crary.''

In a few minutes he had as his audience, not only the House

of Representatives, but as many members of the Senate,

of the Supreme Court, and visitors to the city, as could

be crowded into the congressional chamber, and, of all

humorous speeches ever delivered in Congress, this of

Corwin has come down to us as the most successful.  Long

afterward, parts of it lingered in our ``speakers' manuals''

and were declaimed in the public schools as examples

of witty oratory.  Many years later, when the

House of Representatives left the old chamber and went

into that which it now occupies, Thurlow Weed wrote

an interesting article on scenes he had witnessed in the old

hall, and most vivid of all was his picture of this speech

by Corwin.  His delineations of Crary's brilliant exploits,

his portrayal of the valiant charges made by Crary's

troops on muster days upon the watermelon patches of

Michigan, not only convulsed his audience, but were

echoed throughout the nation, Whigs and Democrats

laughing alike; and when John Quincy Adams, in a speech

shortly afterward, referred to the man who brought on

this tempest of fun as ``the late General Crary,'' there

was a feeling that the adjective indicated a fact.  It really

was so; Crary, although a man of merit, never returned

to Congress, but was thenceforth dropped from political

life.  More than twenty years afterward, as I was passing

through Western Michigan, a friend pointed out to me

his tombstone, in a little village cemetery, with comments,

half comic, half pathetic; and I also recall a mournful

feeling when one day, in going over the roll of my

students at the University of Michigan, I came upon one who

bore the baptismal name of Isaac Crary.  Evidently, the

blighted young statesman had a daughter who, in all this

storm of ridicule and contempt, stood by him, loved him,

and proudly named her son after him.



Another feature in the campaign also impressed me. 

A blackguard orator, on the Whig side, one of those

whom great audiences applaud for the moment and ever

afterward despise,--a man named Ogle,--made a speech

which depicted the luxury prevailing at the White House,

and among other evidences of it, dwelt upon the ``gold

spoons'' used at the President's table, denouncing their

use with such unction that, for the time, unthinking

people regarded Martin Van Buren as a sort of American

Vitellius.  As a matter of fact, the scanty silver-gilt table

utensils at the White House have been shown, in these

latter days, in some very pleasing articles written by

General Harrison's grandson, after this grandson had

himself retired from the Presidency, to have been, for the

most part, bought long before;--and by order of General

Washington.



The only matter of political importance which, as a boy

eight years old, I seized upon, and which dwells in my

memory, was the creation of the ``Sub-Treasury.''  That

this was a wise measure seems now proven by the fact that

through all the vicissitudes of politics, from that day to

this, it has remained and rendered admirable service.  But

at that time it was used as a weapon against the

Democratic party, and came to be considered by feather-

brained partizans, young and old, as the culmination of

human wickedness.  As to what the ``Sub-Treasury''

really was I had not the remotest idea; but this I knew;--

that it was the most wicked outrage ever committed by a

remorseless tyrant upon a long-suffering people.



In November of 1840 General Harrison was elected.  In

the following spring he was inaugurated, and the Whigs

being now for the first time in power, the rush for office

was fearful.  It was undoubtedly this crushing pressure

upon the kindly old man that caused his death.  What

British soldiers, and Indian warriors, and fire, flood, and

swamp fevers could not accomplish in over sixty years,

was achieved by the office-seeking hordes in just one

month.  He was inaugurated on the fourth of March and

died early in April.



I remember, as if it were yesterday, my dear mother

coming to my bedside, early in the morning, and saying

to me, ``President Harrison is dead.''  I wondered what

was to become of us.  He was the first President who had

died during his term of service, and a great feeling of

relief came over me when I learned that his high office

had devolved upon the Vice-President.



But now came a new trouble, and my youthful mind was

soon sadly agitated.  The Whig papers, especially the

``New York Express'' and ``Albany Evening Journal,''

began to bring depressing accounts of the new President,

--tidings of extensive changes in the offices throughout the

country, and especially in the post-offices.  At first the

Whig papers published these under the heading

``Appointments by the President.''  But soon the heading

changed; it became ``Appointments by Judas Iscariot,''

or ``Appointments by Benedict Arnold,'' and war was

declared against President Tyler by the party that elected

him.  Certain it is that no party ever found itself in a

worse position than did the Whigs, when their Vice-President

came into the Chief Magistracy; and equally certain

is it that this position was the richly earned punishment

of their own folly.



I have several times since had occasion to note the

carelessness of National and State conventions in nominating

a candidate for the second place upon the ticket--whether

Vice-President or Lieutenant-Governor.  It would seem

that the question of questions--the nomination to the

first office--having been settled, there comes a sort of

collapse in these great popular assemblies, and that then,

for the second office, it is very often anybody's race and

mainly a matter of chance.  In this way alone can be

explained several nominations which have been made to

second offices, and above all, that of John Tyler.  As a

matter of fact, he was not commended to the Whig party

on any solid grounds.  His whole political life had shown

him an opponent of their main ideas; he was, in fact, a

Southern doctrinaire, and frequently suffered from acute

attacks of that very troublesome political disease,

Virginia metaphysics.  As President he attempted to enforce

his doctrines, and when Whig leaders, and above all

Henry Clay attempted, not only to resist, but to crush him,

he asserted his dignity at the cost of his party, and finally

tried that which other accidental Presidents have since

tried with no better success, namely, to build up a party

of his own by a new distribution of offices.  Never was a

greater failure.  Mr. Tyler was dropped by both parties

and disappeared from American political life forever. 

I can now see that he was a man obedient to his convictions

of duty, such as they were, and in revolt against

attempts of Whig leaders to humiliate him; but then, to

my youthful mind, he appeared the very incarnation of

evil.



My next recollections are of the campaign of 1844. 

Again the Whig party took courage, and having, as a boy

of twelve years, acquired more earnest ideas regarding

the questions at issue, I helped, with other Whig boys,

to raise ash-poles, and to hurrah lustily for Clay at public

meetings.  On the other hand, the Democratic boys hurrahed

as lustily around their hickory poles and, as was

finally proved, to much better purpose.  They sang doggerel

which, to me, was blasphemous, and especially a song

with the following refrain:



   ``Alas poor Cooney Clay,

     Alas poor Cooney Clay,

     You never can be President,

     For so the people say.''



The ash-poles had reference to Ashland, Clay's Kentucky

estate; and the hickory poles recalled General Jackson's

sobriquet, ``Old Hickory.''  For the Democratic candidate

in 1844, James Knox Polk, was considered heir to

Jackson's political ideas.  The campaign of 1844 was not

made so interesting by spectacular outbursts of tom-foolery

as the campaign of 1840 had been.  The sober second

thought of the country had rather sickened people of that

sort of thing; still, there was quite enough of it, especially

as shown in caricatures and songs.  The poorest of the

latter was perhaps one on the Democratic side, for as the

Democratic candidates were Polk of Tennessee and Dallas

of Pennsylvania, one line of the song embraced probably

the worst pun ever made, namely--



     ``PORK in the barrel, and DOLLARS in the pocket.''





It was at this period that the feeling against the extension

of slavery, especially as indicated in the proposed

annexation of Texas, began to appear largely in politics,

and though Clay at heart detested slavery and always

refused to do the bidding of its supporters beyond what he

thought absolutely necessary in preserving the Union, an

unfortunate letter of his led great numbers of anti-

slavery men to support a separate anti-slavery ticket, the

candidate being James G. Birney.  The result was that

the election of Clay became impossible.  Mr. Polk was

elected, and under him came the admission of Texas,

which caused the Mexican War, and gave slavery a new

lease of life.  The main result, in my own environment,

was that my father and his friends, thenceforward for a

considerable time, though detesting slavery, held all

abolitionists and anti-slavery men in contempt,--as unpatriotic

because they had defeated Henry Clay, and as idiotic

because they had brought on the annexation of Texas and

thereby the supremacy of the slave States.



But the flame of liberty could not be smothered by

friends or blown out by enemies; it was kept alive by

vigorous counterblasts in the press, and especially fed by

the lecture system, which was then at the height of its

efficiency.  Among the most powerful of lecturers was

John Parker Hale, senator of the United States from

New Hampshire, his subject being, ``The Last Gladiatorial

Combat at Rome.''  Taking from Gibbon the story of

the monk Telemachus, who ended the combats in the arena

by throwing himself into them and sacrificing his life, Hale

suggested to his large audiences an argument that if men

wished to get rid of slavery in our country they must be

ready to sacrifice themselves if need be.  His words sank

deep into my mind, and I have sometimes thought that

they may have had something to do in leading John

Brown to make his desperate attempt on slavery at

Harper's Ferry.



How blind we all were!  Henry Clay, a Kentucky slave-

holder, would have saved us.  Infinitely better than the

violent solutions proposed to us was his large statesman-

like plan of purchasing the slave children as they were

born and setting them free.  Without bloodshed, and at

cost of the merest nothing as compared to the cost of the

Civil War, he would thus have solved the problem; but

it was not so to be.  The guilt of the nation was not to be

so cheaply atoned for.  Fanatics, North and South,

opposed him and, as a youth, I yielded to their arguments.



Four years later, in 1848, came a very different sort of

election.  General Zachary Taylor, who had shown ster-

ling qualities in the Mexican War, was now the candidate

of the Whigs, and against him was nominated Mr.

Cass, a general of the War of 1812, afterward governor

of the Northwestern Territory, and senator from

Michigan.  As a youth of sixteen, who by that time had become

earnestly interested in politics, I was especially struck

by one event in this campaign.  The Democrats of course

realized that General Taylor, with the prestige gained in

the Mexican War, was a very formidable opponent.  Still,

if they could keep their party together, they had hopes of

beating him.  But a very large element in their party

had opposed the annexation of Texas and strongly disliked

the extension of slavery;--this wing of the party

in New York being known as the ``Barn Burners,'' because

it was asserted that they ``believed in burning the

barn to drive the rats out.''  The question was what these

radical gentlemen would do.  That question was answered

when a convention, controlled largely by the anti-slavery

Democrats of New York and other States, met at Buffalo

and nominated Martin Van Buren to the Presidency. 

For a time it was doubtful whether he would accept the

nomination.  On one side it was argued that he could not

afford to do so, since he had no chance of an election,

and would thereby forever lose his hold upon the Democratic

party; but, on the other hand, it was said that he

was already an old man; that he realized perfectly the

impossibility of his re<e:>lection, and that he had a bitter

grudge against the Democratic candidate, General Cass,

who had voted against confirming him when he was sent

as minister to Great Britain, thus obliging him to return

home ingloriously.  He accepted the nomination.



On the very day which brought the news of this

acceptance, General Cass arrived in Syracuse, on his way

to his home at Detroit.  I saw him welcomed by a great

procession of Democrats, and marched under a broiling

sun, through dusty streets, to the City Hall, where he was

forced to listen and reply to fulsome speeches prophesying

his election, which he and all present knew to be impos-

sible.  For Mr. Van Buren's acceptance of the ``free soil''

nomination was sure to divide the Democratic vote of the

State of New York, thus giving the State to the Whigs;

and in those days the proverb held good, ``As New York

goes, so goes the Union.''



For years afterward there dwelt vividly in my mind

the picture of this old, sad man marching through the

streets, listening gloomily to the speeches, forced to

appear confident of victory, yet evidently disheartened and

disgusted.



Very vivid are my recollections of State conventions

at this period.  Syracuse, as the ``Central City,'' was a

favorite place for them, and, as they came during the

summer vacations, boys of my age and tastes were able

to admire the great men of the hour,--now, alas, utterly

forgotten.  We saw and heard the leaders of all parties. 

Many impressed me; but one dwells in my memory, on

account of a story which was told of him.  This was a

very solemn, elderly gentleman who always looked very

wise but said nothing,--William Bouck of Schoharie

County.  He had white hair and whiskers, and having

been appointed canal commissioner of the State, had

discharged his duties by driving his old white family nag

and buggy along the towing-path the whole length of the

canals, keeping careful watch of the contractors, and so,

in his simple, honest way, had saved the State much money. 

The result was the nickname of the ``Old White Hoss of

Schoharie,'' and a reputation for simplicity and honesty

which made him for a short time governor of the State.



A story then told of him reveals something of his

character.  Being informed that Bishop Hughes of New York

was coming to Albany, and that it would be well to treat

him with especial courtesy, the governor prepared himself

to be more than gracious, and, on the arrival of the

bishop, greeted him most cordially with the words, ``How

do you do, Bishop; I hope you are well.  How did you

leave Mrs. Hughes and your family?''  To this the bishop

answered, ``Governor, I am very well, but there is no

Mrs. Hughes; bishops in our church don't marry.'' 

``Good gracious,'' answered the governor, ``you don't

say so; how long has that been?''  The bishop must have

thoroughly enjoyed this.  His Irish wit made him quick

both at comprehension and repartee.  During a debate

on the school question a leading Presbyterian merchant

of New York, Mr. Hiram Ketchum, made a very earnest

speech against separate schools for Roman Catholics, and

presently, turning to Bishop Hughes, said, ``Sir, we

respect you, sir, but, sir, we can't go your purgatory, sir.'' 

To this the bishop quietly replied, ``You might go further

and fare worse.''



Another leading figure, but on the Whig side, was a

State senator, commonly known as ``Bray'' Dickinson,

to distinguish him from D. S. Dickinson who had been a

senator of the United States, and a candidate for the

Presidency.  ``Bray'' Dickinson was a most earnest

supporter of Mr. Seward; staunch, prompt, vigorous, and

really devoted to the public good.  One story regarding

him shows his rough-and-readiness.



During a political debate in the old Whig days, one

of his Democratic brother senators made a long harangue

in favor of Martin Van Buren as a candidate for the

Presidency, and in the course of his speech referred to

Mr. Van Buren as ``the Curtius of the Republic.''  Upon

this Dickinson jumped up, went to some member better

educated in the classics than himself, and said, ``Who in

thunder is this Curtis that this man is talking about?''  ``It

isn't Curtis, it 's Curtius, ``was the reply.  ``Well, now, ``

said Dickinson, ``what did Curtius do?''  ``Oh,'' said his

informant, ``he threw himself into an abyss to save

the Roman Republic.''  Upon this Dickinson returned to

his seat, and as soon as the Democratic speaker had

finished, arose and said:  ``Mr. President, I deny the justice

of the gentleman's reference to Curtius and Martin Van

Buren.  What did Curtius do?  He threw himself, sir,

into an abyss to save his country.  What, sir, did Martin

Van Buren do?  He threw his country into an abyss to

save himself.''



Rarely, if ever, has any scholar used a bit of classical

knowledge to better purpose.



Another leading figure, at a later period, was a Democrat,

Fernando Wood, mayor of New York, a brilliant

desperado; and on one occasion I saw the henchmen whom

he had brought with him take possession of a State

convention and deliberately knock its president, one of the

most respected men in the State, off the platform.  It was

an unfortunate performance for Mayor Wood, since the

disgust and reaction thereby aroused led all factions of

the Democratic party to unite against him.



Other leading men were such as Charles O'Conor and

John Van Buren; the former learned and generous, but

impracticable; the latter brilliant beyond belief, but not

considered as representing any permanent ideas or principles.



During the campaign of 1848, as a youth of sixteen,

I took the liberty of breaking from the paternal party;

my father voting for General Taylor, I hurrahing for

Martin Van Buren.  I remember well how one day my

father earnestly remonstrated against this.  He said, ``My

dear boy, you cheer Martin Van Buren's name because

you believe that if he is elected he will do something

against slavery: in the first place, he cannot be elected;

and in the second place, if you knew him as we older

people do, you would not believe in his attachment to any

good cause whatever.''



The result of the campaign was that General Taylor

was elected, and I recall the feeling of awe and hope with

which I gazed upon his war-worn face, for the first and

last time, as he stopped to receive the congratulations of

the citizens of Syracuse;--hope, alas, soon brought to

naught, for he, too, soon succumbed to the pressure of

official care, and Millard Fillmore of New York, the Vice-

President, reigned in his stead.



I remember Mr. Fillmore well.  He was a tall, large,

fine-looking man, with a face intelligent and kindly, and

he was noted both as an excellent public servant and an

effective public speaker.  He had been comptroller of

the State of New York,--then the most important of State

offices, had been defeated as Whig candidate for governor,

and had been a representative in Congress.  He was the

second of the accidental Presidents, and soon felt it his

duty to array himself on the side of those who, by

compromise with the South on the slavery question, sought

to maintain and strengthen the Federal Union.  Under

him came the compromise measures on which our great

statesmen of the middle period of the nineteenth century,

Clay, Webster, Calhoun, and Benton, made their last

speeches.  Mr. Fillmore was undoubtedly led mainly by

patriotic motives, in promoting the series of measures

which were expected to end all trouble between the North

and South, but which, unfortunately, embraced the Fugitive

Slave Law; yet this, as I then thought, rendered him

accursed.  I remember feeling an abhorrence for his very

name, and this feeling was increased when there took

place, in the city of Syracuse, the famous ``Jerry Rescue.''







CHAPTER IV

EARLY MANHOOD--1851-1857



On the first day of October, 1851, there was shuffling

about the streets of Syracuse, in the quiet pursuit

of his simple avocations, a colored person, as nearly ``of

no account'' as any ever seen.  So far as was known

he had no surname, and, indeed, no Christian name, save

the fragment and travesty,--``Jerry.''



Yet before that day was done he was famous; his name,

such as it was, resounded through the land; and he had

become, in all seriousness, a weighty personage in American

history.



Under the law recently passed, he was arrested, openly

and in broad daylight, as a fugitive slave, and was carried

before the United States commissioner, Mr. Joseph

Sabine, a most kindly public officer, who in this matter

was sadly embarrassed by the antagonism between his

sworn duty and his personal convictions.



Thereby, as was supposed, were fulfilled the Law and the

Prophets--the Law being the fugitive slave law recently

enacted, and the Prophets being no less than Henry Clay

and Daniel Webster.



For, as if to prepare the little city to sacrifice its

cherished beliefs, Mr. Clay had some time before made a

speech from the piazza of the Syracuse House, urging

upon his fellow-citizens the compromises of the

Constitution; and some months later Mr. Webster appeared,

spoke from a balcony near the City Hall, and to the same

purpose; but more so.  The latter statesman was prophetic,

not only in the hortatory, but in the predictive

sense; for he declared not only that the Fugitive Slave

Law must be enforced, but that it WOULD be enforced, and

he added, in substance: ``it will be enforced throughout

the North in spite of all opposition--even in this city--

even in the midst of your abolition conventions.''  This

piece of prophecy was accompanied by a gesture which

seemed to mean much; for the great man's hand was

waved toward the City Hall just across the square--the

classic seat and center of abolition conventions.



How true is the warning, ``Don't prophesy unless you

know!''  The arrest of Jerry took place within six months

after Mr. Webster's speech, and indeed while an abolition

convention was in session at that same City Hall;

but when the news came the convention immediately

dissolved, the fire-bells began to ring, a crowd moved upon

the commissioner's office, surged into it, and swept Jerry

out of the hands of the officers.  The authorities having

rallied, re-arrested the fugitive, and put him in confinement

and in irons.  But in the evening the assailants returned

to the assault, carried the jail by storm, rescued

Jerry for good, and spirited him off safe and sound to

Canada, thus bringing to nought the fugitive slave law,

as well as the exhortations of Mr. Clay and the predictions

of Mr. Webster.



This rescue produced great excitement throughout the

nation.  Various persons were arrested for taking part

in it, and their trials were adjourned from place to place,

to the great hardship of all concerned.  During a college

vacation I was present at one of these trials at Canandaigua,

the United States Judge, before whom it was held,

being the Hon. N. K. Hall, who had been Mr. Fillmore's

law partner in Buffalo.  The evening before the trial an

anti-slavery meeting was held, which I attended.  It was

opened with prayer by a bishop of the African Methodist

Episcopal Church, Loguen, and of all prayers I have

ever heard, this dwells in my mind as perhaps the most

impressive.  The colored minister's petitions for his race,

bond and free, for Jerry and for those who had sought

to rescue him, for the souls of the kidnappers, and for

the country which was to his people a land of bondage,

were most pathetic.  Then arose Gerrit Smith.  Of all

Tribunes of the People I have ever known he dwells in

my memory as possessing the greatest variety of gifts. 

He had the prestige given by great wealth, by lavish

generosity, by transparent honesty, by earnestness of

purpose, by advocacy of every good cause, by a superb

presence, and by natural eloquence of a very high order.  He

was very tall and large, with a noble head, an earnest, yet

kindly face, and of all human voices I have ever heard

his was the most remarkable for its richness, depth, and

strength.  I remember seeing and hearing him once at

a Republican State Convention in the City Hall at Syracuse,

when, having come in for a few moments as a spectator,

he was recognized by the crowd and greeted

with overwhelming calls for a speech.  He was standing

at the entrance door, towering above all about him, and

there was a general cry for him to come forward to

the platform.  He declined to come forward; but finally

observed to those near him, in his quiet, natural way,

with the utmost simplicity, ``Oh, I shall be heard.''  At

this a shout went up from the entire audience; for every

human being in that great hall had heard these words

perfectly, though uttered in his usual conversational

voice.



I also remember once entering the old Delavan House

at Albany, with a college friend of mine, afterward

Bishop of Maine, and seeing, at the other end of a long

hall, Gerrit Smith in quiet conversation.  In a moment

we heard his voice, and my friend was greatly impressed

by it, declaring he had never imagined such

an utterance possible.  It was indeed amazing; it was

like the deep, clear, rich tone from the pedal bass

of a cathedral organ.  During his career in Congress,

it was noted that he was the only speaker within

remembrance who without effort made himself heard in every

part of the old chamber of the House of Representatives,

which was acoustically one of the worst halls ever

devised.  And it was not a case of voice and nothing else;

his strength of argument, his gift of fit expression, and

his wealth of illustration were no less extraordinary.



On this occasion at Canandaigua he rose to speak, and

every word went to the hearts of his audience.  ``Why,''

he began, ``do they conduct these harassing proceedings

against these men?  If any one is guilty, I am guilty. 

With Samuel J. May I proposed the Jerry Rescue.  We

are responsible for it; why do they not prosecute us?'' 

And these words were followed by a train of cogent

reasoning and stirring appeal.



The Jerry Rescue trials only made matters worse. 

Their injustice disgusted the North, and their futility

angered the South.  They revealed one fact which especially

vexed the Southern wing of the Democratic party, and

this was, that their Northern allies could not be depended

upon to execute the new compromise.  In this Syracuse

rescue one of the most determined leaders was a rough

burly butcher, who had been all his life one of the loudest

of pro-slavery Democrats, and who, until he saw Jerry

dragged in manacles through the streets, had been most

violent in his support of the fugitive slave law.  The

trials also stimulated the anti-slavery leaders and orators

to new vigor.  Garrison, Phillips, Gerrit Smith, Sumner,

and Seward aroused the anti-slavery forces as never

before, and the ``Biglow Papers'' of James Russell Lowell,

which made Northern pro-slavery men ridiculous, were

read with more zest than ever.



But the abolition forces had the defects of their

qualities, and their main difficulty really arose from the

stimulus given to a thin fanaticism.  There followed, in

the train of the nobler thinkers and orators, the ``Fool

Reformers,''--sundry long-haired men and short-haired

women, who thought it their duty to stir good Christian

people with blasphemy, to deluge the founders of the

Republic with blackguardism, and to invent ever more

and more ingenious ways for driving every sober-minded

man and woman out of the anti-slavery fold.  More than

once in those days I hung my head in disgust as I listened

to these people, and wondered, for the moment, whether,

after all, even the supremacy of slaveholders might not

be more tolerable than the new heavens and the new earth,

in which should dwell such bedraggled, screaming,

denunciatory creatures.



At the next national election the Whigs nominated

General Scott, a man of extraordinary merit and of

grandiose appearance; but of both these qualities he was

himself unfortunately too well aware; as a result the

Democrats gave him the name of ``Old Fuss and Feathers,'' and

a few unfortunate speeches, in one of which he expressed

his joy at hearing that ``sweet Irish brogue,'' brought

the laugh of the campaign upon him.



On the other hand the Democrats nominated Franklin

Pierce; a man greatly inferior to General Scott in military

matters, but who had served well in the State politics

of New Hampshire and in Congress, was widely beloved,

of especially attractive manners, and of high personal

character.



He also had been in the Mexican War, but though he

had risen to be brigadier-general, his military record

amounted to very little.  There was in him, no doubt,

some alloy of personal with public motives, but it would

be unjust to say that selfishness was the only source of

his political ideas.  He was greatly impressed by the

necessity of yielding to the South in order to save the

Union, and had shown this by his utterances and votes in

Congress: the South, therefore, accepted him against

General Scott, who was supposed to have moderate anti-

slavery views.



General Pierce was elected; the policy of his

administration became more and more deeply pro-slavery; and

now appeared upon the scene Stephen Arnold Douglas--

senator from Illinois, a man of remarkable ability,--a

brilliant thinker and most effective speaker, with an

extraordinary power of swaying men.  I heard him at vari-

ous times; and even after he had committed what seemed

to me the unpardonable sin, it was hard to resist his

eloquence.  He it was who, doubtless from a mixture of

motives, personal and public, had proposed the abolition of

the Missouri Compromise, which since the year 1820 had

been the bulwark of the new territories against the

encroachments of slavery.  The whole anti-slavery sentiment

of the North was thereby intensified, and as the

establishment of north polarity at one end of the magnet

excites south polarity at the other, so Southern feeling

in favor of slavery was thereby increased.  Up to a recent

period Southern leaders had, as a rule, deprecated

slavery, and hoped for its abolition; now they as generally

advocated it as good in itself;--the main foundation of

civil liberty; the normal condition of the working classes

of every nation; and some of them urged the revival of

the African slave-trade.  The struggle became more and

more bitter.  I was during that time at Yale, and the general

sentiment of that university in those days favored

almost any concession to save the Union.  The venerable

Silliman, and a great majority of the older professors

spoke at public meetings in favor of the pro-slavery

compromise measures which they fondly hoped would settle

the difficulty between North and South and re<e:>stablish

the Union on firm foundations.  The new compromise was

indeed a bitter dose for them, since it contained the

fugitive slave law in its most drastic form; and every one

of them, with the exception of a few theological doctrinaires

who found slavery in the Bible, abhorred the whole

slave system.  The Yale faculty, as a rule, took ground

against anti-slavery effort, and, among other ways of

propagating what they considered right opinions, there

was freely distributed among the students a sermon by

the Rev. Dr. Boardman of Philadelphia, which went to

extremes in advocating compromise with slavery and the

slave power.



The great body of the students, also, from North and

South, took the same side.  It is a suggestive fact that

whereas European students are generally inclined to

radicalism, American students have been, since the war of

the Revolution, eminently conservative.



To this pro-slavery tendency at Yale, in hope of saving

the Union, there were two remarkable exceptions, one

being the beloved and respected president of the university,

Dr. Theodore Dwight Woolsey, and the other his

classmate and friend, the Rev. Dr. Leonard Bacon, pastor

of the great Center Church of New Haven, and frequently

spoken of as the ``Congregational Pope of New

England.''  They were indeed a remarkable pair; Woolsey,

quiet and scholarly, at times irascible, but always kind

and just; Bacon a rugged, leonine sort of man who, when

he shook his mane in the pulpit and addressed the New

England conscience, was heard throughout the nation. 

These two, especially, braved public sentiment, as well

as the opinion of their colleagues, and were supposed,

at the time, to endanger the interests of Yale by standing

against the fugitive slave law and other concessions to

slavery and its extension.  As a result Yale fell into

disrepute in the South, which had, up to that time, sent large

bodies of students to it, and I remember that a classmate

of mine, a tall, harum-scarum, big-hearted, sandy-haired

Georgian known as ``Jim'' Hamilton, left Yale in disgust,

returned to his native heath, and was there welcomed with

great jubilation.  A poem was sent me, written by some

ardent admirer of his, beginning with the words:



     ``God bless thee, noble Hamilton,'' &c.





On the other hand I was one of the small minority of

students who remained uncompromisingly anti-slavery,

and whenever I returned from Syracuse, my classmates

and friends used to greet me in a jolly way by asking me

``How are you, Gerrit; how did you leave the Rev.

Antoinette Brown and brother Fred Douglas?''  In consequence

I came very near being, in a small way, a martyr

to my principles.  Having had some success in winning

essay prizes during my sophomore and junior years, my

name was naturally mentioned in connection with the election

of editors for the ``Yale Literary Magazine.''  At this

a very considerable body of Southern students and their

Northern adherents declared against me.  I neither said

nor did anything in the premises, but two of my most

conservative friends wrought valiantly in my behalf. 

One was my dear old chum, Davies, the present Bishop

of Michigan, at the very antipodes from myself on every

possible question; and the other my life-long friend,

Randall Lee Gibson of Kentucky, himself a large slaveholder,

afterward a general in the Confederate service, and

finally, at his lamented death a few years since, United

States senator from Louisiana.  Both these friends

championed my cause, with the result that they saved me by a

small majority.



As editor of the ``Yale Literary Magazine,'' through

my senior year, I could publish nothing in behalf of my

cherished anti-slavery ideas, since a decided majority

of my fellow-editors would have certainly refused

admission to any obnoxious article, and I therefore confined

myself, in my editorial capacity, to literary and abstract

matters; but with my college exercises it was different. 

Professor Larned, who was charged with the criticism

of our essays and speeches, though a very quiet man, was

at heart deeply anti-slavery, and therefore it was that in

sundry class-room essays, as well as in speeches at the

junior exhibition and at commencement, I was able to

pour forth my ideas against what was stigmatized as the

``sum of human villainies.''



I was not free from temptation to an opposite course. 

My experience at the college election had more than once

suggested to my mind the idea that possibly I might be

wrong, after all; that perhaps the voice of the people was

really the voice of God; that if one wishes to accomplish

anything he must work in harmony with the popular will;

and that perhaps the best way would be to conform to

the general opinion.  To do so seemed, certainly, the only

road to preferment of any kind.  Such were the

temptations which, in those days, beset every young man who

dreamed of accomplishing something in life, and they

beset me in my turn; but there came a day when I dealt

with them decisively.  I had come up across New Haven

Green thinking them over, and perhaps paltering rather

contemptibly with my conscience; but arriving at the door

of North College, I stopped a moment, ran through the

whole subject in an instant, and then and there, on the

stairway leading to my room, silently vowed that, come

what might, I would never be an apologist for slavery

or for its extension, and that what little I could do against

both should be done.



I may add that my conscience was somewhat aided by

a piece of casuistry from the most brilliant scholar in

the Yale faculty of that time, Professor James Hadley. 

I had been brought up with a strong conviction of the

necessity of obedience to law as the first requirement in

any State, and especially in a Republic; but here was the

fugitive slave law.  What was our duty regarding it? 

This question having come up in one of our division-

room debates, Professor Hadley, presiding, gave a decision

to the following effect:  ``On the statute books of all

countries are many laws, obsolete and obsolescent; to

disobey an obsolete law is frequently a necessity and never

a crime.  As to disobedience to an obsolescent law, the

question in every man's mind must be as to the degree

of its obsolescence.  Laws are made obsolescent by change

of circumstances, by the growth of convictions which render

their execution impossible, and the like.  Every man,

therefore, must solemnly decide for himself at what

period a law is virtually obsolete.''



I must confess that the doctrine seems to me now

rather dangerous, but at that time I welcomed it as a very

serviceable piece of casuistry, and felt that there was

indeed, as Mr. Seward had declared, a ``higher law'' than

the iniquitous enactment which allowed the taking of a

peaceful citizen back into slavery, without any of the

safeguards which had been developed under Anglo-Saxon

liberty.



Though my political feelings throughout the senior

year grew more and more intense, there was no chance

for their expression either in competition for the Clarke

Essay Prize or for the De Forest Oration Gold Medal,

the subjects of both being assigned by the faculty; and

though I afterward had the satisfaction of taking both

these, my exultation was greatly alloyed by the thought

that the ideas I most cherished could find little, if any,

expression in them.



But on Commencement Day my chance came.  Then I

chose my own theme, and on the subject of ``Modern

Oracles'' poured forth my views to a church full of people;

many evidently disgusted, but a few as evidently

pleased.  I dwelt especially upon sundry utterances of

John Quincy Adams, who had died not long before, and

who had been, during all his later years, a most earnest

opponent of slavery, and I argued that these, with the

declarations of other statesmen of like tendencies, were the

oracles to which the nation should listen.



Curiously enough this commencement speech secured

for me the friendship of a man who was opposed to my

ideas, but seemed to like my presenting them then and

there--the governor of the State, Colonel Thomas

Seymour.  He had served with distinction in the Mexican

War, had been elected and re<e:>lected, again and again,

governor of Connecticut, was devotedly pro-slavery, in

the interest, as he thought, of preserving the Union; but

he remembered my speech, and afterward, when he was

made minister to Russia, invited me to go with him,

attached me to his Legation, and became one of the dearest

friends I have ever had.



Of the diplomatic phase of my life into which he

initiated me, I shall speak in another chapter; but, as

regards my political life, he influenced me decidedly, for

his conversation and the reading he suggested led me to

study closely the writings of Jefferson.  The impulse

thus given my mind was not spent until the Civil War,

which, betraying the ultimate results of sundry Jeffersonian

ideas, led me to revise my opinions somewhat and

to moderate my admiration for the founder of American

``Democracy,'' though I have ever since retained a strong

interest in his teaching.



But deeply as both the governor and myself felt on the

slavery question, we both avoided it in our conversation. 

Each knew how earnestly the other felt regarding it, and

each, as if by instinct, kept clear of a discussion which

could not change our opinions, and might wreck our

friendship.  The result was, that, so far as I remember,

we never even alluded to it during the whole year we were

together.  Every other subject we discussed freely but

this we never touched.  The nearest approach to a

discussion was when one day in the Legation Chancery at

St. Petersburg, Mr. Erving, also a devoted Union pro-

slavery Democrat, pointing to a map of the United States

hanging on the wall, went into a rhapsody over the

extension of the power and wealth of our country.  I answered,

``If our country could get rid of slavery in all

that beautiful region of the South, such a riddance would

be cheap at the cost of fifty thousand lives and a hundred

millions of dollars.''  At this Erving burst forth

into a torrent of brotherly anger.  ``There was no

conceivable cause,'' he said, ``worth the sacrifice of fifty

thousand lives, and the loss of a hundred millions of

dollars would mean the blotting out of the whole prosperity

of the nation.''  His deep earnestness showed me

the impossibility of converting a man of his opinions,

and the danger of wrecking our friendship by attempting

it.  Little did either of us dream that within ten years

from that day slavery was to be abolished in the United

States, at the sacrifice not of fifty thousand, but of nearly

a million lives, and at the cost not merely of a hundred

millions, but, when all is told, of at least ten thousand

millions of dollars!



I may mention here that it was in this companionship,

at St. Petersburg, that I began to learn why newspaper

criticism has, in our country, so little permanent effect on

the reputation of eminent men.  During four years before

coming abroad I had read, in leading Republican journals

of New York and New Haven, denunciations of Governor

Thomas Hart Seymour as an ignoramus, a pretender,

a blatant demagogue, a sot and companion of sots, an

associate, and fit associate, for the most worthless of the

populace.  I had now found him a man of real convictions,

thoroughly a gentleman, quiet, conscientious, kindly,

studious, thoughtful, modest, abstemious, hardly ever

touching a glass of wine, a man esteemed and beloved by all

who really knew him.  Thus was first revealed to me

what, in my opinion, is the worst evil in American public

life,--that facility for unlimited slander, of which the first

result is to degrade our public men, and the second result

is to rob the press of that confidence among thinking

people, and that power for good and against evil which it

really ought to exercise.  Since that time I have seen

many other examples strengthening the same conviction.



Leaving St. Petersburg, I followed historical and, to

some extent, political studies at the University of Berlin,

having previously given attention to them in France; and

finally, traveling in Italy, became acquainted with a man

who made a strong impression upon me.  This was

Mr. Robert Dale Owen, then the American minister at

Naples, whose pictures of Neapolitan despotism, as it

then existed, made me even a stronger Republican than I

had been before.



Returning to America I found myself on the eve of the

new presidential election.  The Republicans had nominated

John C. Fr<e'>mont, of whom all I knew was gathered

from his books of travel.  The Democrats had nominated

James Buchanan, whom I, as an attach<e'> of the legation

at St. Petersburg, had met while he was minister of the

United States at London.  He was a most kindly and

impressive old gentleman, had welcomed me cordially at

his legation, and at a large dinner given by Mr. George

Peabody, at that time the American Amphitryon in the

British metropolis, discussed current questions in a way

that fascinated me.  Of that I may speak in another chapter;

suffice it here that he was one of the most attractive

men in conversation I have ever met, and that is saying

much.



I took but slight part in the campaign; in fact, a natural

diffidence kept me aloof from active politics.  Having

given up all hope or desire for political preferment, and

chosen a university career, I merely published a few newspaper

and magazine articles, in the general interest of anti-

slavery ideas, but made no speeches, feeling myself, in fact,

unfit to make them.



But I shared more and more the feelings of those who

supported Fr<e'>mont.



Mr. Buchanan, though personal acquaintance had

taught me to like him as a man, and the reading of his

despatches in the archives of our legation at St. Petersburg

had forced me to respect him as a statesman, represented

to me the encroachments and domination of American

slavery, while Fr<e'>mont represented resistance to such

encroachments, and the perpetuity of freedom upon the

American Continent.



On election day, 1856, I went to the polls at the City

Hall of Syracuse to cast my first vote.  There I chanced

to meet an old schoolmate who had become a brilliant

young lawyer, Victor Gardner, with whom, in the old

days, I had often discussed political questions, he being

a Democrat and I a Republican.  But he had now come

upon new ground, and, wishing me to do the same, he

tendered me what was known as ``The American Ticket,''

bearing at its head the name of Millard Fillmore.  He

claimed that it represented resistance to the encroachments

and dangers which he saw in the enormous foreign

immigration of the period, and above all in the

increasing despotism of the Roman Catholic hierarchy

controlling the Irish vote.  Most eloquently did my old

friend discourse on the dangers from this source.  He

insisted that Roman Catholic bishops and priests had

wrecked every country in which they had ever gained

control; that they had aided in turning the mediaeval

republics into despotisms; that they had ruined Spain and

the South American republics; that they had rendered

Poland and Ireland unable to resist oppression; that they

had hopelessly enfeebled Austria and Italy; that by St.

Bartholomew massacres and clearing out of Huguenots

they had made, first, terrorism, and, finally, despotism

necessary in France; that they had rendered every people

they had controlled careless of truth and inclined to

despotism,--either of monarchs or ``bosses'';--that our

prisons were filled with the youth whom they had trained in

religion and morals; that they were ready to ravage the

world with fire and sword to gain the slightest point for

the Papacy; that they were the sworn foes of our public-

school system, without which no such thing as republican

government could exist among us; that, in fact, their

bishops and priests were the enemies of everything we

Americans should hold dear, and that their church was

not so much a religious organization as a political

conspiracy against the best that mankind had achieved.



``Look at the Italians, Spanish, French to-day, ``he

said.  ``The Church has had them under its complete control

fifteen hundred years, and you see the result.  Look

at the Irish all about us;--always screaming for liberty,

yet the most abject slaves of their passions and of their

priesthood.''



He spoke with the deepest earnestness and even

eloquence; others gathered round, and some took his tickets. 

I refused them, saying, ``No.  The question of all questions

to me is whether slavery or freedom is to rule this

Republic,'' and, having taken a Republican ticket, I went

up-stairs to the polls.  On my arrival at the ballot-box

came a most exasperating thing.  A drunken Irish Democrat

standing there challenged my vote.  He had, perhaps,

not been in the country six months; I had lived

in that very ward since my childhood, knew and was

known by every other person present; and such was my

disgust that it is not at all unlikely that if one of

Gardner's tickets had been in my pocket, it would have gone

into the ballot-box.  But persons standing by,--Democrats

as well as Republicans,--having quieted this perfervid 

patriot, and saved me from the ignominy of swearing

in my vote, I carried out my original intention, and

cast my first vote for the Republican candidate.



Certainly Providence was kind to the United States

in that contest.  For Fr<e'>mont was not elected.  Looking

back over the history of the United States I see, thus far,

no instant when everything we hold dear was so much in

peril as on that election day.



We of the Republican party were fearfully mistaken,

and among many evidences in history that there is ``a

Power in the universe, not ourselves, which makes for

righteousness,'' I think that the non-election of Fr<e'>mont

is one of the most convincing.  His election would have

precipitated the contest brought on four years later by

the election of Lincoln.  But the Northern States had in

1856 no such preponderance as they had four years later. 

No series of events had then occurred to arouse and

consolidate anti-slavery feeling like those between 1856 and

1860.  Moreover, of all candidates for the Presidency ever

formally nominated by either of the great parties up to

that time, Fr<e'>mont was probably the most unfit.  He had

gained credit for his expedition across the plains to

California, and deservedly; his popular name of ``Pathfinder''

might have been of some little use in a political campaign,

and some romantic interest attached to him on account of

his marriage with Jessie Benton, daughter of the burly,

doughty, honest-purposed, headstrong senator from Missouri. 

But his earlier career, when closely examined, and,

even more than that, his later career, during the Civil

War, showed doubtful fitness for any duties demanding

clear purpose, consecutive thought, adhesion to a broad

policy, wisdom in counsel, or steadiness in action.  Had

he been elected in 1856 one of two things would 

undoubtedly have followed: either the Union would have

been permanently dissolved, or it would have been 

reestablished by anchoring slavery forever in the 

Constitution. Never was there a greater escape.



On March 1, 1857, I visited Washington for the first

time.  It was indeed the first time I had ever trodden

the soil of a slave State, and, going through Baltimore,

a sense of this gave me a feeling of horror.  The whole

atmosphere of that city seemed gloomy, and the city of

Washington no better.  Our little company established

itself at the National Hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue, then

a famous hostelry.  Henry Clay had died there not long

before, and various eminent statesmen had made it, and

were then making it, their headquarters.



On the evening of my arrival a curious occurrence

showed me the difference between Northern and Southern

civilization.  As I sat in the reading-room, there rattled

upon my ear utterances betokening a vigorous dispute in

the adjoining bar-room, and, as they were loud and long,

I rose and walked toward the disputants, as men are wont

to do on such occasions in the North; when, to my surprise

I found that, though the voices were growing steadily

louder, people were very generally leaving the room;

presently, the reason dawned upon me: it was a case in

which revolvers might be drawn at any moment, and the

bystanders evidently thought life and limb more valuable

than any information they were likely to obtain by remaining.



On the evening of the third of March I went with the

crowd to the White House.  We were marshalled through

the halls, President Pierce standing in the small chamber

adjoining the East Room to receive the guests, around

him being members of the Cabinet, with others distinguished

in the civil, military, and naval service, and,

among them, especially prominent, Senator Douglas, then

at the height of his career.  Persons in the procession

were formally presented, receiving a kindly handshake,

and then allowed to pass on.  My abhorrence of the Presi-

dent and of Douglas was so bitter that I did a thing for

which the only excuse was my youth:--I held my right

hand by my side, walked by and refused to be presented.



Next morning I was in the crowd at the east front of the

Capitol, and, at the time appointed, Mr. Buchanan came

forth and took the oath administered to him by the Chief

Justice, Roger Brooke Taney of Maryland.  Though

Taney was very decrepit and feeble, I looked at him much

as a Spanish Protestant in the sixteenth century would

have looked at Torquemada; for, as Chief Justice, he

was understood to be in the forefront of those who would

fasten African slavery on the whole country; and this

view of him seemed justified when, two days after the

inauguration, he gave forth the Dred Scott decision,

which interpreted the Constitution in accordance with

the ultra pro-slavery theory of Calhoun.



Having taken the oath, Mr. Buchanan delivered the

inaugural address, and it made a deep impression upon me. 

I began to suspect then, and I fully believe now, that

he was sincere, as, indeed, were most of those whom

men of my way of thinking in those days attacked as

pro-slavery tools and ridiculed as ``doughfaces.''  We

who had lived remote from the scene of action, and apart

from pressing responsibility, had not realized the danger

of civil war and disunion.  Mr. Buchanan, and men

like him, in Congress, constantly associating with Southern

men, realized both these dangers.  They honestly and

patriotically shrank from this horrible prospect; and so,

had we realized what was to come, would most of us have

done.  I did not see this then, but looking back across

the abyss of years I distinctly see it now.  The leaders

on both sides were honest and patriotic, and, as I firmly

believe, instruments of that ``Power in the universe, not

ourselves, which makes for righteousness.''



There was in Mr. Buchanan's inaugural address a tone

of deep earnestness.  He declared that all his efforts

should be given to restore the Union, and to re<e:>stablish

it upon permanent foundations; besought his fellow-citizens

throughout the Union to second him in this effort,

and promised that under no circumstances would he be

a candidate for re<e:>lection.  My anti-slavery feelings

remained as deep as ever, but, hearing this speech, there

came into my mind an inkling of the truth:  ``Hinter dem

Berge sind auch Leute.''



During my stay in Washington I several times visited

the Senate and the House, in the old quarters which they

shortly afterward vacated in order to enter the more

commodious rooms of the Capitol, then nearly finished. 

The Senate was in the room at present occupied by the

Supreme Court, and from the gallery I looked down

upon it with mingled feelings of awe, distrust, and

aversion.  There, as its president, sat Mason of Virginia,

author of the fugitive slave law; there, at the desk in

front of him, sat Cass of Michigan, who, for years, had

been especially subservient to the slave power; Douglas

of Illinois, who had brought about the destruction of the

Missouri Compromise; Butler of South Carolina, who

represented in perfection the slave-owning aristocracy;

Slidell and Benjamin of Louisiana, destined soon to play

leading parts in the disruption of the Union.



But there were others.  There was Seward, of my own

State, whom I had been brought up to revere, and who

seemed to me, in the struggle then going on, the

incarnation of righteousness; there was Charles Sumner of

Massachusetts, just recovering from the murderous

blows given him by Preston Brooks of South Carolina,

--a martyr, as I held, to his devotion to freedom; there

was John Parker Hale of New Hampshire, who had

been virtually threatened with murder, as a penalty for

his opposition to slavery; and there was bluff Ben Wade

of Ohio, whose courage strengthened the whole North.



The House of Representatives interested me less.  In

it there sat various men now mainly passed out of

human memory; and, unfortunately, the hall, though

one of the finest, architecturally, in the world, was one

of the least suited to its purpose.  To hear anything

either in the galleries or on the floor was almost an

impossibility.



The Supreme Court, though sitting in a wretched

room in the basement, made a far deeper impression

upon me.  The judges, seated in a row, and wearing

their simple, silken gowns, seemed to me, in their quiet

dignity, what the highest court of a great republic ought

to be; though I looked at Chief Justice Taney and his

pro-slavery associates much as a Hindoo regards his

destructive gods.



The general impression made upon me at Washington

was discouraging.  It drove out from my mind the last

lingering desire to take any part in politics.  The whole

life there was repulsive to me, and when I reflected that

a stay of a few years in that forlorn, decaying, reeking

city was the goal of political ambition, the whole thing

seemed to me utterly worthless.  The whole life there

bore the impress of the slipshod habits engendered by

slavery, and it seemed a civilization rotting before

ripeness.  The city was certainly, at that time, the most

wretched capital in Christendom.  Pennsylvania Avenue

was a sort of Slough of Despond,--with ruts and mud-

holes from the unfinished Capitol, at one end, to the

unfinished Treasury building, at the other, and bounded

on both sides with cheap brick tenements.  The extensive

new residence quarter and better hotels of these

days had not been dreamed of.  The ``National,'' where

we were living, was esteemed the best hotel, and it was

abominable.  Just before we arrived, what was known

as the ``National Hotel Disease'' had broken out in it;--

by some imputed to an attempt to poison the incoming

President, in order to bring the Vice-President into his

place.  But that was the mere wild surmise of a political

pessimist.  The fact clearly was that the wretched

sewage of Washington, in those days, which was betrayed

in all parts of the hotel by every kind of noisome odor,

had at last begun to do its work.  Curiously enough there

was an interregnum in the reign of sickness and death,

probably owing to some temporary sanitary efforts, and

that interregnum, fortunately for us, was coincident with

our stay there.  But the disease set in again shortly

afterward, and a college friend of mine, who arrived on the

day of our departure, was detained in the hotel for many

weeks with the fever then contracted.  The number of

deaths was considerable, but, in the interest of the hotel,

the matter was hushed up, as far as possible.



The following autumn I returned to New Haven as a

resident graduate, and, the popular lecture system being

then at its height, was invited to become one of the

lecturers in the course of that winter.  I prepared my

discourse with great care, basing it upon studies and

observations during my recent stay in the land of the

Czar, and gave it the title of ``Civilization in Russia.''



I remember feeling greatly honored by the fact that

my predecessor in the course was Theodore Parker, and

my successor Ralph Waldo Emerson.  Both talked with

me much about my subject, and Parker surprised me. 

He was the nearest approach to omniscience I had ever

seen.  He was able to read, not only Russian, but the

Old Slavonic.  He discussed the most intimate details of

things in Russia, until, at last, I said to him, ``Mr.

Parker, I would much rather sit at your feet and listen

to your information regarding Russia, than endeavor

to give you any of my own.'' He was especially

interested in the ethnology of the empire, and had an

immense knowledge of the different peoples inhabiting

it, and of their characteristics.  Finally, he asked me

what chance I thought there was for the growth of

anything like free institutions in Russia.  To this I

answered that the best thing they had was their system

of local peasant meetings for the repartition of their

lands, and for the discussion of subjects connected with

them, and that this seemed to me something like a germ

of what might, in future generations, become a sort of

town-meeting system, like that of New England.  This

let me out of the discussion very satisfactorily, for

Parker told me that he had arrived at the same

conclusion, after talking with Count Gurowski, who was, in

those days, an especial authority.



In due time came the evening for my lecture.  As it

was the first occasion since leaving college that I had

appeared on any stage, a considerable number of my old

college associates and friends, including Professor

(afterward President) Porter, Dr. Bacon, and Mr. (afterward

Bishop) Littlejohn, were there among the foremost, and

after I had finished they said some kindly things, which

encouraged me.



In this lecture I made no mention of American slavery,

but into an account of the events of my stay at St.

Petersburg and Moscow during the Crimean War, and

of the death and funeral of the Emperor Nicholas, with

the accession and first public address of Alexander II,

I sketched, in broad strokes, the effects of the serf

system,--effects not merely upon the serfs, but upon the

serf owners, and upon the whole condition of the empire. 

I made it black indeed, as it deserved, and though

not a word was said regarding things in America, every

thoughtful man present must have felt that it was the

strongest indictment against our own system of slavery

which my powers enabled me to make.



Next day came a curious episode.  A classmate of mine,

never distinguished for logical acuteness, came out in a

leading daily paper with a violent attack upon me and

my lecture.  He lamented the fact that one who, as he said,

had, while in college, shown much devotion to the anti-

slavery cause, had now faced about, had no longer the

courage of his opinions, and had not dared say a word

against slavery in the United States.  The article was

laughable.  It would have been easy to attack slavery and

thus at once shut the minds and hearts of a large majority

of the audience.  But I felt then, as I have generally felt

since, that the first and best thing to do is to SET PEOPLE AT

THINKING, and to let them discover, or think that they

discover, the truth for themselves.  I made no reply, but an

eminent clergyman of New Haven took up the cudgels in

my favor, covered my opponent with ridicule, and did me

the honor to declare that my lecture was one of the most

effective anti-slavery arguments ever made in that city. 

With this, I retired from the field well satisfied.



The lecture was asked for in various parts of the country,

was delivered at various colleges and universities, and

in many cities of western New York, Michigan, and Ohio;

and finally, after the emancipation of the serfs, was re-

cast and republished in the ``Atlantic Monthly'' under the

title of ``The Rise and Decline of the Serf System in

Russia.''



And now occurred a great change in my career which,

as I fully believed, was to cut me off from all political life

thoroughly and permanently.  This was my election to

the professorship of history and English literature in the

University of Michigan.







CHAPTER V



THE CIVIL WAR PERIOD--1857-1864



Arriving at the University of Michigan in October,

1857, I threw myself into my new work most heartily. 

Though I felt deeply the importance of the questions

then before the country, it seemed to me that the only

way in which I could contribute anything to their solution

was in aiding to train up a new race of young men who

should understand our own time and its problems in the

light of history.



It was not difficult to point out many things in the past

that had an important bearing upon the present, and my

main work in this line was done in my lecture-room.  I

made no attempts to proselyte any of my hearers to either

political party, my main aim being then, as it has been

through my life, when dealing with students and the public

at large, to set my audience or my readers at thinking,

and to give them fruitful historical subjects to think

upon.  Among these subjects especially brought out in

dealing with the middle ages, was the origin, growth, and

decline of feudalism, and especially of the serf system,

and of municipal liberties as connected with it.  This, of

course, had a general bearing upon the important problem

we had to solve in the United States during the second half

of that century.



In my lectures on modern history, and especially on the

Reformation period, and the events which led to the

French Revolution, there were various things throwing

light upon our own problems, which served my purpose

of arousing thought.  My audiences were large and attentive,

and I have never, in the whole course of my life,

enjoyed any work so much as this, which brought me into

hearty and close relations with a large body of active-

minded students from all parts of our country, and

especially from the Northwest.  More and more I realized

the justice of President Wayland's remark, which had so

impressed me at the Yale Alumni meeting just after my

return from Europe: that the nation was approaching

a ``switching-off place''; that whether we were to turn

toward evil or good in our politics would be decided by the

great Northwest, and that it would be well for young

Americans to cast in their lot with that part of the country.



In the intervals of my university work many invitations

came to me from associations in various parts of Michigan

and neighboring States to lecture before them, and these

I was glad to accept.  Such lectures were of a much more

general character than those given in the university, but

by them I sought to bring the people at large into trains

of thought which would fit them to grapple with the great

question which was rising more and more portentously

before us.



Having accepted, in one of my vacations, an invitation

to deliver the Phi Beta Kappa Commencement Address

at Yale, I laid down as my thesis, and argued it from

history, that in all republics, ancient or modern, the worst

foe of freedom had been a man-owning aristocracy--an

aristocracy based upon slavery.  The address was circulated

in printed form, was considerably discussed, and, I

trust, helped to set some few people thinking.



For the same purpose I also threw some of my lectures

into the form of magazine articles for the ``Atlantic

Monthly,'' and especially one entitled ``The Statesmanship

of Richelieu,'' my effort in this being to show that the

one great error of that greatest of all French statesmen

was in stopping short of rooting out the serf system in

France when he had completely subjugated the serf owners

and had them at his mercy.



As the year 1860 approached, the political struggle

became more and more bitter.  President Buchanan in 

redeeming his promise to maintain the Union had gone to

lengths which startled and disappointed many of his most

devoted supporters.  Civil war had broken out in Kansas

and Nebraska, with murder and massacre: desperate

attempts were made to fasten the hold of the pro-slavery

party permanently upon the State, and as desperately were

these efforts repelled.  A certain John Brown, who requited

assassination of free-state men by the assassination

of slave-state men,--a very ominous appearance,--began

to be heard of; men like Professor Silliman, who, during

my stay at Yale had spoken at Union meetings in favor of

the new compromise measures, even including the fugitive

slave law, now spoke publicly in favor of sending rifles to

the free-state men in Kansas; and, most striking symptom

of all, Stephen A. Douglas himself, who had led the

Democratic party in breaking the Missouri Compromise, now

recoiled from the ultra pro-slavery propaganda of President

Buchanan.  Then, too, came a new incitement to

bitterness between North and South.  John Brown, the

man of Scotch-Covenanter type, who had imbibed his

theories of political methods from the Old-Testament

annals of Jewish dealings with the heathen, and who had in

Kansas solemnly slaughtered in cold blood, as a sort of

sacrifice before the Lord, sundry Missouri marauders who

had assassinated free-state men, suddenly appeared in

Virginia, and there, at Harper's Ferry, with a handful of

fanatics subject to his powerful will, raised the standard

of revolution against the slave-power.  Of course he was

easily beaten down, his forces scattered, those dearest to

him shot, and he himself hanged.  But he was a character

of antique mold, and this desperate effort followed by his

death, while it exasperated the South, stirred the North to

its depths.



Like all such efforts, it was really mistaken and

unfortunate.  It helped to obscure Henry Clay's proposal to

extinguish slavery peaceably, and made the solution of the

problem by bloodshed more and more certain.  And in the

execution of John Brown was lost a man who, had he

lived until the Civil War, might have rendered enormous

services as a partizan leader.  Of course, his action aroused

much thought among my students, and their ideas came

out in their public discussions.  It was part of my duty,

once or twice a week, to preside over these discussions, and

to decide between the views presented.  In these decisions

on the political questions now arising I became deeply

interested, and while I was careful not to give them a partizan

character, they were, of course, opposed to the dominance

of slavery.



In the spring of 1860, the Republican National Convention

was held at Chicago, and one fine morning I went to

the railway station to greet the New York delegation on

its way thither.  Among the delegates whom I especially

recall were William M. Evarts, under whose Secretaryship

of State I afterward served as minister at Berlin,

and my old college friend, Stewart L. Woodford, with

whom I was later in close relations during his term as

lieutenant-governor of New York and minister to Spain. 

The candidate of these New York delegates was of course

Mr. Seward, and my most devout hopes were with him,

but a few days later came news that the nomination had

been awarded to Mr. Lincoln.  Him we had come to know

and admire during his debates with Douglas while the

senatorial contest was going on in the State of Illinois;

still the defeat of Mr. Seward was a great disappointment,

and hardly less so in Michigan than in New York.  In the

political campaign which followed I took no direct part,

though especially aroused by the speeches of a new man

who had just appeared above the horizon,--Carl Schurz. 

His arguments seemed to me by far the best of that whole

campaign--the broadest, the deepest, and the most convincing.



My dear and honored father, during the months of July,

August, and the first days of September, was slowly fading

away on his death-bed.  Yet he was none the less interested

in the question at issue, and every day I sat by

his bedside and read to him the literature bearing upon

the contest; but of all the speeches he best liked those of

this new orator--he preferred them, indeed, to those of his

idol Seward.



I have related in another place how, years afterward,

Bismarck asked me, in Berlin, to what Carl Schurz's great

success in America was due, and my answer to this question.



Mr. Lincoln having been elected, I went on with my

duties as before, but the struggle was rapidly deepening. 

Soon came premonitions of real conflict, and, early in the

following spring, civil war was upon us.  My teaching

went on, as of old, but it became more direct.  In order

to show what the maintenance of a republic was worth,

and what patriots had been willing to do for their country

in a struggle not unlike ours, I advised my students to read

Motley's ``History of the Dutch Republic,'' and I still

think it was good advice.  Other works, of a similar

character, showing how free peoples have conducted long and

desperate wars for the maintenance of their national existence

and of liberty, I also recommended, and with good effect.



Reverses came.  During part of my vacation, in the summer

of 1861, I was at Syracuse, and had, as my guest, Mr.

George Sumner, younger brother of the eminent senator

from Massachusetts, a man who had seen much of the

world, had written magazine articles and reviews which

had done him credit, and whose popular lectures were

widely esteemed.  One Sunday afternoon in June my

uncle, Mr. Hamilton White, dropped in at my house to

make a friendly call.  He had just returned from Washington,

where he had seen his old friend Seward, Mr. Lincoln's

Secretary of State, and felt able to give us a forecast

of the future.  This uncle of mine was a thoughtful

man of affairs; successful in business, excellent in judgment,

not at all prone to sanguine or flighty views, and on

our asking him how matters looked in Washington he

said, ``Depend upon it, it is all right:  Seward says that

they have decided to end the trouble at once, even if it is

necessary to raise an army of fifty thousand men;--that

they will send troops immediately to Richmond and finish

the whole thing at once, so that the country can go on

quietly about its business.''



There was, of course, something reassuring in so

favorable a statement made by a sensible man fresh from

the most accredited sources, and yet I could not resist

grave doubts.  Such historical knowledge as I possessed

taught me that a struggle like that just beginning between

two great principles, both of which had been gathering

force for nearly a century, and each of which had drawn

to its support millions of devoted men, was not to be ended

so easily; but I held my peace.



Next day I took Mr. Sumner on an excursion up the

beautiful Onondaga Valley.  As we drove through the

streets of Syracuse, noticing knots of men gathered here

and there in discussion, and especially at the doors of the

news offices, we secured an afternoon newspaper and drove

on, engaged in earnest conversation.  It was a charming

day, and as we came to the shade of some large trees about

two miles from the city we rested and I took out the paper. 

It struck me like death.  There, displayed in all its horrors,

was the first account of the Battle of Bull Run,--

which had been fought the previous afternoon,--exactly

at the time when my uncle was assuring us that the United

States Army was to march at once to Richmond and end

the war.  The catastrophe seemed fatal.  The plans of

General McDowell had come utterly to nought; our army

had been scattered to the four winds; large numbers of

persons, including sundry members of Congress who had

airily gone out with the army to ``see the fun,'' among

them one from our own neighborhood, Mr. Alfred Ely,

of Rochester, had been captured and sent to Richmond,

and the rebels were said to be in full march on the National

Capital.



Sumner was jubilant.  ``This,'' he said, ``will make the

American people understand what they have to do; this

will stop talk such as your uncle gave us yesterday 

afternoon.''  But to me it was a fearful moment.  Sumner's

remarks grated horribly upon my ears; true as his view

was, I could not yet accept it.



And now preparations for war, and, indeed, for repelling

invasion, began in earnest.  My friends all about me

were volunteering, and I also volunteered, but was rejected

with scorn; the examining physician saying to me,

``You will be a burden upon the government in the first

hospital you reach; you have not the constitution to be

of use in carrying a musket; your work must be of a

different sort.''



My work, then, through the summer was with those who

sought to raise troops and to provide equipments for

them.  There was great need of this, and, in my opinion,

the American people have never appeared to better

advantage than at that time, when they began to realize their

duty, and to set themselves at doing it.  In every city,

village, and hamlet, men and women took hold of the work,

feeling that the war was their own personal business.  No

other country since the world began has ever seen a more

noble outburst of patriotism or more efficient aid by

individuals to their government.  The National and State

authorities of course did everything in their power; but

men and women did not wait for them.  With the exception

of those whose bitter partizanship led them to oppose

the war in all its phases, men, women, and children

engaged heartily and efficiently in efforts to aid the Union

in its struggle.



Various things showed the depths of this feeling.  I

remember meeting one day, at that period, a man who had

risen by hard work from simple beginnings to the head

of an immense business, and had made himself a multi-

millionaire.  He was a hard, determined, shrewd man of

affairs, the last man in the world to show anything like

sentimentalism, and as he said something advising an

investment in the newly created National debt, I answered,

``You are not, then, one of those who believe that our

new debt will be repudiated?''  He answered:  ``Repudia-

tion or no repudiation, I am putting everything I can rake

and scrape together into National bonds, to help this

government maintain itself; for, by G--d, if I am not

to have any country, I don't want any money.''  It is

to be hoped that this oath, bursting forth from a patriotic

heart, was, like Uncle Toby's, blotted out by the recording

angel.  I have quoted it more than once to show how

the average American--though apparently a crude materialist--

is, at heart, a thorough idealist.



Returning to the University of Michigan at the close

of the vacation, I found that many of my students had

enlisted, and that many more were preparing to do so.  With

some it was hard indeed.  I remember two especially, who

had for years labored and saved to raise the money which

would enable them to take their university course; they

had hesitated, for a time, to enlist; but very early one

morning I was called out of bed by a message from them,

and, meeting them, found them ready to leave for the

army.  They could resist their patriotic convictions no

longer, and they had come to say good-bye to me.  They

went into the war; they fought bravely through the thickest

of it; and though one was badly wounded, both lived

to return, and are to-day honored citizens.  With many

others it was different; many, very many of them, alas,

were among the ``unreturning brave!'' and loveliest and

noblest of all, my dear friend and student, Frederick Arne,

of Princeton, Illinois, killed in the battle of Shiloh, at the

very beginning of the war, when all was blackness and

discouragement.  Another of my dearest students at that time

was Albert Nye.  Scholarly, eloquent, noble-hearted, with

every gift to ensure success in civil life, he went forth

with the others, rose to be captain of a company, and I

think major of a regiment.  He sent me most kindly messages,

and at one time a bowie-knife captured from a rebel

soldier.  But, alas! he was not to return.



I may remark, in passing, that while these young men

from the universities, and a vast host of others from

different walks of life, were going forth to lay down their

lives for their country, the English press, almost without

exception, from the ``Times'' down, was insisting that we

were fighting our battles with ``mercenaries.''



One way in which those of us who remained at the

university helped the good cause was in promoting the

military drill of those who had determined to become soldiers. 

It was very difficult to secure the proper military instruction,

but in Detroit I found a West Point graduate, engaged

him to come out a certain number of times every week to

drill the students, and he cheered us much by saying that

he had never in his life seen soldiers so much in earnest,

and so rapid in making themselves masters of the drill

and tactics.



One of my advisers at this period, and one of the

noblest men I have ever met, was Lieutenant Kirby Smith,

a graduate of West Point, and a lieutenant in the army. 

His father, after whom he was named, had been killed at

the Battle of Molino del Rey, in the Mexican War.  His

uncle, also known as Kirby Smith, was a general in the

Confederate service.  His mother, one of the dearest

friends of my family, was a woman of extraordinary abilities,

and of the noblest qualities.  Never have I known a

young officer of more promise.  With him I discussed

from time to time the probabilities of the war.  He was

full of devotion, quieted my fears, and strengthened

my hopes.  He, too, fought splendidly for his country, and

like his father, laid down his life for it.



The bitterest disappointment of that period, and I regret

deeply to chronicle it, was the conduct of the government

and ruling classes in England.  In view of the fact that

popular sentiment in Great Britain, especially as voiced

in its literature, in its press, and from its pulpit, had been

against slavery, I had never doubted that in this struggle,

so evidently between slavery and freedom, Great Britain

would be unanimously on our side.  To my amazement

signs soon began to point in another direction.  More and

more it became evident that British feeling was against

us.  To my students, who inquired how this could possibly

be, I said, ``Wait till Lord John Russell speaks.''  Lord

John Russell spoke, and my heart sank within me.  He was

the solemnly constituted impostor whose criminal carelessness

let out the Alabama to prey upon our commerce,

and who would have let out more cruisers had not Mr.

Charles Francis Adams, the American minister, brought

him to reason.



Lord John Russell was noted for his coolness, but in

this respect Mr. Adams was more than his match.  In

after years I remember a joke based upon this characteristic. 

During a very hot summer in Kansas, when the

State was suffering with drought, some newspaper proposed,

and the press very generally acquiesced in the suggestion,

that Mr. Charles Francis Adams should be asked

to take a tour through the State, in order, by his presence,

to reduce its temperature.



When, therefore, Lord John Russell showed no signs

of interfering with the sending forth of English ships,--

English built, English equipped, and largely English

manned,--against our commerce, Mr. Adams, having

summed up to his Lordship the conduct of the British

Government in the matter, closed in his most icy way with

the words:  ``My lord, I need hardly remind you that this

is war.''



The result was, that tardily,--just in time to prevent war

between the two nations,--orders were given which prevented

the passing out of more cruisers.



Goldwin Smith, who in the days of his professorship at

Oxford, saw much of Lord John Russell, once told me that

his lordship always made upon him the impression of

``an eminent corn-doctor.''



During the following summer, that of 1863, being much

broken down by overwork, and threatened, as I supposed,

with heart disease, which turned out to be the beginning

of a troublesome dyspepsia, I was strongly recommended

by my physician to take a rapid run to Europe, and though

very reluctant to leave home, was at last persuaded to go

to New York to take my passage.  Arrived there, bad news

still coming from the seat of war, I could not bring myself

at the steamer office to sign the necessary papers, finally

refused, and having returned home, took part for the first

time in a political campaign as a speaker, going through

central New York, and supporting the Republican candidate

against the Democratic.  The election seemed of

vast importance.  The Democrats had nominated for the

governorship, Mr. Horatio Seymour, a man of the highest

personal character, and, so far as the usual duties of

governor were concerned, admirable; but he had been

bitterly opposed to the war, and it seemed sure that his

election would encourage the South and make disunion

certain; therefore it was that I threw myself into the

campaign with all my might, speaking night and day; but

alas! the election went against us.



At the close of the campaign, my dyspepsia returning

with renewed violence, I was thinking what should be done,

when I happened to meet my father's old friend, Mr.

Thurlow Weed, a devoted adherent of Mr. Seward through

his whole career, and, at that moment, one of the main

supports of the Lincoln Administration.  It was upon the

deck of a North River steamer, and on my mentioning my

dilemma he said:  ``You can just now do more for us

abroad than at home.  You can work in the same line with

Archbishop Hughes, Bishop McIlvaine, and myself; everything

that can be done, in the shape of contributions to

newspapers, or speeches, even to the most restricted

audiences abroad, will help us: the great thing is to gain

time, increase the number of those who oppose European

intervention in our affairs, and procure takers for our

new National bonds.''



The result was that I made a short visit to Europe,

stopping first in London.  Political feeling there was

bitterly against us.  A handful of true men, John Bright and

Goldwin Smith at the head of them, were doing heroic

work in our behalf, but the forces against them seemed

overwhelming.  Drawing money one morning in one of

the large banks of London, I happened to exhibit a few

of the new National greenback notes which had been

recently issued by our Government.  The moment the clerk

saw them he called out loudly, ``Don't offer us any of

those things; we don't take them; they will never be good

for anything.''  I was greatly vexed, of course, but there

was no help for it.  At another time I went into a famous

book-shop near the Haymarket to purchase a rare book

which I had long coveted.  It was just after the Battle of

Fredericksburg.  The book-seller was chatting with a

customer, and finally, with evident satisfaction, said to him: 

``I see the Yankees have been beaten again.''  ``Yes,'' said

the customer, ``and the papers say that ten thousand of

them have been killed.''  ``Good,'' said the shop-keeper,

``I wish it had been twice as many.''  Of course it was

impossible for me to make any purchase in that place.



In order to ascertain public sentiment I visited certain

``discussion forums,'' as they are called, frequented by

contributors to the press and young lawyers from the

Temple and Inns of Court.  In those places there was, as

a rule, a debate every night, and generally, in one form

or another, upon the struggle then going on in the

United States.  There was, perhaps, in all this a trifle

too much of the Three Tailors of Tooley Street; still,

excellent speeches were frequently made, and there was a

pleasure in doing my share in getting the company on the

right side.  On one occasion, after one of our worst

reverses during the war, an orator, with an Irish brogue,

thickened by hot whisky, said, ``I hope that Republic of

blackguards is gone forever.''  But, afterward, on learning

that an American was present, apologized to me in a

way effusive, laudatory, and even affectionate.



But my main work was given to preparing a pamphlet,

in answer to the letters from America by Dr. Russell,

correspondent of the London ``Times.''  Though nominally

on our side, he clearly wrote his letters to suit the demands

of the great journal which he served, and which was most

bitterly opposed to us.  Nothing could exceed its virulence

against everything American.  Every occurrence was

placed in the worst light possible as regarded our

interests, and even the telegraphic despatches were manipulated

so as to do our cause all the injury possible.  I therefore

prepared, with especial care, an answer to these letters

of Dr. Russell, and published it in London.  Its fate

was what might have been expected.  Some papers discussed

it fairly, but, on the whole, it was pooh-poohed, explained

away, and finally buried under new masses of slander. 

I did, indeed, find a few friends of my country in

Great Britain.  In Dublin I dined with Cairnes, the

political economist, who had earnestly written in behalf of the

Union against the Confederates; and in London, with Professor

Carpenter, the eminent physiologist, who, being

devoted to anti-slavery ideas, was mildly favorable to the

Union side.  But I remember him less on account of anything

he said relating to the struggle in America, than for

a statement bearing upon the legitimacy of the sovereign

then ruling in France, who was at heart one of our most

dangerous enemies.  Dr. Carpenter told me that some time

previously he had been allowed by Nassau Senior, whose

published conversations with various men of importance

throughout Europe had attracted much attention, to look

into some of the records which Mr. Senior had not thought

it best to publish, and that among them he had read the

following:



``---- showed me to-day an autograph letter written by

Louis Bonaparte, King of Holland, not far from the time

of the birth of his putative son, now Napoleon III.  One

passage read as follows:  `J'ai le malheur d'avoir pour

femme une Messalene.  Elle a des amants partout, et

partout elle laise des enfants.' ''



I could not but think of this a few weeks later when I

saw the emperor, who derived his title to the throne of

France from his nominal father, poor King Louis, but

whose personal appearance, like that of his brother, the

Duc de Morny, was evidently not derived from any Bonaparte. 

All the J<e'>rome Napoleons I have ever seen, including

old King J<e'>rome of Westphalia, and Prince Na-

poleon J<e'>rome, otherwise known as ``Plon-Plon,'' whom

I saw during my student life at Paris, and the eldest son

of the latter, the present Bonaparte pretender to the

Napoleonic crown of France, whom I saw during my stay

as minister at St. Petersburg, very strikingly resembled

the first Napoleon, though all were of much larger size. 

But the Louis Napoleons, that is, the emperor and his

brother the Duc de Morny, had no single Napoleonic

point in their features or bearing.



I think that the most startling inspiration during my

life was one morning when, on walking through the Garden

of the Tuileries, I saw, within twenty feet of me, at

a window, in the old palace, which afterward disappeared

under the Commune, the emperor and his minister of

finance, Achille Fould, seated together, evidently in earnest

discussion.  There was not at that time any human

being whom I so hated and abhorred as Napoleon III. 

He had broken his oath and trodden the French republic

under his feet, he was aiding to keep down the aspirations

of Italy, and he was doing his best to bring on an

intervention of Europe, in behalf of the Confederate States, to

dissolve our Union.  He was then the arbiter of Europe. 

The world had not then discovered him to be what Bismarck

had already found him--``a great unrecognized incapacity,''

and, as I looked up and distinctly saw him so

near me, there flashed through my mind an understanding

of some of the great crimes of political history, such as I

have never had before or since.[1]





[1] Since writing this I find in the Autobiography of W. J.

Stillman that a similar feeling once beset him on seeing this

imperial malefactor,







In France there was very little to be done for our cause. 

The great mass of Frenchmen were either indifferent or

opposed to us.  The only exception of importance was

Laboulaye, professor at the Coll<e!>ge de France, and his

lecture-room was a center of good influences in favor of

the American cause; in the midst of that frivolous

Napoleonic France he seemed by far ``the noblest Roman of

them all.''



The main effort in our behalf was made by Mr. John

Bigelow, at that time consul-general, but afterward minister

of the United States,--to supply with arguments the

very small number of Frenchmen who were inclined to

favor the Union cause, and this he did thoroughly well.



Somewhat later there came a piece of good fortune. 

Having been sent by a physician to the baths at Homburg,

I found as our consul-general, at the neighboring city of

Frankfort-on-the-Main, William Walton Murphy of Michigan,

a life-long supporter of Mr. Seward, a most devoted

and active American patriot;--a rough diamond; one of

the most uncouth mortals that ever lived; but big-hearted,

shrewd, a general favorite, and prized even by those who

smiled at his oddities.  He had labored hard to induce the

Frankfort bankers to take our government bonds, and to

recommend them to their customers, and had at last been

successful.  In order to gain and maintain this success he

had established in Frankfort a paper called ``L'Europe,''

for which he wrote and urged others to write.  To this

journal I became a contributor, and among my associates I

especially remember the Rev. Dr. John McClintock, formerly

president of Dickinson College, and Dr. E. H.

Chapin, of New York, so eminent in those days as a

preacher.  Under the influence of Mr. Murphy, Frankfort-

on-the-Main became, and has since remained, a center of

American ideas.  Its leading journal was the only influential

daily paper in Germany which stood by us during

our Spanish War.



I recall a story told me by Mr. Murphy at that period. 

He had taken an American lady on a business errand to

the bank of Baron Rothschild, and, after their business was

over, presented her to the great banker.  It happened that

the Confederate loan had been floated in Europe by Baron

Erlanger, also a Frankfort financial magnate, and by birth

a Hebrew.  In the conversation that ensued between this

lady and Baron Rothschild, the latter said:  ``Madam, my

sympathies are entirely with your country; but is it not

disheartening to think that there are men in Europe who

are lending their money and trying to induce others to

lend it for the strengthening of human slavery?  Madam,

NONE BUT A CONVERTED JEW WOULD DO THAT.''



On the Fourth of July of that summer, Consul-General

Murphy--always devising new means of upholding the

flag of his country--summoned Americans from every

part of Europe to celebrate the anniversary of our

National Independence at Heidelberg, and at the dinner given

at the Hotel Schreider seventy-four guests assembled,

including two or three professors from the university, as

against six guests from the Confederate States, who had

held a celebration in the morning at the castle.  Mr. Murphy

presided and made a speech which warmed the hearts

of us all.  It was a thorough-going, old-fashioned, Western

Fourth of July oration.  I had jeered at Fourth of July

orations all my life, but there was something in this one

which showed me that these discourses, so often ridiculed,

are not without their uses.  Certain it is that as the consul-

general repeated the phrases which had more than once

rung through the Western clearings, in honor of the

defenders of our country, the divine inspiration of the

Constitution, our invincibility in war and our superiority in

peace, all of us were encouraged and cheered most lustily. 

Pleasing was it to note various British tourists standing

at the windows listening to the scream of the American

eagle and evidently wondering what it all meant.



Others of us spoke, and especially Dr. McClintock, one

of the foremost thinkers, scholars, and patriots that the

Methodist Episcopal church has ever produced.  His

speech was in a very serious vein, and well it might be.  In

the course of it he said:  ``According to the last accounts

General Lee and his forces are near the town where I live,

and are marching directly toward it.  It is absolutely certain

that, if they reach it, they will burn my house and all

that it contains, but I have no fear; I believe that the Almighty

is with us in this struggle, and though we may suffer

much before its close, the Union is to endure and slavery

is to go down before the forces of freedom.''  These

words, coming from the heart of a strong man, made a

deep impression upon us all.



About two weeks later I left Frankfort for America,

and at my parting from Consul-General Murphy at the

hotel, he said:  ``Let me go in the carriage with you; this

is steamer-day and we shall probably meet the vice-consul

coming with the American mail.''  He got in, and we

drove along the Zeil together.  It was at the busiest time

of the day, and we had just arrived at the point in that

main street of Frankfort where business was most active,

when the vice-consul met us and handed Mr. Murphy a

newspaper.  The latter tore it open, read a few lines,

and then instantly jumped out into the middle of the street,

waved his hat and began to shout.  The public in general

evidently thought him mad; a crowd assembled; but as

soon as he could get his breath he pointed out the headlines

of the newspaper.  They indicated the victories of Gettysburg

and Vicksburg, and the ending of the war.  It was,

indeed, a great moment for us all.



Arriving in America, I found that some friends had

republished from the English edition my letter to Dr.

Russell, that it had been widely circulated, and that, at any

rate, it had done some good at home.



Shortly afterward, being on a visit to my old friend,

James T. Fields of Boston, I received a telegram from

Syracuse as follows:  ``You are nominated to the State

senate: come home and see who your friends are.''  I

have received, in the course of my life, many astonishing

messages, but this was the most unexpected of all.  I had

not merely not been a candidate for any such nomination,

but had forgotten that any nomination was to be made; I

had paid no attention to the matter whatever; all my

thoughts had been given to other subjects; but on returning

to Syracuse I found that a bitter contest having arisen

between two of the regular candidates, each representing a

faction, the delegates had suddenly turned away from both

and nominated me.  My election followed and so began

the most active phase of my political life.







CHAPTER VI



SENATORSHIP AT ALBANY--1864-1865



On the evening of New Year's Day, 1864, I arrived in

Albany to begin my duties in the State Senate, and

certainly, from a practical point of view, no member of the

legislature was more poorly equipped.  I had, indeed,

received a university education, such as it was, in those

days, at home and abroad, and had perhaps read more than

most college-bred men of my age, but all my education,

study, and reading were remote from the duties now assigned

me.  To history, literature, and theoretical politics,

I had given considerable attention, but as regarded the

actual necessities of the State of New York, the relations

of the legislature to the boards of supervisors of

counties, to the municipal councils of cities, to the boards

of education, charity, and the like, indeed, to the whole

system throughout the Commonwealth, and to the

modes of conducting public and private business, my

ignorance was deplorable.  Many a time have I envied some

plain farmer his term in a board of supervisors, or some

country schoolmaster his relations to a board of education,

or some alderman his experience in a common council, or

some pettifogger his acquaintance with justices' courts. 

My knowledge of law and the making of law was wretchedly

deficient, and my ignorance of the practical administration

of law was disgraceful.  I had hardly ever been

inside a court-house, and my main experience of legal

procedure was when one day I happened to step into court

at Syracuse, and some old friends of mine thought it a

good joke to put a university professor as a talesman upon

a jury in a horse case.  Although pressed with business

I did not flinch, but accepted the position, discharged its

duties, and learned more of legal procedure and of human

nature in six hours than I had ever before learned in six

months.  Ever afterward I advised my students to get

themselves drawn upon a petit jury.  I had read some

Blackstone and some Kent and had heard a few law

lectures, but my knowledge was purely theoretical:

in constitutional law it was derived from reading

scattered essays in the ``Federalist,'' with extracts here

and there from Story.  Of the State charitable and

penal institutions I knew nothing.  Regarding colleges

I was fairly well informed, but as to the practical

working of our system of public instruction I had

only the knowledge gained while a scholar in a public

school.




There was also another disadvantage.  I knew nothing

of the public men of the State.  Having lived outside of

the Commonwealth, first, as a student at Yale, then during

nearly three years abroad, and then nearly six years as a

professor in another State, I knew only one of my

colleagues, and of him I had only the knowledge that came

from an introduction and five minutes' conversation ten

years before.  It was no better as regarded my acquaintance

with the State officers; so far as I now remember, I

had never seen one of them, except at a distance,--the

governor, Mr. Horatio Seymour.



On the evening after our arrival the Republican

majority of the Senate met in caucus, partly to become

acquainted, partly to discuss appointments to committees,

and partly to decide on a policy regarding State aid to

the prosecution of the war for the Union.  I found myself

the youngest member of this body, and, indeed, of

the entire Senate, but soon made the acquaintance of my

colleagues and gained some friendships which have been

among the best things life has brought me.



Foremost in the State Senate, at that period, was

Charles James Folger, its president.  He had served in

the Senate several years, had been a county judge, and

was destined to become assistant treasurer of the United

States at New York, chief justice of the highest State

court, and finally, to die as Secretary of the Treasury of

the United States, after the most crushing defeat which

any candidate for the governorship of New York had ever

known.  He was an excellent lawyer, an impressive

speaker, earnestly devoted to the proper discharge of his

duties, and of extraordinarily fine personal appearance. 

His watch upon legislation sometimes amused me, but always

won my respect.  Whenever a bill was read a third

time he watched it as a cat watches a mouse.  His hatred of

doubtful or bad phraseology was a passion.  He was

greatly beloved and admired, yet, with all his fine and

attractive qualities, modest and even diffident to a fault.



Another man whom I then saw for the first time

interested me much as soon as his name was called, and he

would have interested me far more had I known how

closely my after life was to be linked with his.  He was

then about sixty years of age, tall, spare, and austere,

with a kindly eye, saying little, and that little dryly.  He

did not appear unamiable, but there seemed in him a sort

of aloofness: this was Ezra Cornell.



Still another senator was George H. Andrews, from

the Otsego district, the old Palatine country.  He had

been editor of one of the leading papers in New York,

and had been ranked among the foremost men in his

profession, but he had retired into the country to lead the

life of a farmer.  He was a man to be respected and even

beloved.  His work for the public was exceedingly valuable,

and his speeches of a high order.  Judge Folger,

as chairman of the judiciary committee, was most useful

to the State at large in protecting it from evil legislation. 

Senator Andrews was not less valuable to the cities, and

above all to the city of New York, for his intelligent

protection of every good measure, and his unflinching

opposition to every one of the many doubtful projects

constantly brought in by schemers and dreamers.



Still another senator was James M. Cook of Saratoga. 

He had been comptroller of the State and, at various

times, a member of the legislature.  He was the faithful

``watch-dog of the treasury,''--bitter against every

scheme for taking public money for any unworthy purpose,

and, indeed, against any scheme whatever which

could not assign for its existence a reason, clear, cogent,

and honest.



Still another member, greatly respected, was Judge

Bailey of Oneida County.  His experience upon the bench

made him especially valuable upon the judiciary and

other committees.



Yet another man of mark in the body was one of the

younger men, George G. Munger of Rochester.  He had

preceded me by a few years at Yale, had won respect

as a county judge, and had a certain lucid way of

presenting public matters which made him a valuable public

servant.



Another senator of great value was Henry R. Low. 

He, too, had been a county judge and brought not only

legal but financial knowledge to the aid of his colleagues. 

He was what Thomas Carlyle called a ``swallower of

formulas.''  That a thing was old and revered mattered

little with him: his question was what is the best thing

NOW.



From the city of New York came but one Republican,

William Laimbeer, a man of high character and large

business experience; impulsive, but always for right

against wrong; kindly in his nature, but most bitter

against Tammany and all its works.



From Essex County came Senator Palmer Havens, also

of middle age, of large practical experience, with a clear,

clean style of thinking and speaking, anxious to make a

good record by serving well, and such a record he certainly made.



And, finally, among the Republican members of that

session I may name the senator from Oswego, Mr. Cheney

Ames.  Perhaps no one in the body had so large a prac-

tical knowledge of the commercial interests of the State,

and especially of the traffic upon its lakes and inland

waterways; on all questions relating to these his advice

was of the greatest value; he was in every respect a

good public servant.



On the Democratic side the foremost man by far was

Henry C. Murphy of Brooklyn, evidently of Irish ancestry,

though his immediate forefathers had been long in

the United States.  He was a graduate of Columbia College,

devoted to history and literature, had produced sundry

interesting books on the early annals of the State,

had served with distinction in the diplomatic service as

minister to The Hague, was eminent as a lawyer, and

had already considerable legislative experience.



From New York City came a long series of Democratic

members, of whom the foremost was Thomas C. Fields. 

He had considerable experience as a lawyer in the city

courts, had served in the lower house of the legislature,

and was preternaturally acute in detecting the interests

of Tammany which he served.  He was a man of much

humor, with occasional flashes of wit, his own worst

enemy, evidently, and his career was fitly ended when

upon the fall of Tweed he left his country for his country's

good and died in exile.



There were others on both sides whom I could mention

as good men and true, but those I have named took a

leading part as heads of committees and in carrying on

public business.



The lieutenant-governor of the State who presided over

the Senate was Mr. Floyd-Jones, a devoted Democrat of

the old school who exemplified its best qualities; a

gentleman, honest, courteous, not intruding his own views,

ready always to give the fullest weight to those of others

without regard to party.



Among the men who, from their constant attendance,

might almost be considered as officers of the Senate were

sundry representatives of leading newspapers.  Several

of them were men of marked ability, and well known

throughout the State, but they have long since been

forgotten with one exception: this was a quiet reporter who

sat just in front of the clerk's chair, day after day, week

after week, throughout the entire session; a man of very

few words, and with whom I had but the smallest

acquaintance.  Greatly surprised was I in after years when

he rose to be editor of the leading Democratic organ

in the State, and finally, under President Cleveland, a

valuable Secretary of the Treasury of the United States:

Daniel Manning.



In the distribution of committees there fell to me the

chairmanship of the committee on education, or, as it

was then called, the committee on literature.  I was also

made a member of the committee on cities and villages,

afterward known as the committee on municipal affairs,

and of the committee on the library.  For the first of

these positions I was somewhat fitted by my knowledge

of the colleges and universities of the State, but in other

respects was poorly fitted.  For the second of these

positions, that of the committee on cities and villages, I am

free to confess that no one could be more wretchedly

equipped; for the third, the committee on the library, my

qualifications were those of a man who loved both to collect

books and to read them.



But from the beginning I labored hard to fit myself,

even at that late hour, for the duties pressing upon me,

and gradually my practical knowledge was increased. 

Still there were sad gaps in it, and more than once I sat

in the committee-room, looking exceedingly wise, no

doubt, but with an entirely inadequate appreciation of

the argument made before me.



During this first session my maiden speech was upon

the governor's message, and I did my best to show what

I thought His Excellency's shortcomings.  Governor Seymour

was a patriotic man, after his fashion, but the one

agency which he regarded as divinely inspired was the

Democratic party; his hatred of the Lincoln Administration

was evidently deep, and it was also clear that he

did not believe that the war for the Union could be brought

to a successful termination.



With others I did my best against him; but while

condemning his political course as severely as was possible

to me, I never attacked his personal character or his

motives.  The consequence was that, while politically we

were enemies, personally a sort of friendship remained,

and I recall few things with more pleasure than my

journeyings from Albany up the Mohawk Valley, sitting at

his side, he giving accounts to me of the regions through

which we passed, and the history connected with them,

regarding which he was wonderfully well informed.  If

he hated New England as the breeding bed of radicalism,

he loved New York passionately.



The first important duty imposed upon me as chairman

of the committee on education was when there came

up a bill for disposing of the proceeds of public lands

appropriated by the government of the United States

to institutions for scientific and technical education, under

what was then known as the Morrill Act of 1862.  Of

these lands the share which had come to New York was

close upon a million acres--a fair-sized European

principality.  Here, owing to circumstances which I shall

detail in another chapter, I found myself in a contest with

Mr. Cornell.  I favored holding the fund together, letting

it remain with the so-called ``People's College,'' to

which it had been already voted, and insisted that the

matter was one to be referred to the committee on education. 

Mr. Cornell, on the other hand, favored the division

of the fund, and proposed a bill giving one half of

it to the ``State Agricultural College'' recently

established at Ovid on Seneca Lake.  The end was that the

matter was referred to a joint committee composed of

the committees on literature and agriculture, that is, to

Mr. Cornell's committee and my own, and as a result no

meeting to consider the bill was held during that session.



Gradually I accumulated a reasonable knowledge of

the educational interests intrusted to us, but ere long

there came in from the superintendent of public

instruction; Mr. Victor Rice, a plan for codifying the

educational laws of the State.  This necessitated a world of

labor on my part.  Section by section, paragraph by

paragraph, phrase by phrase, I had to go through it, and

night after night was devoted to studying every part

of it in the light of previous legislation, the laws of other

States, and such information as could be obtained from

general sources.  At last, after much alteration and revision,

I brought forward the bill, secured its passage,

and I may say that it was not without a useful influence

upon the great educational interests of the State.



I now brought forward another educational bill.  Various

persons interested in the subject appeared urging

the creation of additional State normal schools, in order

to strengthen and properly develop the whole State

school system.  At that time there was but one; that one at

Albany; and thus our great Commonwealth was in this

respect far behind many of her sister States.  The whole

system was evidently suffering from the want of teachers

thoroughly and practically equipped.  Out of the multitude

of projects presented, I combined what I thought

the best parts of three or four in a single bill, and

although at first there were loud exclamations against so

lavish a use of public money, I induced the committee

to report my bill, argued it in the Senate, overcame much

opposition, and thus finally secured a law establishing

four State normal schools.



Still another duty imposed upon me necessitated much

work for which almost any other man in the Senate would

have been better equipped by experience and knowledge

of State affairs.  The condition of things in the city of

New York had become unbearable; the sway of Tammany

Hall had gradually brought out elements of opposition

such as before that time had not existed.  Tweed

was already making himself felt, though he had not yet

assumed the complete control which he exercised afterward. 

The city system was bad throughout; but at the

very center of evil stood what was dignified by the name

of the ``Health Department.''  At the head of this was a

certain Boole, who, having gained the title of ``city

inspector,'' had the virtual appointment of a whole army

of so-called ``health inspectors,'' ``health officers,'' and

the like, charged with the duty of protecting the public

from the inroads of disease; and never was there a

greater outrage against a city than the existence of this

body of men, absolutely unfit both as regarded character

and education for the duties they pretended to discharge.



Against this state of things there had been developed

a ``citizens' committee,'' representing the better elements

of both parties,--its main representatives being Judge

Whiting and Mr. Dorman B. Eaton,--and the evidence

these gentlemen exhibited before the committee on municipal

affairs, at Albany, as to the wretched condition of

the city health boards was damning.  Whole districts in

the most crowded wards were in the worst possible sanitary

condition.  There was probably at that time nothing

to approach it in any city in Christendom save, possibly,

Naples.  Great blocks of tenement houses were owned by

men who kept low drinking bars in them, each of whom,

having secured from Boole the position of ``health

officer,'' steadily resisted all sanitary improvement or

even inspection.  Many of these tenement houses were

known as ``fever nests''; through many of them small-

pox frequently raged, and from them it was constantly

communicated to other parts of the city.



Therefore it was that one morning Mr. Laimbeer, the

only Republican member from the city, rose, made an

impassioned speech on this condition of things, moved a

committee to examine and report, and named as its members

Judge Munger, myself, and the Democratic senator

from the Buffalo district, Mr. Humphrey.



As a result, a considerable part of my second winter

as senator was devoted to the work of this special committee

in the city of New York.  We held a sort of court,

had with us the sergeant-at-arms, were empowered to send

for persons and papers, summoned large numbers of

witnesses, and brought to view a state of things even worse

than anything any of us had suspected.



Against the citizens' committee, headed by Judge Whiting

and Mr. Eaton, Boole, aided by a most successful

Tammany lawyer of the old sort, John Graham, fought

with desperation.  In order to disarm his assailants as

far as possible, he brought before the committee a number

of his ``health officers'' and ``sanitary inspectors,''

whom he evidently thought best qualified to pass muster;

but as one after another was examined and cross-examined,

neither the cunning of Boole nor the skill of Mr.

Graham could prevent the revelation of their utter unfitness. 

In the testimony of one of them the whole monstrous

absurdity culminated.  Judge Whiting examining

him before the commission with reference to a case of

small-pox which had occurred within his district, and to

which, as health officer it was his duty to give attention,

and asking him if he remembered the case, witness answered

that he did.  The following dialogue then ensued:





Q.  Did you visit this sick person?



A.  No, sir.



Q.  Why did you not?



A.  For the same reason that you would not.



Q.  What was that reason?



A.  I did n't want to catch the disease myself.



Q.  Did the family have any sort of medical aid?



A.  Yes.



Q.  From whom did they have it?



A.  From themselves; they was ``highjinnicks'' (hygienics).



Q.  What do you mean by ``highjinnicks''?



A.  I mean persons who doctor themselves.



After other answers of a similar sort the witness

departed; but for some days afterward Judge Whiting

edified the court, in his examination of Boole's health

officers and inspectors, by finally asking each one whether

he had any ``highjinnicks'' in his health district.  Some

answered that they had them somewhat; some thought

that they had them ``pretty bad,'' others thought that

there was ``not much of it,'' others claimed that they

were ``quite serious''; and, finally, in the examination of

a certain health officer who was very anxious to show that

he had done his best, there occurred the following dialogue

which brought down the house:



Q.  (By Judge Whiting.)  Mr. Health Officer, have you

had any ``highjinnicks'' in your district?



A.  Yes, sir.



Q.  Much?



A.  Yes, sir, quite a good deal.



Q.  Have you done anything in regard to them?



A.  Yes, sir; I have done all that I could.



Q.  Witness, now, on your oath, do you know what the

word ``highjinnicks'' means?



A.  Yes, sir.



Q.  What does it mean?



A.  It means the bad smells that arise from standing

water.



At this the court was dissolved in laughter, but Mr.

Graham made the best that he could of it by the following

questions and answers:



Q.  Witness, have you ever learned Greek?



A.  No, sir.



Q.  Can you speak Greek?



A.  No, sir.



Q.  Do you understand Greek?



A.  No, sir.



``Then you may stand down.''



The examination was long and complicated, so that

with various departments to be examined there was no

time to make a report before the close of the session, and

the whole matter had to go over until the newly elected

senate came into office the following year.



Shortly after the legislature had adjourned I visited

the city of New York, and on arriving took up the evening

paper which, more than any other, has always been supposed to

represent the best sentiment of the city;--the

``New York Evening Post.''  The first article on which my

eye fell was entitled ``The New York Senate Trifling,''

and the article went on to say that the Senate of the

State had wasted its time, had practically done nothing

for the city, had neglected its interests, had paid no

attention to its demands, and the like.  That struck me

as ungrateful, for during the whole session we had

worked early and late on questions relating to the city,

had thwarted scores of evil schemes, and in some cases,

I fear, had sacrificed the interests of the State at large

to those of the city.  Thus there dawned on me a knowledge

of the reward which faithful legislators are likely

to obtain.



Another of these city questions also showed the sort

of work to be done in this thankless protection of the

metropolis.  During one of the sessions there had

appeared in the lobby an excellent man, Dr. Levi Silliman

Ives, formerly Protestant Episcopal Bishop of North

Carolina, who, having been converted to Roman Catholicism,

had become a layman and head of a protectory

for Catholic children.  With him came a number of

others of his way of thinking, and a most determined

effort was made to pass a bill sanctioning a gift of one

half of the great property known as Ward's Island,

adjacent to the city of New York, to this Roman Catholic

institution.



I had strong sympathy with the men who carried on

the protectory, and was quite willing to go as far as

possible in aiding them, but was opposed to voting such

a vast landed property belonging to the city into the

hands of any church, and I fought the bill at all stages. 

In committee of the whole, and at first reading, priestly

influence led a majority to vote for it, but at last, despite

all the efforts of Tammany Hall, it was defeated.



It was during this first period of my service that the

last and most earnest effort of the State was made for

the war.  Various circumstances had caused discourage-

ment.  It had become difficult to raise troops, yet it was

most important to avoid a draft.  In the city of New

York, at the prospect of an enforced levy of troops,

there had been serious uprisings which were only

suppressed after a considerable loss of life.  It was

necessary to make one supreme effort, and the Republican

members of the legislature decided to raise a loan of

several millions for bounties to those who should

volunteer.  This decision was not arrived at without much

opposition, and, strange to say, its most serious opponent

was Horace Greeley, who came to Albany in the

hope of defeating it.  Invaluable as his services had been

during the struggle which preceded the war, it must be

confessed, even by his most devoted friends, that during

the war he was not unfrequently a stumbling block.  His

cry ``on to Richmond'' during the first part of the

struggle, his fearful alarm when, like the heroes in the

``Biglow Papers,'' he really discovered ``why baggonets is

peaked,'' his terror as the conflict deepened, his proposals

for special peace negotiations later--all these things

were among the serious obstacles which President Lincoln

had to encounter; and now, fearing burdens which,

in his opinion, could not and would not be borne by the

State, and conjuring up specters of trouble, he came to

Albany and earnestly advised members of the legislature

against the passage of the bounty bill.  Fortunately,

common sense triumphed, and the bill was passed.



Opposition came also from another and far different

source.  There was then in the State Senate a Democrat

of the oldest and strongest type; a man who believed

most devoutly in Jefferson and Jackson, and abhorred

above all things, abolitionists and protectionists,--Dr.

Allaben of Schoharie.  A more thoroughly honest man

never lived; he was steadily on the side of good legislation;

but in the midst of the discussion regarding this

great loan for bounties he arose and began a speech

which, as he spoke but rarely, received general attention.

He was deeply in earnest.  He said (in substance), ``I

shall vote for this loan; for of various fearful evils it

seems the least.  But I wish, here and now, and with the

deepest sorrow, to record a prediction: I ask you to note

it and to remember it, for it will be fulfilled, and speedily. 

This State debt which you are now incurring will never

be paid.  It cannot be paid.  More than that, none of the

vast debts incurred for military purposes, whether by

the Nation or by the States, will be paid; the people will

surely repudiate them.  Nor is this all.  Not one dollar

of all the treasury notes issued by the United States will

ever be redeemed.  Your paper currency has already

depreciated much and will depreciate more and more; all

bonds and notes, State and National, issued to continue

this fratricidal war will be whirled into the common

vortex of repudiation.  I say this with the deepest pain, for

I love my country, but I cannot be blind to the teachings

of history.''  He then went on to cite the depreciation

of our revolutionary currency, and, at great length

pictured the repudiation of the assignats during the French

Revolution.  He had evidently read Alison and Thiers

carefully, and he spoke like an inspired prophet.



As Senator Allaben thus spoke, Senator Fields of New

York quietly left his seat and came to me.  He was a

most devoted servant of Tammany, but was what was

known in those days as a War Democrat.  His native

pugnacity caused him to feel that the struggle must be

fought out, whereas Democrats of a more philosophic

sort, like Allaben, known in those days as ``Copperheads,''

sought peace at any price.  Therefore it was that,

while Senator Allaben was pouring out with the deepest

earnestness these prophecies of repudiation, Mr. Fields

came round to my desk and said to me:  ``You have been

a professor of history; you are supposed to know something

about the French Revolution; if your knowledge

is good for anything, why in h--l don't you use it now?''



This exhortation was hardly necessary, and at the close

of Senator Allaben's remarks I arose and presented

another view of the case.  It happened by a curious coin-

cidence that, having made a few years before a very careful

study of the issues of paper money during the French

Revolution, I had a portion of my very large collection

of assignats, mandats, and other revolutionary currency

in Albany, having brought it there in order to show

it to one or two of my friends who had expressed an

interest in the subject.



Holding this illustrative material in reserve I showed

the whole amount of our American paper currency in

circulation to be about eight hundred million dollars, of

which only about one half was of the sort to which the

senator referred.  I then pointed to the fact that, although

the purchasing power of the French franc at the time of

the Revolution was fully equal to the purchasing power

of the American dollar of our own time, the French

revolutionary government issued, in a few months, forty-

five thousand millions of francs in paper money, and had

twenty-five thousand millions of it in circulation at the

time when the great depression referred to by Dr. Allaben

had taken place.



I also pointed out the fact that our American notes were

now so thoroughly well engraved that counterfeiting was

virtually impossible, so that one of the leading European

governments had its notes engraved in New York, on this

account, whereas, the French assignats could be easily

counterfeited, and, as a matter of fact, were counterfeited

in vast numbers, the British government pouring them

into France through the agency of the French royalists,

especially in Brittany, almost by shiploads, and to such

purpose, that the French government officials themselves

were at last unable to discriminate between the genuine

money and the counterfeit.  I also pointed out the

connection of our national banking system with our issues

of bonds and paper, one of the happiest and most statesmanlike

systems ever devised, whereas, in France there

was practically no redemption for the notes, save as they

could be used for purchasing from the government the

doubtful titles to the confiscated houses and lands of the

clergy and aristocracy.



The speech of Senator Allaben had exercised a real

effect, but these simple statements, which I supported by

evidence, and especially by exhibiting specimens of the

assignats bearing numbers showing that the issues had

risen into the thousands of millions, and in a style of

engraving most easily counterfeited, sufficed to convince the

Senate that no such inference as was drawn by the senator

was warranted by the historical facts in the case.



A vote was taken, the bill was passed, the troops were

finally raised, and the debt was extinguished not many

years afterward.



It is a pleasure for me to remember that at the close

of my remarks, which I took pains to make entirely

courteous to Dr. Allaben, he came to me, and strongly

opposed as we were in politics, he grasped me by the hand

most heartily, expressed his amazement at seeing these

assignats, mandats, and other forms of French revolutionary

issues, of which he had never before seen one,

and thanked me for refuting his arguments.  It is one of

the very few cases I have ever known, in which a speech

converted an opponent.



Perhaps a word more upon this subject may not be

without interest.  My attention had been drawn to the

issues of paper money during the French Revolution, by

my studies of that period for my lectures on modern

history at the University of Michigan, about five years

before.  In taking up this special subject I had supposed

that a few days would be sufficient for all the study

needed; but I became more and more interested in it,

obtained a large mass of documents from France, and then

and afterward accumulated by far the largest collection of

French paper money, of all the different issues, sorts,

and amounts, as well as of collateral newspaper reports

and financial documents, ever brought into our country. 

The study of the subject for my class, which I had hoped

to confine to a few days, thus came to absorb my leisure

for months, and I remember that, at last, when I had

given my lecture on the subject to my class at the university,

a feeling of deep regret, almost of remorse, came

over me, as I thought how much valuable time I had given

to a subject that, after all, had no bearing on any present

problem, which would certainly be forgotten by the

majority of my hearers, and probably by myself.



These studies were made mainly in 1859.  Then the

lectures were laid aside, and though, from time to time,

when visiting France, I kept on collecting illustrative

materials, no further use was made of them until this debate

during the session of the State Senate of 1864.



Out of this offhand speech upon the assignats grew a

paper which, some time afterward, I presented in

Washington before a number of members of the Senate and

House, at the request of General Garfield, who was then

a representative, and of his colleague, Mr. Chittenden of

Brooklyn.  In my audience were some of the foremost

men of both houses, and among them such as Senators

Bayard, Stevenson, Morrill, Conkling, Edmunds, Gibson,

and others.  This speech, which was the result of

my earlier studies, improved by material acquired later,

and most carefully restudied and verified, I repeated

before a large meeting of the Union League Club at New

York, Senator Hamilton Fish presiding.  The paper thus

continued to grow and, having been published in New

York by Messrs. Appleton, a cheap edition of it was

circulated some years afterward, largely under the auspices

of General Garfield, to act as an antidote to the ``Greenback

Craze'' then raging through Ohio and the Western

States.



Finally, having been again restudied, in the light of my

ever-increasing material, it was again reprinted and

circulated as a campaign document during the struggle

against Mr. Bryan and the devotees of the silver standard

in the campaign of 1896, copies of it being spread

very widely, especially through the West, and placed,

above all, in nearly every public library, university,

college, and normal school in the Union.



I allude to this as showing to any young student who

may happen to read these recollections, the value of a careful

study of any really worthy subject, even though, at

first sight, it may seem to have little relation to present

affairs.



In the spring of 1864, at the close of my first year in

the State Senate, came the national convention at Baltimore

for the nomination of President and Vice-President,

and to that convention I went as a substitute delegate. 

Although I have attended several similar assemblages since,

no other has ever seemed to me so interesting.  It met in

an old theater, on one of the noisiest corners in the city,

and, as it was June, and the weather already very warm,

it was necessary, in order to have as much air as possible,

to remove curtains and scenery from the stage and throw

the back of the theater open to the street.  The result

was, indeed, a circulation of air, but, with this, a noise

from without which confused everything within.



In selecting a president for the convention a new

departure was made, for the man chosen was a clergyman;

one of the most eminent divines in the Union,--the Rev.

Dr. Robert Breckinridge of Kentucky, who, on the

religious side, had been distinguished as moderator of the

Presbyterian General Assembly, and on the political side

was revered for the reason that while very nearly all his

family, and especially his sons and nephews, including

the recent Vice-President, had plunged into the Confederate

service, he still remained a staunch and sturdy adherent

of the Union and took his stand with the Republican

party.  He was a grand old man, but hardly suited

to the presidency of a political assemblage.



The proceedings were opened with a prayer by a

delegate, who had been a colonel in the Union army, and was

now a Methodist clergyman.  The heads of all were

bowed, and the clergyman-soldier began with the words of

the Lord's Prayer; but when he had recited about one half

of it he seemed to think that he could better it, and he

therefore substituted for the latter half a petition which

began with these words:  ``Grant, O Lord, that the ticket

here to be nominated may command a majority of the

suffrages of the American people.''  To those accustomed

to the more usual ways of conducting service this was

something of a shock; still there was this to be said in

favor of the reverend colonel's amendment,--he had faith

to ask for what he wanted.



This opening prayer being ended, there came a display

of parliamentary tactics by leaders from all parts of the

Union: one after another rose in this or that part of the

great assemblage to move this or that resolution, and the

confusion which soon prevailed was fearful, the noise of

the street being steadily mingled with the tumult of the

house.  But good Dr. Breckinridge did his best, and

in each case put the motion he had happened to hear. 

Thereupon each little group, supposing that the resolution

which had been carried was the one it had happened

to hear, moved additional resolutions based upon it. 

These various resolutions were amended in all sorts of

ways, in all parts of the house, the good doctor putting

the resolutions and amendments which happened to reach

his ear, and declaring them ``carried'' or ``lost,'' as the

case might be.  Thereupon ensued additional resolutions

and amendments based upon those which their movers

supposed to have been passed, with the result that, in

about twenty minutes no one in the convention, and least

of all its president, knew what we had done or what we

ought to do.  Each part of the house firmly believed that

the resolutions which it had heard were those which had

been carried, and the clash and confusion between them all

seemed hopeless.



Various eminent parliamentarians from different parts

of the Union arose to extricate the convention from this

welter, but generally, when they resumed their seats, left

the matter more muddled than when they arose.



A very near approach to success was made by my dear

friend George William Curtis of New York, who, in

admirable temper, and clear voice, unraveled the tangle,

as he understood it, and seemed just about to start the

convention fairly on its way, when some marplot arose

to suggest that some minor point in Mr. Curtis's exposition

was not correct, thus calling out a tumult of conflicting

statements, the result of which was yet greater

confusion, so that we seemed fated to adjourn pell-mell

into the street and be summoned a second time into

the hall, in order to begin the whole proceedings over

again.



But just at this moment arose Henry J. Raymond, editor

of the ``New York Times.''  His parliamentary training

had been derived not only from his service as lieutenant-

governor of the State, but from attendance on a

long series of conventions, State and National.  He had

waited for his opportunity, and when there came a lull

of despair, he arose and, in a clear, strong, pleasant voice,

made an alleged explanation of the situation.  As a piece

of parliamentary tactics, it was masterly though from

another point of view it was comical.  The fact was that

he developed a series of motions and amendments:--a

whole line of proceedings,--mainly out of his own interior

consciousness.  He began somewhat on this wise:  ``Mr.

President:  The eminent senator from Vermont moved

a resolution to such an effect; this was amended as follows,

by my distinguished friend from Ohio, and was

passed as amended.  Thereupon the distinguished senator

from Iowa arose and made the following motion, which,

with an amendment from the learned gentleman from

Massachusetts, was passed; thereupon a resolution was

moved by the honorable gentleman from Pennsylvania,

which was declared by the chair to be carried; and now,

sir, I submit the following motion,'' and he immediately

followed these words by moving a procedure to business

and the appointment of committees.  Sundry marplots,

such as afflict all public bodies did, indeed, start to their

feet, but a universal cry of ``question'' drowned all their

efforts, and Mr. Raymond's motion was carried, to all

appearance unanimously.



Never was anything of the kind more effectual. 

Though most, if not all, the proceedings thus stated by

Mr. Raymond were fictions of his own imagination,

they served the purpose; his own resolution started the

whole machinery and set the convention prosperously on

its way.



The general opinion of the delegates clearly favored

the renomination of Mr. Lincoln.  It was an exhibition

not only of American common sense, but of sentiment. 

The American people and the public bodies which represent

them are indeed practical and materialistic to the

last degree, but those gravely err who ignore a very

different side of their character.  No people and no public

bodies are more capable of yielding to deep feeling.  So

it was now proven.  It was felt that not to renominate

Mr. Lincoln would be a sort of concession to the enemy. 

He had gained the confidence and indeed the love of

the entire Republican party.  There was a strong

conviction that, having suffered so much during the

terrible stress and strain of the war, he ought to be retained

as President after the glorious triumph of the Nation

which was felt to be approaching.



But in regard to the second place there was a different

feeling.  The Vice-President who had served with Mr.

Lincoln during his first term, Mr. Hamlin of Maine, was

a steadfast, staunch, and most worthy man, but it was

felt that the loyal element in the border States ought

to be recognized, and, therefore it was that, for the Vice-

Presidency was named a man who had begun life in the

lowest station, who had hardly learned to read until he

had become of age, who had always shown in Congress

the most bitter hatred of the slave barons of the South,

whom he considered as a caste above his own, but who

had distinguished himself, as a man, by high civic courage,

and as a senator by his determined speeches in behalf of

the Union.  This was Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, a

man honest, patriotic, but narrow and crabbed, who

turned out to be the most unfortunate choice ever made,

with the possible exception of John Tyler, twenty-four

years before.



The convention having adjourned, a large number of

delegates visited Washington, to pay their respects to the

President, and among them myself.  The city seemed

to me hardly less repulsive than at my first visit eight

years before; it was still unkempt and dirty,--made indeed

all the more so by the soldiery encamped about it,

and marching through it.



Shortly after our arrival our party, perhaps thirty in

number, went to the White House and were shown into

the great East Room.  We had been there for about ten

minutes when one of the doors nearest the street was

opened, and a young man entered who held the door

open for the admission of a tall, ungainly man dressed

in a rather dusty suit of black.  My first impression was

that this was some rural tourist who had blundered into the

place; for, really, he seemed less at home there than any

other person present, and looked about for an instant, as

if in doubt where he should go; but presently he turned

toward our group, which was near the southwestern corner

of the room, and then I saw that it was the President. 

As he came toward us in a sort of awkward, perfunctory

manner his face seemed to me one of the saddest I had

ever seen, and when he had reached us he held out his

hand to the first stranger, then to the second, and so on,

all with the air of a melancholy automaton.  But,

suddenly, some one in the company said something which

amused him, and instantly there came in his face a most

marvelous transformation.  I have never seen anything

like it in any other human being.  His features were

lighted, his eyes radiant, he responded to sundry remarks

humorously, though dryly, and thenceforward was cordial

and hearty.  Taking my hand in his he shook it in the

most friendly way, with a kindly word, and so passed

cheerily on to the others until the ceremony was finished.



Years afterward, noticing in the rooms of his son, Mr.

Robert Lincoln, our minister at London, a portrait of

his father, and seeing that it had the same melancholy

look noticeable in all President Lincoln's portraits, I

alluded to this change in his father's features, and asked

if any artist had ever caught the happier expression. 

Mr. Robert Lincoln answered that, so far as he knew, no

portrait of his father in this better mood had ever been

taken; that when any attempt was made to photograph

him or paint his portrait, he relapsed into his melancholy

mood, and that this is what has been transmitted to us by

all who have ever attempted to give us his likeness.



In the campaign which followed this visit to Washington

I tried to do my duty in speaking through my own

and adjacent districts, but there was little need of

speeches; the American people had made up their minds,

and they re<e:>lected Mr. Lincoln triumphantly.







CHAPTER VII



SENATORSHIP AT ALBANY--1865-1867



During my second year in the State Senate, 1865,

came the struggle for the charter of Cornell

University, the details of which will be given in another

chapter.



Two things during this session are forever stamped into

my memory.  The first was the news of Lee's surrender

on April 9, 1865: though it had been daily expected, it

came as a vast relief.



It was succeeded by a great sorrow.  On the morning

of April 15, 1865, coming down from my rooms in the

Delavan House at Albany, I met on the stairway a very

dear old friend, the late Charles Sedgwick, of Syracuse,

one of the earliest and most devoted of Republicans, who

had served with distinction in the House of Representatives,

and had more than once been widely spoken of

for the United States Senate.  Coming toward me with

tears in his eyes and voice, hardly able to speak, he

grasped me by the hand and gasped the words, ``Lincoln

is murdered.''  I could hardly believe myself awake: the

thing seemed impossible;--too wicked, too monstrous, too

cruel to be true; but alas! confirmation of the news came

speedily and the Presidency was in the hands of Andrew

Johnson.



Shortly afterward the body of the murdered President,

borne homeward to Illinois, rested overnight in the State

Capitol, and preparations were made for its reception.  I

was one of the bearers chosen by the Senate and was also

elected to pronounce one of the orations.  Rarely have I

felt an occasion so deeply: it has been my lot during my

life to be present at the funerals of various great rulers

and magnates; but at none of these was so deep an

impression made upon me as by the body of Lincoln lying

in the assembly chamber at Albany, quiet and peaceful at

last.



Of the speeches made in the Senate on the occasion,

mine being the only one which was not read or given from

memory, attracted some attention, and I was asked

especially for the source of a quotation which occurred in

it, and which was afterward dwelt upon by some of my

hearers.  It was the result of a sudden remembrance of the

lines in Milton's ``Samson Agonistes,'' beginning:



   ``Oh, how comely it is, and how reviving

     To the spirits of just men long oppressed,

     When God into the hands of their deliverer

     Puts invincible might

     To quell the mighty of the earth, the oppressor,

     The brute and boisterous force of violent men,'' etc.[2]





[2] Milton's ``Samson Agonistes,'' lines 1268-1280.







The funeral was conducted with dignity and solemnity. 

When the coffin was opened and we were allowed to take

one last look at Lincoln's face, it impressed me as having

the same melancholy expression which I had seen upon it

when he entered the East Room at the White House.  In

its quiet sadness there seemed to have been no change. 

There was no pomp in the surroundings; all, though dignified,

was simple.  Very different was it from the show

and ceremonial at the funeral of the Emperor Nicholas

which I had attended ten years before;--but it was even

more impressive.  At the head of the coffin stood General

Dix, who had served so honorably in the War of 1812, in

the Senate of the United States, in the Civil War, and who

was afterward to serve with no less fidelity as governor

of the State.  Nothing could be more fitting than such a

chieftaincy in the guard of honor.



In the following autumn the question of my renomination

came.



It had been my fortune to gain, first of all, the ill will

of Tammany Hall, and the arms of Tammany were long. 

Its power was exercised strongly through its henchmen

not only in the Democratic party throughout the State,

but especially in the Republican party, and, above all,

among sundry contractors of the Erie Canal, many of

whose bills I had opposed, and it was understood that

they and their friends were determined to defeat me.



Moreover, it was thought by some that I had mortally

offended sundry Catholic priests by opposing their plan

for acquiring Ward's Island, and that I had offended

various Protestant bodies, especially the Methodists, by

defeating their efforts to divide up the Land Grant

Fund between some twenty petty sectarian colleges, and

by exerting myself to secure it for Cornell University,

which, because it was unsectarian, many called ``godless.''



Though I made speeches through the district as formerly,

I asked no pledges of any person, but when the nominating

convention assembled I was renominated in spite

of all opposition, and triumphantly:--a gifted and honorable

man, the late David J. Mitchell, throwing himself

heartily into the matter, and in an eloquent speech

absolutely silencing the whole Tammany and canal

combination.  He was the most successful lawyer in the

district before juries, and never did his best qualities

show themselves more fully than on this occasion. 

My majority on the first ballot was overwhelming, the

nomination was immediately made unanimous, and at the

election I had the full vote.



Arriving in Albany at the beginning of my third year

of service--1866--I found myself the only member of the

committee appointed to investigate matters in the city of

New York who had been re<e:>lected.  Under these circumstances

no report from the committee was possible; but

the committee on municipal affairs, having brought in a

bill to legislate out of office the city inspector and all his

associates, and to put in a new and thoroughly qualified

health board, I made a carefully prepared speech, which

took the character of a report.  The facts which I

brought out were sufficient to condemn the whole existing

system twenty times over.  By testimony taken under oath

the monstrosities of the existing system were fully revealed,

as well as the wretched character of the ``health

officers,'' ``inspectors,'' and the whole army of underlings,

and I exhibited statistics carefully ascertained and tabulated,

showing the absurd disproportion of various classes

of officials to each other, their appointment being made,

not to preserve the public health, but to carry the ward

caucuses and elections.  During this exposure Boole, the

head of the whole system, stood not far from me on the

floor, his eyes fastened upon me, with an expression in

which there seemed to mingle fear, hatred, and something

else which I could hardly divine.  His face seemed to me,

even then, the face of a madman.  So it turned out.  The

new bill drove him out of office, and, in a short time, into

a madhouse.



I have always thought upon the fate of this man with a

sort of sadness.  Doubtless in his private relations he

had good qualities, but to no public service that I have

ever been able to render can I look back with a stronger

feeling that my work was good.  It unquestionably resulted

in saving the lives of hundreds, nay thousands, of

men, women, and children; and yet it is a simple fact that

had I, at any time within a year or two afterward, visited

those parts of the city of New York which I had thus

benefited, and been recognized by the dwellers in the tenement

houses as the man who had opposed their dramshop-

keepers and brought in a new health board, those very

people whose lives and the lives of whose children I had

thus saved would have mobbed me, and, if possible, would

have murdered me.



Shortly after the close of the session I was invited to

give the Phi Beta Kappa address at the Yale commencement,

and as the question of the reconstruction of the

Union at the close of the war was then the most important

subject before the country, and as it seemed to me

best to strike while the iron was hot, my subject was

``The Greatest Foe of Republics.''  The fundamental

idea was that the greatest foe of modern states, and

especially of republics, is a political caste supported by

rights and privileges.  The treatment was mainly historical,

one of the main illustrations being drawn from the

mistake made by Richelieu in France, who, when he had

completely broken down such a caste, failed to destroy its

privileges, and so left a body whose oppressions and

assumptions finally brought on the French Revolution. 

Though I did not draw the inference, I presume that my

auditors drew it easily: it was simply that now, when the

slave power in the Union was broken down, it should not

be allowed to retain the power which had cost the country

so dear.



The address was well received, and two days later there

came to me what, under other circumstances, I would have

most gladly accepted, the election to a professorship at

Yale, which embraced the history of art and the direction

of the newly founded Street School of Art.  The thought

of me for the place no doubt grew out of the fact that,

during my stay in college, I had shown an interest in art,

and especially in architecture, and that after my return

from Europe I had delivered in the Yale chapel an address

on ``Cathedral Builders and Mediaeval Sculptors''

which was widely quoted.



It was with a pang that I turned from this offer.  To all

appearance, then and now, my life would have been far

happier in such a professorship, but to accept it was

clearly impossible.  The manner in which it was tendered

me seemed to me almost a greater honor than the professorship

itself.  I was called upon by a committee of the

governing body of the university, composed of the man

whom of all in New Haven I most revered, Dr. Bacon,

and the governor of the State, my old friend Joseph R.

Hawley, who read to me the resolution of the governing

body and requested my acceptance of the election. 

Nothing has ever been tendered me which I have felt to be a

greater honor.



A month later, on the 28th of August, 1866, began at

Albany what has been very rare in the history of New

York, a special session of the State Senate:--in a sense,

a court of impeachment.



Its purpose was to try the county judge of Oneida for

complicity in certain illegal proceedings regarding bounties. 

``Bounty jumping'' had become a very serious evil,

and it was claimed that this judicial personage had connived

at it.



I must confess that, as the evidence was developed, my

feelings as a man and my duties as a sworn officer of

the State were sadly at variance.  It came out that this

judge was endeavoring to support, on the wretched salary

of $1800 a year allowed by the county, not only

his own family, but also the family of his brother, who, if

I remember rightly, had lost his life during the war, and

it seemed to me a great pity that, as a penalty upon the

people of the county, he could not be quartered upon them

as long as he lived.  For they were the more culpable

criminals.  Belonging to one of the richest divisions of

the State, with vast interests at stake, they had not been

ashamed to pay a judge this contemptible pittance, and

they deserved to have their law badly administered.  This

feeling was undoubtedly wide-spread in the Senate; but,

on the other hand, there was the duty we were sworn to

perform, and the result was that the judge was removed

from office.



During this special session of the State Senate it was

entangled in a curious episode of national history.  The

new President, Mr. Andrew Johnson, had been induced to

take an excursion into the north and especially into the

State of New York.  He was accompanied by Mr. Seward,

the Secretary of State; General Grant, with his laurels

fresh from the Civil War; Admiral Farragut, who had

so greatly distinguished himself during the same epoch,

and others of great merit.  It was clear that Secretary

Seward thought that he could establish the popularity of

the new administration in the State of New York by

means of his own personal influence; but this proved the

greatest mistake of his life.



On the arrival of the presidential party in New York

City, various elements there joined in a showy reception

to them, and all were happy.  But the scene soon changed. 

From the city Mr. Seward, with the President, his

associates, and a large body of citizens more or less

distinguished, came up the Hudson River in one of the finest

steamers, a great banquet being given on board.  But on

approaching Albany, Mr. Seward began to discover his

mistake; for the testimonials of admiration and respect

toward the President grew less and less hearty as the party

moved northward.  This was told me afterward by Mr.

Thurlow Weed, Mr. Seward's lifelong friend, and probably

the most competent judge of such matters in the

United States.  At various places where the President

was called out to speak, he showed a bitterness toward

those who opposed his policy which more and more

displeased his audiences.  One pet phrase of his soon excited

derision.  The party were taking a sort of circular tour,

going northward by the eastern railway and steamer lines,

turning westward at Albany, and returning by western

lines; hence the President, in one of his earlier speeches,

alluded to his journey as ``swinging round the circle.'' 

The phrase seemed to please him, and he constantly

repeated it in his speeches, so that at last the whole matter

was referred to by the people at large, contemptuously, as

``swinging round the circle,'' reference being thereby

made, not merely to the President's circular journey, but

to the alleged veering of his opinions from those he professed

when elected.



As soon as the State Senate was informed of the probable

time when the party would arrive at Albany, a resolution

was introduced which welcomed in terms:  ``The

President of the United States, Andrew Johnson; the

Secretary of State, William H. Seward; the General of

the Army, Ulysses S. Grant; and the Admiral of the Navy,

David G. Farragut.''  The feeling against President Johnson

and his principal adviser, Mr. Seward, on account of

the break which had taken place between them and the

majority of the Republican party, was immediately evident,

for it was at once voiced by amending the resolution

so that it left out all names, and merely tendered a

respectful welcome, in terms, to ``The President of the

United States, the Secretary of State, the General of the

Army, and the Admiral of the Navy.''  But suddenly came

up a second amendment which was little if anything short

of an insult to the President and Secretary.  It extended

the respectful welcome, in terms, to ``The President of

the United States; to the Secretary of State; to Ulysses

S. Grant, General of the Army; and to David G. Farragut,

Admiral of the Navy''; thus making the first part, relating

to the President and the Secretary of State, merely

a mark of respect for the offices they held, and the latter

part a tribute to Grant and Farragut, not only official,

but personal.  Most earnest efforts were made to defeat

the resolution in this form.  It was pathetic to see old

Republicans who had been brought up to worship Mr.

Seward plead with their associates not to put so gross

an insult upon a man who had rendered such services

to the Republican party, to the State, and to the Nation. 

All in vain!  In spite of all our opposition, the resolution,

as amended in this latter form, was carried, indicating

the clear purpose of the State Senate to honor

simply and solely the offices of the President and of the

Secretary of State, but just as distinctly to honor the

persons of the General of the Army and the Admiral of

the Navy.



On the arrival of the party in Albany they came up to

the State House, and were received under the portico

by Governor Fenton and his staff.  It was perfectly

understood that Governor Fenton, though a Republican,

was in sympathy with the party in the Senate which had

put this slight upon the President and Secretary of State

and Mr. Seward's action was characteristic.  Having

returned a curt and dry reply to the guarded phrases of the

governor, he pressed by him with the President and his

associates to the ``Executive Chamber'' near the entrance,

the way to which he, of all men, well knew.  In that room

the Senate were assembled and, on the entrance of the

visitors, Governor Fenton endeavored to introduce them

in a formal speech; but Mr. Seward was too prompt for

him; he took the words out of the governor's mouth and

said, in a way which thrilled all of us who had been

brought up to love and admire him, ``In the Executive

Chamber of the State of New York I surely need no

introduction.  I bring to you the President of the United

States; the chief magistrate who is restoring peace and

prosperity to our country.''



The whole scene impressed me greatly; there rushed

upon me a strong tide of recollection as I contrasted what

Governor Fenton had been and was, with what Governor

Seward had been and was: it all seemed to me a ghastly

mistake.  There stood Fenton, marking the lowest point

in the choice of a State executive ever reached in our

Commonwealth by the Republican party: there stood

Seward who, from his boyhood in college, had fought

courageously, steadily, powerfully, and at last triumphantly,

against the domination of slavery; who, as State

senator, as governor, as the main founder of the Republican

party, as senator of the United States and finally as

Secretary of State, had rendered service absolutely

inestimable; who for years had braved storms of calumny

and ridicule and finally the knife of an assassin; and who

was now adhering to Andrew Johnson simply because he

knew that if he let go his hold, the President would relapse

into the hands of men opposed to any rational settlement

of the questions between the North and South.  I

noticed on Seward's brow the deep scar made by the

assassin's knife when Lincoln was murdered; all the

others, greatly as I admired Grant and Farragut, passed

with me at that time for nothing; my eyes were fixed upon

the Secretary of State.



After all was over I came out with my colleague, Judge

Folger, and as we left the Capitol he said:  ``What was

the matter with you in the governor's room?'' I answered: 

``Nothing was the matter with me; what do you

mean?''  He said:  ``The moment Seward began to speak

you fastened your eyes intently upon him, you turned so

pale that I thought you were about to drop, and I made

ready to seize you and prevent your falling.''  I then

confessed to him the feeling which was doubtless the cause

of this change of countenance.



As one who cherishes a deep affection for my native

State and for men who have made it great, I may be

allowed here to express the hope that the day will come

when it will redeem itself from the just charge of

ingratitude, and do itself honor by honoring its two greatest

governors, De Witt Clinton and William H. Seward.  No

statue of either of them stands at Albany, the place of all

others where such memorials should be erected, not

merely as an honor to the two statesmen concerned, but as

a lesson to the citizens of the State;--pointing out the

qualities which ought to ensure public gratitude, but

which, thus far, democracies have least admired.









CHAPTER VIII



ROSCOE CONKLING AND JUDGE FOLGER--1867-1868



At the beginning of my fourth year at Albany, in

1867, came an election to the Senate of the United

States.  Of the two senators then representing the State,

one, Edwin D. Morgan, had been governor, and combined

the qualities of a merchant prince and of a shrewd politician;

the other, Ira Harris, had been a highly respected

judge, and was, from every point of view, a most worthy

man: but unfortunately neither of these gentlemen seemed

to exercise any adequate influence in solving the main

questions then before Congress.



No more important subjects have ever come before that

body than those which arose during the early years of

the Civil War, and it was deeply felt throughout the State

that neither of the senators fitly uttered its voice or

exercised its influence.



Mr. Cornell, with whom I had then become intimate, was

never censorious; rarely did he say anything in disapproval

of any man; he was charitable in his judgments, and

generally preferred to be silent rather than severe; but I

remember that on his return from a stay in Washington,

he said to me indignantly:  ``While at the Capitol

I was ashamed of the State of New York: one great question

after another came up; bills of the highest importance

were presented and discussed by senators from Ohio,

Vermont, Missouri, Indiana, Iowa, and the rest; but from

New York never a word!''



The question now was, who should succeed Senator

Harris?  He naturally desired a second term, and it would

have given me pleasure to support him, for he was an old

and honored friend of my father and mother, they having

been, in their early life, his neighbors and schoolmates,

and their friendship having descended to me; but like

others I was disappointed that Senator Harris had not

taken a position more fitting.  His main efforts seemed to

be in the line of friendly acts for his constituents.  In so

far as these were done for soldiers in the army they were

praiseworthy; though it was generally felt that while arising

primarily from a natural feeling of benevolence, they

were mainly devoted to securing a body of friends

throughout the State, who would support him when the

time should come for his re<e:>lection.  Apparently with the

same object, he was a most devoted supporter of New

York office-seekers of all sorts.  He had pleasing personal

characteristics, but it was reported that Mr. Lincoln,

referring to the senator's persistency in pressing candidates

for office, once said:  ``I never think of going to sleep now

without first looking under my bed to see if Judge Harris

is not there wanting something for somebody.''



Another candidate was Judge Noah Davis, then of

Lockport, also a man of high character, of excellent legal

abilities, a good speaker, and one who, had he been elected,

would have done honor to the State.  But on looking about

I discovered, as I thought, a better candidate.  Judge

Bailey, of Oneida County, had called my attention to the

claims of Mr. Roscoe Conkling, then a member of Congress

from the Oneida district, who had distinguished

himself as an effective speaker, a successful lawyer, and

an honest public servant.  He had, to be sure, run foul of

Mr. Blaine of Maine, and had received, in return for what

Mr. Blaine considered a display of offensive manners, a

very serious oratorical castigation; but he had just fought

a good fight which had drawn the attention of the whole

State to him.  A coalition having been formed between the

anti-war Democrats and a number of disaffected Republicans

in his district to defeat his re<e:>lection to Congress, it

had seemed likely to overwhelm him and drive him out of

public life, and one thing seemed for a time likely to prove

fatal to him:--the ``New York Tribune,'' the great organ

of the party, edited by Horace Greeley, gave him no effective

support.  But the reason was apparent later when it

became known that Mr. Greeley was to be a candidate

for the senatorship, and it was evidently felt that should

Mr. Conkling triumph in such a struggle, he would be a

very serious competitor.  The young statesman had shown

himself equal to the emergency.  He had fought his battle

without the aid of Mr. Greeley and the ``Tribune,'' and

won it, and, as a result, had begun to be thought of as a

promising candidate for the United States senatorship.  I

had never spoken with him; had hardly seen him; but

I had watched his course closely, and one thing especially

wrought powerfully with me in his favor.  The men who

had opposed him were of the same sort with those who had

opposed me, and as I was proud of their opposition, I

felt that he had a right to be so.  The whole force of

Tammany henchmen and canal contractors throughout

the State honored us both with their enmity.



It was arranged among Mr. Conkling's supporters that,

at the great caucus which was to decide the matter, Mr.

Conkling's name should be presented by the member of

the assembly representing his district, Ellis Roberts, a

man of eminent character and ability, who, having begun

by taking high rank as a scholar at Yale, had become one

of the foremost editors of the State, and had afterward

distinguished himself not only in the State legislature, but

in Congress, and as the head of the independent treasury

in the city of New York.  The next question was as to the

speech seconding the nomination.  It was proposed that

Judge Folger should make it, but as he showed a curious

diffidence in the matter, and preferred to preside over the

caucus, the duty was tendered to me.



At the hour appointed the assembly hall of the old Capitol

was full; floor and galleries were crowded to suffocation. 

The candidates were duly presented, and, among

them, Mr. Conkling by Mr. Roberts.  I delayed my speech

somewhat.  The general course of it had been thought out

beforehand, but the phraseology and sequence of argument

were left to the occasion.  I felt deeply the importance

of nominating Mr. Conkling, and when the moment came

threw my heart into it.  I was in full health and vigor, and

soon felt that a very large part of the audience was with


me.  Presently I used the argument that the great State

of New York, which had been so long silent in the highest

councils of the Nation, demanded A VOICE.  Instantly the

vast majority of all present, in the galleries, in the lobbies,

and on the floor, rose in quick response to the sentiment

and cheered with all their might.  There had been no such

outburst in the whole course of the evening.  Evidently

this was the responsive chord, and having gone on with

the main line of my argument, I at last closed with the

same declaration in different form;--that our great

Commonwealth,--the most important in the whole sisterhood

of States,--which had been so long silent in the Senate,

WISHED TO BE HEARD, and that, therefore, I seconded the

nomination of Mr. Conkling.  Immediately the whole

house rose to this sentiment again and again, with even

greater evidence of approval than before; the voting began

and Mr. Conkling was finally nominated, if my memory

is correct, by a majority of three.



The moment the vote was declared the whole assembly

broke loose; the pressure being removed, there came a

general effervescence of good feeling, and I suddenly

found myself raised on the shoulders of stalwart men who

stood near, and rapidly carried over the heads of the

crowd, through many passages and corridors, my main

anxiety being to protect my head so that my brains might

not be knocked out against stairways and doorways;

but presently, when fairly dazed and bewildered, I was

borne into a room in the old Congress Hall Hotel, and

deposited safely in the presence of a gentleman standing

with his back to the fire, who at once extended his hand

to me most cordially, and to whom I said, ``God bless

you, Senator Conkling.  ``A most hearty response

followed, and so began my closer acquaintance with the

new senator.



Mr. Conkling's election followed as a thing of course,

and throughout the State there was general approval.



During this session of 1867 I found myself involved in

two rather curious struggles, and with no less a personage

than my colleague, Judge Folger.



As to the first of these I had long felt, and still feel, that

of all the weaknesses in our institutions, one of the most

serious is our laxity in the administration of the criminal

law.  No other civilized country, save possibly the lower

parts of Italy and Sicily, shows anything to approach the

number of unpunished homicides, in proportion to the

population, which are committed in sundry parts of our

own country, and indeed in our country taken as a whole. 

In no country is the deterrent effect of punishment so

vitiated by delay; in no country is so much facility given

to chicanery, to futile appeals, and to every possible means

of clearing men from the due penalty of high crime, and

especially the crime of murder.



It was in view of this fact that, acting on the advice of an

old and able judge whose experience in criminal practice

had been very large, I introduced into the Senate a

bill to improve the procedure in criminal cases.  The

judge just referred to had shown me the absurdities

arising from the fact that testimony in regard to character,

even in the case of professional criminals, was not

allowed save in rebuttal.  It was notorious that professional

criminals charged with high crimes, especially in

our large cities, frequently went free because, while the

testimony to the particular crime was not absolutely

overwhelming, testimony to their character as professional

criminals, which, in connection with the facts established,

would have been absolutely conclusive, could not be admitted. 

I therefore proposed that testimony as to character

in any criminal case might be introduced by the

prosecution if, after having been privately submitted to

the judge, he should decide that the ends of justice would

be furthered thereby.



The bill was referred to the Senate judiciary committee,

of which Judge Folger was chairman.  After it had lain

there some weeks and the judge had rather curtly answered

my questions as to when it would be reported, it

became clear to me that the committee had no intention of

reporting it at all, whereupon I introduced a resolution

requesting them to report it, at the earliest day possible,

for the consideration of the Senate, and this was passed

in spite of the opposition of the committee.  Many days

then passed; no report was made, and I therefore introduced

a resolution taking the bill out of the hands of the

committee and bringing it directly before the committee

of the whole.  This was most earnestly resisted by Judge

Folger and by his main associate on the committee, Henry

Murphy of Brooklyn.  On the other hand I had, to aid me,

Judge Lowe, also a lawyer of high standing, and indeed

all the lawyers in the body who were not upon the judiciary

committee.  The result was that my motion was

successful; the bill was taken from the committee and

immediately brought under discussion.



In reply to the adverse arguments of Judge Folger and

Mr. Murphy, which were to the effect that my bill was an

innovation upon the criminal law of the State, I pointed

out the fact that evidence as to the character of the person

charged with crime is often all-important; that in our

daily life we act upon that fact as the simplest dictate of

common sense; that if any senator present had his watch

stolen from his room he would be very slow to charge the

crime against the servant who was last seen in the room,

even under very suspicious circumstances; but if he found

that the servant had been discharged for theft from various

places previously, this would be more important than

any other circumstance.  I showed how safeguards which

had been devised in the middle ages to protect citizens

from the feudal lord were now used to aid criminals in

evading the law, and I ended by rather unjustly compar-

ing Judge Folger to the great Lord Chancellor Eldon, of

whom it was said that, despite his profound knowledge

of the law, ``no man ever did so much good as he

prevented.''  The result was that the bill was passed by the

Senate in spite of the judiciary committee.



During the continuance of the discussion Judge Folger

had remained in his usual seat, but immediately after the

passage of the bill he resumed his place as president of the

Senate.  He was evidently vexed, and in declaring the

Senate adjourned he brought the gavel down with a sort

of fling which caused it to fly out of his hand and fall in

front of his desk on the floor.  Fortunately it was after

midnight and few saw it; but there was a general feeling

of regret among us all that a man so highly respected

should have so lost his temper.  By common consent the

whole matter was hushed; no mention of it, so far as I

could learn, was made in the public press, and soon all

seemed forgotten.



Unfortunately it was remembered, and in a quarter

which brought upon Judge Folger one of the worst

disappointments of his life.



For, in the course of the following summer, the Constitutional

Convention of the State was to hold its session and

its presidency was justly considered a great honor.  Two

candidates were named, one being Judge Folger and the

other Mr. William A. Wheeler, then a member of Congress

and afterward Vice-President of the United States.  The

result of the canvas by the friends of both these gentlemen

seemed doubtful, when one morning there appeared in the

``New York Tribune,'' the most powerful organ of the

Republican party, one of Horace Greeley's most trenchant

articles.  It dwelt on the importance of the convention

in the history of the State, on the responsibility of its

members, on the characteristics which should mark its

presiding officer, and, as to this latter point, wound up

pungently by saying that it would be best to have a president

who, when he disagreed with members, did not throw

his gavel at them.  This shot took effect; it ran through

the State; people asked the meaning of it; various exaggerated

legends became current, one of them being that he

had thrown the gavel at me personally;--and Mr. Wheeler

became president of the convention.



But before the close of the session another matter had

come up which cooled still more the relations between

Judge Folger and myself.  For many sessions, year after

year, there had been before the legislature a bill for

establishing a canal connecting the interior lake system of the

State with Lake Ontario.  This was known as the Sodus

Canal Bill, and its main champion was a public-spirited

man from Judge Folger's own district.  In favor of the

canal various arguments were urged, one of them being

that it would enable the United States, while keeping

within its treaty obligations with Great Britain, to build

ships on these smaller lakes, which, in case of need, could

be passed through the canal into the great chain of lakes

extending from Lake Ontario to Lake Superior.  To this

it was replied that such an evasion of the treaty was not

especially creditable to those suggesting it, and that the

main purpose of the bill really was to create a vast water

power which should enure to the benefit of sundry gentlemen

in Judge Folger's district.



Up to this time Judge Folger seemed never to care

much for the bill, and I had never made any especial effort

against it; but when, just at the close of the session,

certain constituents of mine upon the Oswego River had

shown me that there was great danger in the proposed

canal to the water supply through the counties of Onondaga

and Oswego, I opposed the measure.  Thereupon

Judge Folger became more and more earnest in its favor,

and it soon became evident that all his power would be

used to pass it during the few remaining days of the

session.  By his influence it was pushed rapidly through

all its earlier stages, and at last came up before the

Senate.  It seemed sure to pass within ten minutes, when I

moved that the whole matter be referred to the approaching

Constitutional Convention, which was to begin its sessions

immediately after the adjournment of the legislature,

and Judge Folger having spoken against this motion, I

spoke in its favor and did what I have never done before

in my life and probably shall never do again--spoke

against time.  There was no ``previous question'' in the

Senate, no limitation as to the period during which a

member could discuss any measure, and, as the youngest

member in the body, I was in the full flush of youthful

strength.  I therefore announced my intention to present

some three hundred arguments in favor of referring the

whole matter to the State Constitutional Convention, those

arguments being based upon the especial fitness of its

three hundred members to decide the question, as shown

by the personal character and life history of each and

every one of them.  I then went on with this series of

biographies, beginning with that of Judge Folger himself,

and paying him most heartily and cordially every

tribute possible, including some of a humorous nature. 

Having given about half an hour to the judge, I then took

up sundry other members and kept on through the entire

morning.  I had the floor and no one could dispossess me. 

The lieutenant-governor, in the chair, General Stewart

Woodford, was perfectly just and fair, and although

Judge Folger and Mr. Murphy used all their legal acuteness

in devising some means of evading the rules, they

were in every case declared by the lieutenant-governor to

be out of order, and the floor was in every case reassigned

to me.  Meantime, the whole Senate, though anxious to

adjourn, entered into the spirit of the matter, various

members passing me up biographical notes on the members

of the convention, some of them very comical, and

presently the hall was crowded with members of the

assembly as well as senators, all cheering me on.  The

reason for this was very simple.  There had come to be

a general understanding of the case, namely, that Judge

Folger, by virtue of his great power and influence, was

trying in the last hours of the session to force through a

bill for the benefit of his district, and that I was simply

doing my best to prevent an injustice.  The result was

that I went on hour after hour with my series of biographies,

until at last Judge Folger himself sent me word

that if I would desist and allow the legislature to adjourn

he would make no further effort to carry the bill at that

session.  To this I instantly agreed; the bill was dropped

for that session and for all sessions: so far as I can learn

it has never reappeared.



Shortly after our final adjournment the Constitutional

Convention came together.  It was one of the best bodies

of the kind ever assembled in any State, as a list of its

members abundantly shows.  There was much work for

it, and most important of all was the reorganization of

the highest judicial body in the State--the Court of

Appeals--which had become hopelessly inadequate.



The two principal members of the convention from the

city of New York were Horace Greeley, editor of the

``Tribune,'' and William M. Evarts, afterward Attorney-

General, United States senator, and Secretary of State of

the United States.  Mr. Greeley was at first all-powerful. 

As has already been seen, he had been able to prevent

Judge Folger taking the presidency of the convention,

and for a few days he had everything his own way.  But

he soon proved so erratic a leader that his influence was

completely lost, and after a few sessions there was hardly

any member with less real power to influence the judgments

of his colleagues.



This was not for want of real ability in his speeches,

for at various times I heard him make, for and against

measures, arguments admirably pungent, forcible, and

far-reaching, but there seemed to be a universal feeling

that he was an unsafe guide.



Soon came a feature in his course which made matters

worse.  The members of the convention, many of them,

were men in large business and very anxious to have a

day or two each week for their own affairs.  Moreover,

during the first weeks of the session, while the main

matters coming before the convention were still in the hands

of committees, there was really not enough business ready

for the convention to occupy it through all the days of the

week, and consequently it adopted the plan, for the first

weeks at least, of adjourning from Friday night till Tuesday

morning.  This vexed Mr. Greeley sorely.  He insisted

that the convention ought to keep at its business

and finish it without any such weekly adjournments, and,

as his arguments to this effect did not prevail in the

convention, he began making them through the ``Tribune''

before the people of the State.  Soon his arguments

became acrid, and began undermining the convention at

every point.



As to Mr. Greeley's feeling regarding the weekly

adjournment, one curious thing was reported:  There was

a member from New York of a literary turn for whom the

great editor had done much in bringing his verses and

other productions before the public--a certain Mr. Duganne;

but it happened that, on one of the weekly motions

to adjourn, Mr. Duganne had voted in the affirmative, and,

as a result, Mr. Greeley, meeting him just afterward,

upbraided him in a manner which filled the rural bystanders

with consternation.  It was well known to those best

acquainted with the editor of the ``Tribune'' that, when

excited, he at times indulged in the most ingenious and

picturesque expletives, and some of Mr. Chauncey Depew's

best stories of that period pointed to this fact.  On this

occasion Mr. Greeley really outdid himself, and the

result was that the country members, who up to that

time had regarded him with awe as the representative of

the highest possible morality in public and private life,

were greatly dismayed, and in various parts of the room

they were heard expressing their amazement, and saying

to each other in awe-stricken tones:  ``Why! Greeley

swears!''



Ere long Mr. Greeley was taking, almost daily in the

``Tribune,'' steady ground against the doings of his

colleagues.  Lesser newspapers followed with no end of

cheap and easy denunciation, and the result was that the

convention became thoroughly, though unjustly, discredited

throughout the State, and indeed throughout the

country.  A curious proof of this met me.  Being at

Cambridge, Massachusetts, I passed an evening with Governor

Washburn, one of the most thoughtful and valuable

public men of that period.  In the course of our conversation

he said:  ``Mr. White, it is really sad to hear of the

doings at your Albany convention.  I can remember your

constitutional convention of 1846, and when I compare

this convention with that, it grieves me.''  My answer

was:  ``Governor Washburn, you are utterly mistaken:

there has never been a constitutional convention in the

State of New York, not even that you name, which has

contained so many men of the highest ability and character

as the one now in session, and none which has really

done better work.  I am not a member of the body and

can say this in its behalf.''  At this he expressed his

amazement, and pointed to the ``Tribune'' in confirmation

of his own position.  I then stated the case to him, and, I

think, alleviated his distress.



But as the sessions of the convention drew to a close and

the value of its work began to be clearly understood,

Greeley's nobler qualities, his real truthfulness and public

spirit began to assert themselves, and more than once he

showed practical shrewdness and insight.  Going into

convention one morning, I found the question under

discussion to be the election of the secretary of state,

attorney-general, and others of the governor's cabinet, whose

appointment under the older constitutions was wisely

left to the governor, but who, for twenty years, had

been elected by the people.  There was a wide-spread feeling

that the old system was wiser, and that the new had

by no means justified itself; in fact, that by fastening on

the governor the responsibility for his cabinet, the State

is likely to secure better men than when their choice is

left to the hurly-burly of intrigue and prejudice in a

nominating convention.



The main argument made by those who opposed such a

return to the old, better order of things was that the

people would not like it and would be inclined to vote

down the new constitution on account of it.



In reply to this, Mr. Greeley arose and made a most

admirable short speech ending with these words, given in

his rapid falsetto, with a sort of snap that made the whole

seem like one word:  ``When-the-people-take-up-their-

ballots-they-want-to-see-who-is-to-be-governor: that's-all-

they-care-about: they-don't-want-to-read-a-whole-chapter-

of-the-Bible-on-their-ballots.''



Unfortunately, the majority dared not risk the popular

ratification of the new constitution, and so this amendment

was lost.



No doubt Mr. Greeley was mainly responsible for this

condition of things; his impatience with the convention, as

shown by his articles in the ``Tribune,'' had been caught

by the people of the State.



The long discussions were very irksome to him, and one

day I mildly expostulated with him on account of some

of his utterances against the much speaking of his colleagues,

and said:  ``After all, Mr. Greeley, is n't it a pretty

good thing to have a lot of the best men in the State come

together every twenty years and thoroughly discuss the

whole constitution, to see what improvements can be

made; and is not the familiarity with the constitution and

interest in it thus aroused among the people at large worth

all the fatigue arising from long speeches?''  ``Well,

perhaps so,'' he said, but he immediately began to grumble

and finally to storm in a comical way against some of his

colleagues who, it must be confessed, were tiresome.  Still

he became interested more and more in the work, and as

the new constitution emerged from the committees and

public debates, he evidently saw that it was a great gain

to the State, and now did his best through the ``Tribune''

to undo what he had been doing.  He wrote editorials

praising the work of the convention and urging that it be

adopted.  But all in vain: the unfavorable impression had

been too widely and deeply made, and the result was that

the new constitution, when submitted to the people, was

ignominiously voted down, and the whole summer's work

of the convention went for nothing.  Later, however, a

portion of it was rescued and put into force through the

agency of a ``Constitutional Commission,'' a small body

of first-rate men who sat at Albany, and whose main

conclusions were finally adopted in the shape of amendments

to the old constitution.  There was, none the less, a

wretched loss to the State.



During the summer of 1867 I was completely immersed

in the duties of my new position at Cornell University;

going through various institutions in New England and

the Western States to note the workings of their technical

departments; visiting Ithaca to consult with Mr. Cornell

and to look over plans for buildings, and credentials for

professorships, or, shut up in my own study at Syracuse,

or in the cabins of Cayuga Lake steamers, drawing up

schemes of university organization, so that my political

life soon seemed ages behind me.



While on a visit to Harvard, I was invited by Agassiz

to pass a day with him at Nahant in order to discuss

methods and men.  He entered into the matter very

earnestly, agreed to give us an extended course of

lectures, which he afterward did, and aided us in many

ways.  One remark of his surprised me.  I had asked him

to name men, and he had taken much pains to do so, when

suddenly he turned to me abruptly and said:  ``Who is to

be your professor of moral philosophy?  That is by far

the most important matter in your whole organization.'' 

It seemed strange that one who had been honored by the

whole world as probably the foremost man in natural

science then living, and who had been denounced by many

exceedingly orthodox people as an enemy of religion,

should take this view of the new faculty, but it showed

how deeply and sincerely religious he was.  I soon

reassured him on the point he had raised, and then went on

with the discussion of scientific men, methods, and equipments.



I was also asked by the poet Longfellow to pass a day

with him at his beautiful Nahant cottage in order to discuss

certain candidates and methods in literature.  Nothing

could be more delightful than his talk as we sat

together on the veranda looking out over the sea, with the

gilded dome of the State House, which he pointed out to

me as ``The Hub,'' in the dim distance.  One question of

his amused me much.  We were discussing certain recent

events in which Mr. Horace Greeley had played an

important part, and after alluding to Mr. Greeley's course

during the War, he turned his eyes fully but mildly

upon me and said slowly and solemnly:  ``Mr. White, don't

you think Mr. Greeley a very useless sort of man?''  The

question struck me at first as exceedingly comical; for, I

thought, ``Imagine Mr. Greeley, who thinks himself, and

with reason, a useful man if there ever was one, and whose

whole life has been devoted to what he has thought of the

highest and most direct use to his fellow-men, hearing this

question put in a dreamy way by a poet,--a writer of

verse,--probably the last man in America whom Mr.

Greeley would consider `useful.' ''  But my old admiration

for the great editor came back in a strong tide, and if I

was ever eloquent it was in showing Mr. Longfellow how

great, how real, how sincere, and in the highest degree

how useful Mr. Greeley had been.



Another man of note whom I met in those days was

Judge Rockwood Hoar, afterward named by General

Grant Attorney-General of the United States, noted as a

profound lawyer of pungent wit and charming humor, the

delight of his friends and the terror of his enemies.  I

saw him first at Harvard during a competition for the

Boylston prize at which we were fellow-judges.  All the

speaking was good, some of it admirable; but the especially

remarkable pieces were two.  First of these was a

recital of Washington Irving's ``Broken Heart,'' by an

undergraduate from the British provinces, Robert Alder

McLeod.  Nothing could be more simple and perfect in its

way; nothing more free from any effort at orating; all

was in the most quiet and natural manner possible.  The

second piece was a rendering of Poe's ``Bells,'' and was

a most amazing declamation, the different sorts of bells

being indicated by changes of voice ranging from basso

profondo to the highest falsetto, and the feelings aroused

in the orator being indicated by modulations which must

have cost him months of practice.



The contest being ended, and the committee having

retired to make their award, various members expressed an

opinion in favor of Mr. McLeod's quiet recital, when

Judge Hoar, who had seemed up to that moment immersed

in thought, seemed suddenly to awake, and said:  ``If I

had a son who spoke that bell piece in that style I believe

I'd choke him.''  The vote was unanimously in favor of

Mr. McLeod, and then came out a curious fact.  Having

noticed that he bore an empty sleeve, I learned from

Professor Peabody that he had lost his arm while fighting on

the Confederate side in our Civil War, and that he was a

man of remarkably fine scholarship and noble character. 

He afterward became an instructor at Harvard, but died

early.



During the following autumn, in spite of my absorption

in university interests, I was elected a delegate to the State

Convention, and in October made a few political speeches,

the most important being at Clinton, the site of Hamilton

College.  This was done at the special request of Senator

Conkling, and on my way I passed a day with him at

Utica, taking a long drive through the adjacent country. 

Never was he more charming.  The bitter and sarcastic

mood seemed to have dropped off him; the overbearing

manner had left no traces; he was full of delightful

reminiscences and it was a day to be remembered.



I also spoke at various other places and, last of all, at

Clifton Springs, but received there a rebuff which was not

without its uses.



I had thought my speeches successful; but at the latter

place, taking the cars next morning, I heard a dialogue

between two railway employees, as follows:



``Bill, did you go to the meetin' last night?''  ``Yes.''

``How was it?''  ``It wa'n't no meetin', leastwise no P'LITICAL

meetin'; there wa'n't nothin' in it fur the boys; it was

only one of them scientific college purfessors lecturin'.'' 

And so I sped homeward, pondering on many things, but

strengthened, by this homely criticism, in my determination

to give my efforts henceforth to the new university.







CHAPTER IX



GENERAL GRANT AND SANTO DOMINGO--1868-1871





During the two or three years following my senatorial

term, work in the founding and building of Cornell

University was so engrossing that there was little

time for any effort which could be called political.  In

the early spring of 1868 I went to Europe to examine

institutions for scientific and technological instruction,

and to secure professors and equipment, and during about

six months I visited a great number of such schools,

especially those in agriculture, mechanical, civil, and mining

engineering and the like in England, France, Germany,

and Italy; bought largely of books and apparatus,

discussed the problems at issue with Europeans who seemed

likely to know most about them, secured sundry professors,

and returned in September just in time to take

part in the opening of Cornell University and be inaugurated

as its first president.  Of all this I shall speak more

in detail hereafter.



There was no especial temptation to activity in the

political campaign of that year; for the election of General

Grant was sure, and my main memory of the period is a

visit to Auburn to hear Mr. Seward.



It had been his wont for many years, when he came

home to cast his vote, to meet his neighbors on the eve of

the election and give his views of the situation and of its

resultant duties.  These occasions had come to be anticipated

with the deepest interest by the whole region round

about, and what had begun as a little gathering of neighors 

had now become such an assembly that the largest

hall in the place was crowded with voters of all parties.



But this year came a disappointment.  Although the

contest was between General Grant,--who on various decisive

battle-fields had done everything to save the administration

of which Mr. Seward had been a leading member,

--and on the other side, Governor Horatio Seymour, who

had done all in his power to wreck it, Mr. Seward devoted

his speech to optimistic generalities, hardly alluding to

the candidates, and leaving the general impression that

one side was just as worthy of support as the other.



The speech was an unfortunate ending of Mr. Seward's

career.  It was not surprising that some of his old

admirers bitterly resented it, and a remark by Mr. Cornell

some time afterward indicated much.  We were arranging

together a program for the approaching annual

commencement when I suggested for the main address Mr.

Seward.  Mr. Cornell had been one of Mr. Seward's

lifelong supporters, but he received this proposal coldly,

pondered it for a few moments silently, and then said

dryly, ``Perhaps you are right, but if you call him you

will show to our students the deadest man that ain't buried

in the State of New York.''  So, to my regret, was lost the

last chance to bring the old statesman to Cornell.  I have

always regretted this loss; his presence would have given

a true consecration to the new institution.  A career like

his should not be judged by its little defects and lapses,

and this I felt even more deeply on receiving, some time

after his death, the fifth volume of his published works,

which was largely made up of his despatches and other

papers written during the war.  When they were first

published in the newspapers, I often thought them long

and was impatient at their optimism, but now, when I read

them all together, saw in them the efforts made by the

heroic old man to keep the hands of European powers

off us while we were restoring the Union, and noted the

desperation with which he fought, the encouragement

which he infused into our diplomatic representatives

abroad, and his struggle, almost against fate, in the time

of our reverses, I was fascinated.  The book had arrived

early in the evening, and next morning found me still

seated in my library chair completely absorbed in it.



In the spring of the year 1870, while as usual in the

thick of university work, I was again drawn for a moment

into the current of New York politics.  The long wished

for amendment of the State constitution, putting our highest

tribunal, the Court of Appeals, on a better footing

than it had ever been before, making it more adequate, the

term longer, and the salaries higher, had been passed, and

judges were to be chosen at the next election.  Each of the

two great parties was entitled to an equal number of

judges, and I was requested to go to the approaching

nominating convention at Rochester in order to present

the name of my old friend and neighbor, Charles Andrews.



It was a most honorable duty, no man could have

desired a better candidate, and I gladly accepted the

mandate.  Although it was one of the most staid and dignified

bodies of the sort which has ever met in the State, it had

as a preface a pleasant farce.



As usual, the seething cauldron of New York City politics

had thrown to the surface some troublesome delegates,

and among them was one long famed as a ``Tammany Republican.''



Our first business was the choice of a president for the

convention, and, as it had been decided by the State committee

to present for that office the name of one of the most

respected judges in the State, the Honorable Platt Potter,

of Schenectady, it was naturally expected that some member

of the regular organization would present his name

in a dignified speech.  But hardly had the chairman of

the State committee called the convention to order when

the aforesaid Tammany Republican, having heard that

Judge Potter was to be elected, thought evidently that

he could gain recognition and applause by being the

first to present his name.  He therefore rushed for-

ward, and almost before the chairman had declared the

convention opened, cried out:  ``Mr. Chairman, I move

you, sir, that the Honorable `Pot Platter' be made

president of this convention.''  A scream of laughter went

up from all parts of the house, and in an instant a gentleman

rose and moved to amend by making the name ``Platt

Potter.''  This was carried, and the proposer of the

original motion retired crestfallen to his seat.



I had the honor of presenting Mr. Andrews's name. 

He was nominated and elected triumphantly, and so began

the career of one of the best judges that New York

has ever had on its highest court, who has also for many

years occupied, with the respect and esteem of the State,

the position of chief justice.



The convention then went on to nominate other judges,

--nomination being equivalent to election,--but when the

last name was reached there came a close contest.  An old

friend informed me that Judge Folger, my former colleague

in the Senate and since that assistant treasurer of

the United States in the city of New York, was exceedingly

anxious to escape from this latter position, and

desired greatly the nomination to a judgeship on the Court

of Appeals.



I decided at once to do what was possible to secure

Judge Folger's nomination, though our personal relations

were very unsatisfactory.  Owing to our two conflicts at

the close of our senatorial term above referred to, and

to another case where I thought he had treated me

unjustly, we had never exchanged a word since I had left

the State Senate; and though we met each other from

time to time on the board of Cornell University trustees,

we passed each other in silence.  Our old friendship, which

had been very dear to me, seemed forever broken, but I

felt deeply that the fault was not mine.  At the same time

I recognized the fact that Judge Folger was not especially

adapted to the position of assistant treasurer of the United

States, and was admirably fitted for the position of judge

in the Court of Appeals.  I therefore did everything possible 

to induce one or two of the delegations with which I

had some influence to vote for him, dwelling especially

upon his former judgeship, his long acquaintance with the

legislation of the State, and his high character, and at last

he was elected by a slight majority.



The convention having adjourned, I was on my way to

the train when I was met by Judge Folger, who had just

arrived.  He put out his hand and greeted me most heartily,

showing very deep feeling as he expressed his regret

over our estrangement.  Of course I was glad that bygones

were to be bygones, and that our old relations were

restored.  He became a most excellent judge, and finally

chief justice of the State, which position he left to become

Secretary of the Treasury.



To the political cataclysm which ended his public activity

and doubtless hastened his death, I refer elsewhere. 

As long as he lived our friendly relations continued, and

this has been to me ever since a great satisfaction.



In this same year, 1870, occurred my first extended

conversation with General Grant.  At my earlier meeting with

him when he was with President Johnson in Albany, I had

merely been stiffly presented to him, and we had exchanged

a few commonplaces; but I was now invited to his

cottage at Long Branch and enjoyed a long and pleasant

talk with him.  Its main subject was the Franco-German

War then going on, and his sympathies were evidently

with Germany.  His comments on the war were prophetic. 

There was nothing dogmatic in them; nothing could be

more simple and modest than his manner and utterance,

but there was a clearness and quiet force in them which

impressed me greatly.  He was the first great general I

had ever seen, and I was strongly reminded of his mingled

diffidence and mastery when, some years afterward, I

talked with Moltke in Berlin.



Another experience of that summer dwells in my memory. 

I was staying, during the first week of September,

with my dear old friend, Dr. Henry M. Field, at Stockbridge,

in the Berkshire Mountains of Massachusetts, and

had the good fortune, at the house of his brother, the

eminent jurist, David Dudley Field, to pass a rainy evening

in company with Mr. Burton Harrison, who, after a

distinguished career at Yale, had been the private secretary

of Jefferson Davis, president of the Southern Confederacy. 

On that evening a storm had kept away all but a

few of us, and Mr. Harrison yielded to our entreaties to

give us an account of Mr. Davis's flight at the surrender of

Richmond, from the time when he quietly left his pew in

St. Paul's Church to that of his arrest by United States

soldiers.  The story was most vivid, and Mr. Harrison, as

an eye witness, told it simply and admirably.  There had

already grown out of this flight of Mr. Davis a most

luxuriant tangle of myth and legend, and it had come to

be generally believed that the Confederate president had

at last endeavored to shield himself behind the women of

his household; that when arrested he was trying to escape

in the attire of his wife, including a hooped skirt and a

bonnet, and that he was betrayed by an incautious display

of his military boots beneath his wife's flounces.  The

simple fact was that, having separated from his family

party, and seeking escape to the coast or mountains, he

was again and again led by his affection for his family to

return to them, his fears for them overcoming all care

for himself; and that, as he was suffering from neuralgia,

he wore over his clothing, to guard him from the incessant

rain, Mrs. Davis' waterproof cloak.  Out of this grew the

legend which found expression in jubilant newspaper

articles, songs, and caricatures.



This reminds me that some years later, my old college

friend, Colonel William Preston Johnston, president of

Tulane University, told me a story which throws light

upon that collapse of the Confederacy.  Colonel Johnston

was at that period the military secretary of President

Davis, and, as the catastrophe approached, was much

vexed at the interminable debates in the Confederate

Congress.  Among the subjects of these discussions was the

great seal of the Confederacy.  It had been decided to

adopt for this purpose a relief representing Crawford's

statue of Washington at Richmond, with the Southern

statesmen and soldiers surrounding it; but though all

agreed that Washington, in his Continental costume, and

holding in his hand his cocked hat, should retain the

central position, there were many differences of opinion as

to the surrounding portraits, the result being that motions

were made to strike out this or that revolutionary hero

from one State and to replace him by another from another

State, thus giving rise to lengthy eulogies of these

various personages, so that the whole thing resembled the

discussions in metaphysical theology by the Byzantines

at the time when the Turks were forcing their way

through the walls of Constantinople.  One day, just

before the final catastrophe, Mr. Judah Benjamin, formerly

United States senator, but at that time the Confederate

secretary of state, passed through Colonel Johnston's

office, and the following dialogue took place.



Colonel Johnston:  ``What are they doing in the Senate

and House, Mr. Secretary?''



Mr. Benjamin:  ``Oh, simply debating the Confederate

seal, moving to strike out this man and to insert that.''



Colonel Johnston:  ``Do you know what motion I would

make if I were a member?''



Mr. Benjamin:  ``No, what would you move?''



Colonel Johnston:  ``I would move to strike out from

the seal everything except the cocked hat.''



Colonel Johnston was right; the Confederacy was

``knocked into a cocked hat'' a few days afterward.



In the autumn of that year, September, 1870, I was sent

as a delegate to the State Republican Convention, and

presented as a candidate for the lieutenant-governorship a

man who had served the State admirably in the National

Congress and in the State legislature as well as in great

business operations, Mr. DeWitt Littlejohn of Oswego.  I

did this on the part of sundry gentlemen who were anxious

to save the Republican ticket, which had at its head my

old friend General Woodford, but though I was successful

in securing Mr. Littlejohn's nomination, he soon

afterward declined, and defeat followed in November.



The only part which I continued to take in State politics

was in writing letters and in speaking, on sundry social

occasions of a political character, in behalf of harmony

between the two factions which were now becoming more

and more bitter.  At first I seemed to have some success,

but before long it became clear that the current was too

strong and that the bitterness of faction was to prevail.  I

am so constituted that factious thought and effort

dishearten and disgust me.  At many periods of my life

I have acted as a ``buffer'' between conflicting cliques

and factions, generally to some purpose; now it was

otherwise.  But, as Kipling says, ``that is another story.''



The hard work and serious responsibilities brought

upon me by the new university had greatly increased. 

They had worn deeply upon me when, in the winter of

1870-71, came an event which drew me out of my university

life for a time and gave me a much needed change:

--I was sent by the President as one of the three

commissioners to Santo Domingo to study questions relating

to the annexation of the Spanish part of that island which

was then proposed, and to report thereupon to Congress.



While in Washington at this time I saw much of President

Grant, Mr. Sumner, and various other men who were

then leading in public affairs, but some account of them

will be given in my reminiscences of the Santo Domingo

expedition.



I trust that it may be allowed me here to recall an

incident which ought to have been given in a preceding

chapter.  During one of my earlier visits to the National

Capital, I made the acquaintance of Senator McDougal. 

His distorted genius had evidently so dazzled his fellow-

citizens of California that, in spite of his defects, they had

sent him to the highest council of the Nation.  He was a

martyr to conviviality, and when more or less under

the sway of it, had strange ideas and quaint ways of

expressing them.  His talk recalled to me a time in my child-

hood when, having found a knob of glass, twisted, striated

with different colors, and filled with air bubbles, I enjoyed

looking at the landscape through it.  Everything became

grotesquely transfigured.  A cabbage in the foreground

became opalescent, and an ear of corn a mass of jewels,

but the whole atmosphere above and beyond was lurid, and

the chimneys and church spires were topsy-turvy.



The only other person whose talk ever produced an

impression of this sort on me was Tolstoy, and he will be

discussed in another chapter.



McDougal's peculiarity made him at last unbearable;

so much so that the Senate was obliged to take measures

against him.  His speech in his own defense showed the

working of his mind, and one passage most of all.  It

remains probably the best defense of drunkenness ever

made, and it ran as follows:



``Mr. President,--I pity the man who has never viewed

the affairs of this world, save from the poor, low, miserable

plane of ordinary sobriety.''



My absence in the West Indies covered the first three

months of the year 1871, and then the commission returned

to Washington and made its report; but regarding

this I shall speak at length in the chapter of my diplomatic

experiences, devoted to the Santo Domingo question.







CHAPTER X



THE GREELEY CAMPAIGN--1872



Having finished my duties on the Santo Domingo

Commission, I returned to the University in May

of 1871, devoted myself again to my duties as president

and professor, and, in the mass of arrears which had

accumulated, found ample occupation.  I also delivered

various addresses at universities, colleges, and elsewhere,

keeping as remote from politics as possible.



In June, visiting New York in order to take part in a

dinner given by various journalists and others to my

classmate and old friend, George Washburne Smalley, at

that time the London correspondent of the ``New York

Tribune,'' I met, for the first time, Colonel John Hay,

who was in the full tide of his brilliant literary career and

who is, as I write this, Secretary of State of the United

States.  His clear, thoughtful talk strongly impressed me,

but the most curious circumstance connected with the affair

was that several of us on the way to Delmonico's

stopped for a time to observe the public reception given to

Mr. Horace Greeley on his return from a tour through the

Southern States.  Mr. Greeley, undoubtedly from the

purest personal and patriotic motives, had, with other

men of high standing, including Gerrit Smith, attached

his name to the bail bond of Jefferson Davis, which

released the ex-president of the Confederacy from prison,

and, in fact, freed him entirely from anything like

punishment for treason.  I have always admired Mr. Greeley's

honesty and courage in doing this.  Doubtless, too, an

equally patriotic and honest desire to aid in bringing

North and South together after the war led him to take

an extensive tour through sundry Southern States.  He

had just returned from this tour and this reception was

given him in consequence.



It had already been noised abroad that there was a

movement on foot to make him a candidate for the Presidency,

and many who knew the characteristics of the man,

even those who, like myself, had been greatly influenced

by him and regarded him as by far the foremost editorial

writer that our country had ever produced, looked upon

this idea with incredulity.  For of all patriotic men in

the entire country who had touched public affairs Horace

Greeley seemed the most eminently unfit for executive

duties.  He was notoriously, in business matters, the

easy prey of many who happened to get access to him;--

the ``long-haired men and short-haired women'' of the

country seemed at times to have him entirely under their

sway; his hard-earned money, greatly needed by himself

and his family, was lavished upon ne'er-do-weels and cast

into all sorts of impracticable schemes.  He made loans

to the discarded son of the richest man whom the United

States had at that time produced, and in every way

showed himself an utterly incompetent judge of men.  It

was a curious fact that lofty as were his purposes, and

noble as were his main characteristics, the best men of

the State--men like Seward, Weed, Judge Folger, Senator

Andrews, General Leavenworth, Elbridge Spaulding, and

other really thoughtful, solid, substantial advisers of

the Republican party--were disliked by him, and yet no

other reason could be assigned than this:--that while they

all admired him as a writer, they could not be induced to

pretend that they considered him fit for high executive

office, either in the State or Nation.  On the other hand,

so far as politics were concerned, his affections seemed to

be lavished on politicians who flattered and coddled him. 

Of this the rise of Governor Fenton was a striking

example.  Doubtless there were exceptions to this rule, but

it was the rule nevertheless.  This was clearly and indeed

comically shown at the reception given him in Union

Square on the evening referred to.  Mr. Greeley appeared

at a front window of a house on the Broadway side and

came out upon a temporary platform.  His appearance

is deeply stamped upon my memory.  He was in a rather

slouchy evening dress, his white hair thrown back off his

splendid forehead, and his broad, smooth, kindly features

as serene as the face of a big, well-washed baby.



There was in his appearance something at the same time

na<i:>ve and impressive, and the simplicity of it was

increased by a bouquet, huge and gorgeous, which some

admirer had attached to his coat, and which forced upon

the mind of a reflective observer the idea of a victim

adorned for sacrifice.



He gave scant attention to his audience in the way of

ceremonial greeting, and plunged at once into his subject;

--beginning in a high, piping, falsetto voice which, for a

few moments, was almost painful.  But the value of his

matter soon overcame the defects of his manner; the

speech was in his best vein; it struck me as the best, on the

whole, I had ever heard him make, and that is saying

much.  Holding in his hands a little package of

cards on which notes were jotted down, he occasionally

cast his eyes upon them, but he evidently trusted to the

inspiration of the hour for his phrasing, and his trust was

not misplaced.  I never heard a more simple, strong,

lucid use of the English language than was his on that

occasion.  The speech was a very noble plea for the restoration

of good feeling between North and South, with an

effort to show that the distrust felt by the South toward

the North was natural.  In the course of it he said in

substance:



``Fellow Citizens:  The people of the South have much

reason to distrust us.  We have sent among them during

the war and since the war, to govern them, to hold office

among them, and to eat out their substance, a number of

worthless adventurers whom they call ``carpet-baggers.'' 

These emissaries of ours pretend to be patriotic and pious;

they pull long faces and say `Let us pray'; but they spell

it p-r-E-y.  The people of the South hate them, and they

ought to hate them.''



At this we in the audience looked at each other in

amazement; for, standing close beside Mr. Greeley, at

that very moment, most obsequiously, was perhaps the

worst ``carpet-bagger'' ever sent into the South; a man

who had literally been sloughed off by both parties;--

who, having been become an unbearable nuisance in New

York politics, had been ``unloaded'' by Mr. Lincoln, in an

ill-inspired moment, upon the hapless South, and who was

now trying to find new pasture.



But this was not the most comical thing; for Mr.

Greeley in substance continued as follows:



``Fellow Citizens:  You know how it is yourselves. 

There are men who go to your own State Capitol, nominally

as legislators or advisers, but really to plunder and

steal.  These men in the Northern States correspond to the

`carpet-baggers' in the Southern States, and you hate

them and you ought to hate them.''  Thus speaking, Mr.

Greeley poured out the vials of his wrath against all this

class of people; blissfully unconscious of the fact that on

the other side of him stood the most notorious and corrupt

lobbyist who had been known in Albany for years;--

a man who had been chased out of that city by the sheriff

for attempted bribery, had been obliged to remain for a

considerable time in hiding to avoid criminal charges of

exerting corrupt influence on legislation, and whom both

political parties naturally disowned.  Comical as all this

was, it was pathetic to see a man like Greeley in such a

cave of Adullam.



During this summer of 1871 occurred the death of

one of my dearest friends, a man who had exercised a

most happy influence over my opinions and who had

contributed much to the progress of anti-slavery ideas in

New England and New York.  This was the Rev.

Samuel Joseph May, pastor of the Unitarian Church in

Syracuse, a friend and associate of Emerson, Garrison,

Phillips, Gerrit Smith, and one of the noblest, truest, and

most beautiful characters I have ever known.



Having seen the end of slavery, and being about eighty

years of age, he felt deeply that his work was done, and

thenceforward declared that he was happy in the idea

that his life on this planet was soon to end.  I have never

seen, save in the case of the Hicksite Quaker at Ann

Arbor, referred to elsewhere, such a living faith in the

reality of another world.  Again and again Mr. May said

to me in the most cheerful way imaginable, ``I am as much

convinced of the existence of a future state as of these

scenes about me, and, to tell you the truth, now that my

work here is ended, I am becoming very curious to know

what the next stage of existence is like.''  On the afternoon

of the 1st of July I paid him a visit, found him much

wearied by a troublesome chronic complaint, but contented,

cheerful, peaceful as ever.



Above him as he lay in his bed was a portrait which I

had formerly seen in his parlor.  Thereby hung a curious

tale.  Years before, at the very beginning of Mr. May's

career, he had been a teacher in the town of Canterbury,

Connecticut, when Miss Prudence Crandall was persecuted,

arrested, and imprisoned for teaching colored children. 

Mr. May had taken up her case earnestly, and, with the aid

of Mr. Lafayette Foster, afterward president of the United

States Senate, had fought it out until the enemies of Miss

Crandall were beaten.  As a memorial of this activity of

his, Mr. May received this large, well painted portrait of

Miss Crandall, and it was one of his most valued possessions.



On the afternoon referred to, after talking about

various other matters most cheerfully, and after I had told

him that we could not spare him yet, that we needed him at

least ten years longer, he laughingly said, ``Can't you

compromise on one year?''  ``No,'' I said, ``nothing less

than ten years.  ``Thereupon he laughed pleasantly, called

his daughter, Mrs. Wilkinson, and said, ``Remember;

when I am gone this portrait of Prudence Crandall is to

go to Andrew White for Cornell University, where my

anti-slavery books already are.''  As I left him, both of

us were in the most cheerful mood, he appearing better

than during some weeks previous.  Next morning I

learned that he had died during the night.  The portrait

of Miss Crandall now hangs in the Cornell University Library.



My summer was given up partly to recreation mingled

with duties of various sorts, including an address in honor

of President Woolsey at the Alumni dinner at Yale and

another at the laying of the corner stone of Syracuse

University.



Noteworthy at this period was a dinner with Longfellow

at Cambridge, and I recall vividly his showing me

various places in the Craigie house connected with interesting

passages in the life of Washington when he occupied it.



Early in the autumn, while thus engrossed in everything

but political matters, I received a letter from my

friend Mr. A. B. Cornell, a most energetic and efficient

man in State and national politics, a devoted supporter

of General Grant and Senator Conkling, and afterward

governor of the State of New York, asking me if I would

go to the approaching State convention and accept its

presidency.  I wrote him in return expressing my reluctance,

dwelling upon the duties pressing upon me in connection

with the university, and asking to be excused.  In

return came a very earnest letter insisting on the

importance of the convention in keeping the Republican party

together, and in preventing its being split into factions

before the approaching presidential election.  I had, on

all occasions, and especially at various social gatherings

at which political leaders were present, in New York and

elsewhere, urged the importance of throwing aside all

factious spirit and harmonizing the party in view of the

coming election, and to this Mr. Cornell referred very

earnestly.  As a consequence I wrote him that if the 

delegates from New York opposed to General Grant could be

admitted to the convention on equal terms with those who

favored him, and if he, Mr. Cornell, and the other managers

of the Grant wing of the party would agree that the

anti-Grant forces should receive full and fair representation

on the various committees, I would accept the presidency

of the convention in the interest of peace between

the factions, and would do my best to harmonize the differing

interests in the party, but that otherwise I would not

consent to be a member of the convention.  In his answer

Mr. Cornell fully agreed to this, and I have every reason

to believe, indeed to know, that his agreement was kept. 

The day of the convention having arrived (September 27,

1871), Mr. Cornell, as chairman of the Republican State

committee, called the assemblage to order, and after a

somewhat angry clash with the opponents of the administration,

nominated me to the chairmanship of the convention.



By a freak of political fortune I was separated in this

contest from my old friend Chauncey M. Depew; but

though on different sides of the question at issue, we sat

together chatting pleasantly as the vote went on, neither

of us, I think, very anxious regarding it, and when the

election was decided in my favor he was one of those who,

under instructions from the temporary chairman, very

courteously conducted me to the chair.  It was an immense

assemblage, and from the first it was evident that there

were very turbulent elements in it.  Hardly, indeed, had

I taken my seat, when the chief of the Syracuse police

informed me that there were gathered near the platform

a large body of Tammany roughs who had come from New

York expressly to interfere with the convention, just as

a few years before they had interfered in the same place

with the convention of their own party, seriously wounding

its regular chairman; but that I need have no alarm

at any demonstration they might make; that the police

were fully warned and able to meet the adversary.



In my opening speech I made an earnest plea for peace

among the various factions of the party, and especially

between those who favored and those who opposed the

administration; this plea was received with kindness, and

shortly afterward came the appointment of committees. 

Of course, like every other president of such a body, I

had to rely on the standing State committee.  Hardly one

man in a thousand coming to the presidency of a State

convention knows enough of the individual leaders of politics

in all the various localities to distinguish between their

shades of opinion.  It was certainly impossible for me to

know all those who, in the various counties of the State,

favored General Grant and those who disliked him.  Like

every other president of a convention, probably without

an exception, from the beginning to the present hour, I

received the list of the convention committees from the

State committee which represented the party, and I received

this list, not only with implied, but express assurances

that the agreement under which I had taken the

chairmanship had been complied with;--namely, that the

list represented fairly the two wings of the party in

convention, and that both the Grant and the anti-Grant

delegations from New York city were to be admitted on equal

terms.



I had no reason then, and have no reason now, to believe

that the State committee abused my confidence.  I feel sure

now, as I felt sure then, that the committee named by me

fairly represented the two wings of the party; but after

their appointment it was perfectly evident that this did

not propitiate the anti-administration wing.  They were

deeply angered against the administration by the fact that

General Grant had taken as his adviser in regard to New

York patronage and politics Senator Conkling rather than

Senator Fenton.  Doubtless Senator Conkling's manner

in dealing with those opposed to him had made many

enemies who, by milder methods, might have been brought

to the support of the administration.  At any rate, it was

soon clear that the anti-administration forces, recognizing

their inferiority in point of numbers, were determined to

secede.  This, indeed, was soon formally announced by one

of their leaders; but as they still continued after this

declaration to take part in the discussions, the point of order

was raised that, having formally declared their intention

of leaving the convention, they were no longer entitled to

take part in its deliberations.  This point I ruled out,

declaring that I could not consider the anti-administration

wing as outside the convention until they had left it.  The

debates grew more and more bitter, Mr. Conkling making,

late at night, a powerful speech which rallied the forces of

the administration and brought them victory.  The anti-

administration delegates now left the convention, but before

they did so one of them rose and eloquently tendered

to me as president the thanks of his associates for my

impartiality, saying that it contrasted most honorably with

the treatment they had received from certain other members

of the convention.  But shortly after leaving they

held a meeting in another place, and, having evidently

made up their minds that they must declare war against

everybody who remained in the convention, they

denounced us all alike, and the same gentleman who had

made the speech thanking me for my fairness, and who

was very eminent among those who were known as ``Tammany

Republicans,'' now made a most violent harangue

in which he declared that a man who conducted himself

as I had done, and who remained in such an infamous

convention, or had anything to do with it, was ``utterly

unfit to be an instructor of youth.''



Similar attacks continued to appear in the anti-

administration papers for a considerable time afterward, and at

first they were rather trying to me.  I felt that nothing

could be more unjust, for I had strained to the last degree

my influence with my associates who supported General

Grant in securing concessions to those who differed from

us.  Had these attacks been made by organs of the opposite

political party, I would not have minded them; but

being made in sundry journals which had represented the

Republican party and were constantly read by my old

friends, neighbors, and students, they naturally, for a

time, disquieted me.  One of the charges then made has

often amused me as I have looked back upon it since, and

is worth referring to as an example of the looseness of

statement common among the best of American political

journals during exciting political contests.  This charge

was that I had ``sought to bribe people to support the

administration by offering them consulates.''  This was

echoed in various parts of the State.



The facts were as follows:  An individual who had made

some money as a sutler in connection with the army had

obtained control of a local paper at Syracuse, and, through

the influence thus gained, an election to the lower house of

the State legislature.  During the winter which he passed

at Albany he was one of three or four Republicans who

voted with the Democrats in behalf of the measures

proposed by Tweed, the municipal arch-robber afterward

convicted and punished for his crimes against the city of

New York.  Just at this particular time Tweed was at the

height of his power, and at a previous session of the

legislature he had carried his measures through the

Assembly by the votes of three or four Republicans who were

needed in addition to the Democratic votes in order to

give him the required majority.  Many leading Republican

journals had published the names of these three or

four men with black lines around them, charging them,

apparently justly, with having sold themselves to Tweed

for money, and among them the person above referred

to.  Though he controlled a newspaper in Syracuse, he

had been unable to secure renomination to the legislature,

and, shortly afterward, in order to secure rehabilitation

as well as pelf, sought an appointment to the Syracuse

postmastership.  Senator Conkling, mindful of the man's

record, having opposed the appointment, and the President

having declined to make it, the local paper under

control of this person turned most bitterly against the

administration, and day after day poured forth diatribes

against the policy and the persons of all connected with

the actual government at Washington, and especially

against President Grant and Senator Conkling.



The editor of the paper at that time was a very gifted

young writer, an old schoolmate and friend of mine, who,

acting under instructions from the managers of the paper,

took a very bitter line against the administration and its

supporters.



About the time of the meeting of the convention this

old friend came to me, expressed his regret at the line he

was obliged to take, said that both he and his wife were

sick of the whole thing and anxious to get out of it, and

added:  ``The only way out, that I can see, is some appointment

that will at once relieve me of all these duties, and

in fact take me out of the country.  Cannot you aid me by

application to the senator or the President in obtaining a

consulate?''  I answered him laughingly, ``My dear ----,

I will gladly do all I can for you, not only for friendship's

sake, but because I think you admirably fitted for the place

you name; but don't you think that, for a few days at

least, while you are applying for such a position, you

might as well stop your outrageous attacks against the

very men from whom you hope to receive the appointment?''



Having said this, half in jest and half in earnest, I

thought no more on the subject, save as to the best way of

aiding my friend to secure the relief he desired.



So rose the charge that I was ``bribing persons to support

the administration by offering them consulates.''



But strong friends rallied to my support.  Mr. George

William Curtis in ``Harper's Weekly,'' Mr. Godkin in

``The Nation,'' Mr. Charles Dudley Warner and others

in various other journals took up the cudgels in my behalf,

and I soon discovered that the attacks rather helped than

hurt me.  They did much, indeed, to disgust me for a time

with political life; but I soon found that my friends, my

students, and the country at large understood the charges,

and that they seemed to think more rather than less of me

on account of them.  In those days the air was full of that

sort of onslaught upon every one supposed to be friendly

to General Grant, and the effect in one case was revealed

to me rather curiously.  Matthew Carpenter, of Wisconsin,

was then one of the most brilliant members of the United

States Senate, a public servant of whom his State was

proud; but he had cordially supported the administration

and was consequently made the mark for bitter attack, day

after day and week after week, by the opposing journals,

and these attacks finally culminated in an attempt to base

a very ugly scandal against him upon what was known

among his friends to be a simple courtesy publicly

rendered to a very worthy lady.  The attacks and the scandal

resounded throughout the anti-administration papers,

their evident purpose being to defeat his re<e:>lection to the

United States Senate.



But just before the time for the senatorial election in

Wisconsin, meeting a very bright and active-minded student

of my senior class who came from that State, I asked

him, ``What is the feeling among your people regarding

the re<e:>lection of Senator Carpenter?''  My student

immediately burst into a torrent of wrath and answered:  ``The

people of Wisconsin will send Mr. Carpenter back to the

Senate by an enormous majority.  We will see if a gang

of newspaper blackguards can slander one of our senators

out of public life.''  The result was as my young friend

had foretold:  Mr. Carpenter was triumphantly re<e:>lected.



While I am on this subject I may refer, as a comfort to

those who have found themselves unjustly attacked in

political matters, to two other notable cases within my

remembrance.



Probably no such virulence has ever been known day

after day, year after year, as was shown by sundry presses

of large circulation in their attacks on William H. Seward. 

They represented him as shady and tricky; as the lowest

of demagogues; as utterly without conscience or ability;

as pretending a hostility to slavery which was simply

a craving for popularity; they refused to report his

speeches, or, if they did report them, distorted them.  He

had also incurred the displeasure of very many leaders

of his own party, and of some of its most powerful presses,

yet he advanced steadily from high position to high

position, and won a lasting and most honorable place in the

history of his country.



The same may be said of Senator Conkling.  The attacks

on him in the press were bitter and almost universal;

yet the only visible result was that he was re<e:>lected to the

national Senate by an increased majority.  To the catastrophe

which some years later ended his political career,

the onslaught by the newspapers contributed nothing; it

resulted directly from the defects of his own great

qualities and not at all from attacks made upon him from

outside.



Almost from the first moment of my acquaintance with

Mr. Conkling, I had endeavored to interest him in the reform

of the civil service, and at least, if this was not

possible, to prevent his actively opposing it.  In this sense

I wrote him various letters.  For a time they seemed successful;

but at last, under these attacks, he broke all bounds

and became the bitter opponent of the movement.  In his

powerful manner and sonorous voice he from time to time

expressed his contempt for it.  The most striking of his

utterances on the subject was in one of the State conventions,

which, being given in his deep, sonorous tones, ran

much as follows:  ``When Doctor-r-r Ja-a-awnson said that

patr-r-riotism-m was the l-a-w-s-t r-r-refuge of a scoundr-r-rel,

he ignor-r-red the enor-r-rmous possibilities of

the word r-refa-awr-r-rm!''



The following spring (June 5, 1872) I attended the

Republican National Convention at Philadelphia as a

substitute delegate.  It was very interesting and, unlike the

enormous assemblages since of twelve or fifteen thousand

people at Chicago and elsewhere, was a really deliberative

body.  As it was held in the Academy of Music, there was

room for a sufficient audience, while there was not room

for a vast mob overpowering completely the members of

the convention and preventing any real discussion at some

most important junctures, as has been the case in so many

conventions of both parties in these latter years.



The most noteworthy features of this convention were

the speeches of sundry colored delegates from the South. 

Very remarkable they were, and a great revelation as to

the ability of some, at least, of their race in the former

slave States.



General Grant was renominated for the Presidency,

and for the Vice-Presidency Mr. Henry Wilson of Massachusetts

in place of Schuyler Colfax, who had held the position

during General Grant's first term.



The only speeches I made during the campaign were

one from the balcony of the Continental Hotel in Philadelphia

and one from the steps of the Delavan House at


Albany, but they were perfunctory and formal.  There

was really no need of speeches, and I was longing to go at

my proper university work.  Mr. James Anthony Froude,

the historian, had arrived from England to deliver his

lectures before our students; and, besides this, the university

had encountered various difficulties which engrossed

all my thoughts.



General Grant's re<e:>lection was a great victory.  Mr.

Greeley had not one Northern electoral vote; worst of all,

he had, during the contest, become utterly broken in body

and mind, and shortly after the election he died.



His death was a sad ending of a career which, as a

whole, had been so beneficent.  As to General Grant, I believe

now, as I believed then, that his election was a great

blessing, and that he was one of the noblest, purest, and

most capable men who have ever sat in the Presidency. 

The cheap, clap-trap antithesis which has at times been

made between Grant the soldier and Grant the statesman

is, I am convinced, utterly without foundation.  The

qualities which made him a great soldier made him an

effective statesman.  This fact was clearly recognized

by the American people at various times during the

war, and especially when, at the surrender of Appomattox,

he declined to deprive General Lee of his sword,

and quietly took the responsibility of allowing the

soldiers of the Southern army to return with their horses

to their fields to resume peaceful industry.  These

statesmanlike qualities were developed more and more

by the great duties and responsibilities of the Presidency. 

His triumph over financial demagogy in his vetoes

of the Inflation Bill, and his triumph over political demagogy

in securing the treaty of Washington and the Alabama

indemnity, prove him a statesman worthy to rank

with the best of his predecessors.  In view of these

evidences of complete integrity and high capacity, and

bearing in mind various conversations which I had with him

during his public life down to a period just before his

death, I feel sure that history will pronounce him not only

a general but a statesman in the best sense of the word.



The renomination of General Grant at the Philadelphia

convention was the result of gratitude, respect, and conviction

of his fitness.  Although Mr. Greeley had the support

of the most influential presses of the United States, and

was widely beloved and respected as one who had borne

the burden and heat of the day, he was defeated in obedience

to a healthy national instinct.



Years afterward I was asked in London by one of the

most eminent of English journalists how such a thing

could have taken place.  Said he, ``The leading papers of

the United States, almost without exception, were in favor

of Mr. Greeley; how, then, did it happen that he was in

such a hopeless minority?''  I explained the matter as

best I could, whereupon he said, ``Whatever the explanation

may be, it proves that the American press, by its wild

statements in political campaigns, and especially by its

reckless attacks upon individuals, has lost that hold upon

American opinion which it ought to have; and, depend

upon it, this is a great misfortune for your country.''  I

did not attempt to disprove this statement, for I knew but

too well that there was great truth in it.



Of my political experiences at that period I recall two:

the first of these was making the acquaintance at Saratoga 

of Mr. Samuel J. Tilden.  His political fortunes were

then at their lowest point.  With Mr. Dean Richmond of

Buffalo, he had been one of the managers of the Democratic

party in the State, but, Mr. Richmond having died,

the Tweed wing of the party, supported by the canal

contractors, had declared war against Mr. Tilden, treated

him with contempt, showed their aversion to him in every

way, and, it was fully understood, had made up their

minds to depose him.  I remember walking and talking

again and again with him under the colonnade at Congress

Hall, and, without referring to any person by name, he

dwelt upon the necessity of more earnest work in redeeming

American politics from the management of men utterly

unfit for leadership.  Little did he or I foresee that

soon afterward his arch-enemy, Tweed, then in the same

hotel and apparently all-powerful, was to be a fugitive

from justice, and finally to die in prison, and that he, Mr.

Tilden himself, was to be elected governor of the State of

New York, and to come within a hair's-breadth of the

presidential chair at Washington.



The other circumstance of a political character was my

attendance as an elector at the meeting of the Electoral

College at Albany, which cast the vote of New York for

General Grant.  I had never before sat in such a body, and

its proceedings interested me.  As president we elected

General Stewart L. Woodford, and as the body, after the

formal election of General Grant to the Presidency, was

obliged to send certificates to the governor of the State,

properly signed and sealed, and as it had no seal of its

own, General Woodford asked if any member had a seal

which he would lend to the secretary for that purpose. 

Thereupon a seal-ring which Goldwin Smith had brought

from Rome and given me was used for that purpose.  It

was an ancient intaglio.  Very suitably, it bore the figure

of a ``Winged Victory,'' and it was again publicly used,

many years later, when it was affixed to the American

signature of the international agreement made at the

Peace Conference of The Hague.



The following winter I had my first experience of

``Reconstruction'' in the South.  Being somewhat worn with

work, I made a visit to Florida, passing leisurely through

the southern seaboard States, and finding at Columbia

an old Yale friend, Governor Chamberlain, from whom I

learned much.  But the simple use of my eyes and ears

during the journey gave me more than all else.  A visit

to the State legislature of South Carolina revealed vividly

the new order of things.  The State Capitol was a beautiful

marble building, but unfinished without and dirty

within.  Approaching the hall of the House of Representatives,

I found the door guarded by a negro, squalid and

filthy.  He evidently reveled in his new citizenship; his

chair was tilted back against the wall, his feet were high

in the air, and he was making everything nauseous about

him with tobacco; but he soon became obsequious and

admitted us to one of the most singular deliberative bodies

ever known--a body composed of former landed proprietors

and slave-owners mixed up pell-mell with their

former slaves and with Northern adventurers then known

as ``carpet-baggers.''  The Southern gentlemen of the

Assembly were gentlemen still, and one of them, Mr.

Memminger, formerly Secretary of the Treasury of the

Confederate States, was especially courteous to us.  But soon

all other things were lost in contemplation of ``Mr.

Speaker.''  He was a bright, nimble, voluble mulatto who,

as one of the Southern gentlemen informed me, was ``the

smartest nigger God ever made.''  Having been elevated

to the speakership, he magnified his office.  While we were

observing him, a gentleman of one of the most historic

families of South Carolina, a family which had given to

the State a long line of military commanders, governors,

senators, and ambassadors, rose to make a motion.  The

speaker, a former slave, at once declared him out of order. 

On the member persisting in his effort, the speaker called

out, ``De genlemun frum Bufert has no right to de floh;

de genlemun from Bufert will take his seat,'' and the

former aristocrat obeyed.  To this it had come at last. 

In the presence of this assembly, in this hall where dis-

union really had its birth, where secession first shone out

in all its glory, a former slave ordered a former master

to sit down, and was obeyed.



In Charleston the same state of things was to be seen,

and for the first time I began to feel sympathy for

the South.  This feeling was deepened by what I saw in

Georgia and Florida; and yet, below it all I seemed to see

the hand of God in history, and in the midst of it all I

seemed to hear a deep voice from the dead.  To me, seeing

these things, there came, reverberating out of the last

century, that prediction of Thomas Jefferson,--himself a

slaveholder,--who, after depicting the offenses of slavery,

ended with these words, worthy of Isaiah,--divinely inspired

if any ever were:--``I tremble when I remember

that God is just.''







CHAPTER XI



GRANT, HAYES, AND GARFIELD--1871-1881



At various times after the death of Mr. Lincoln I visited

Washington, meeting many men especially influential,

and, first of all, President Grant.  Of all personages whom

I then met he impressed me most strongly.  At various

times I talked with him at the White House, dining with

him and seeing him occasionally in his lighter mood, but

at no time was there the slightest diminution of his

unaffected dignity.  Now and then he would make some dry

remark which showed a strong sense of humor, but in

everything there was the same quiet, simple strength.  On

one occasion, when going to the White House, I met Professor

Agassiz of Cambridge, and took him with me: we

were received cordially, General Grant offering us cigars,

as was his wont with visitors, and Agassiz genially

smoking with him: when we had come away the great

naturalist spoke with honest admiration of the President,

evidently impressed by the same qualities which had

always impressed me--his modesty, simplicity, and quiet

force.



I also visited him at various times in his summer

cottage at Long Branch, and on one of these occasions he

gave a bit of history which specially interested me.  As

we were taking coffee after dinner, a card was brought

in, and the President, having glanced at it, said, ``Tell him

that I cannot see him.''  The servant departed with the

message, but soon returned and said, ``The gentleman

wishes to know when he can see the President.''  ``Tell

him NEVER,'' said Grant.



It turned out that the person whose name the card bore

was the correspondent of a newspaper especially noted

for sensation-mongering, and the conversation drifted to

the subject of newspapers and newspaper correspondents,

when the President told the following story, which I give

as nearly as possible in his own words:



``During the hottest period of the final struggle in

Virginia, we suffered very much from the reports of newspaper

correspondents who prowled about our camps and

then put on the wires the information they had gained,

which of course went South as rapidly as it went North. 

It became really serious and embarrassed us greatly.  On

this account, one night, when I had decided to make an

important movement with a portion of the army early

next day, I gave orders that a tent should be pitched in an

out-of-the-way place, at the earliest possible moment in the

morning, and notified the generals who were to take part

in the movement to meet me there.



``It happened that on the previous day there had come

to the camp a newspaper correspondent named ----, and,

as he bore a letter from Mr. Washburne, I treated him as

civilly as possible.



``At daylight next morning, while we were assembled in

the tent making final arrangements, one of my aides,

Colonel ----, heard a noise just outside, and, going out,

saw this correspondent lying down at full length, his ear

under the edge of the tent, and a note-book in his

hand.  Thereupon Colonel took the correspondent

by his other ear, lifted him to his feet, and swore to him

a solemn oath that if he was visible in any part of the

camp more than five minutes longer, a detachment of

troops would be ordered out to shoot him and bury him

there in the swamp, so that no one would ever know his

name or burial-place.



``The correspondent left at once,'' said the President,

``and he took his revenge by writing a history of the war

from which he left me out.''



The same characteristic which I had found at other

meetings with Grant came out even more strongly when,

just before the close of his term, he made me a visit at

Cornell, where one of his sons was a student.  To meet

him I invited several of our professors and others who

were especially prejudiced against him, and, without

exception, they afterward expressed the very feeling which

had come over me after my first conversation with him--

surprise at the revelation of his quiet strength and his

knowledge of public questions then before the country.



During a walk on the university grounds he spoke to me

of the Santo Domingo matter.[3]  He said:  ``The annexation

question is doubtless laid aside for the present, but the time

will come when the country will have occasion to regret

that it was disposed of without adequate discussion.  As I

am so soon to leave the presidency, I may say to you now

that one of my main thoughts in regard to the annexation

of the island has been that it might afford a refuge for the

negroes of the South in case anything like a war of races

should ever arise in the old slave States.''  He then alluded

to the bitter feeling between the two races which was then

shown in the South, and which was leading many of the

blacks to take refuge in Kansas and other northwestern

States, and said, ``If such a refuge as Santo Domingo

were open to them, their former masters would soon find

that they have not the colored population entirely at their

mercy, and would be obliged to compromise with them on

far more just terms than would otherwise be likely.''





[3] See my chapter on Santo Domingo experiences.







The President said this with evidently deep conviction,

and it seemed to me a very thoughtful and far-sighted

view of the possibilities and even probabilities involved.



During another walk, in speaking of the approaching

close of his second presidential term, he said that he found

himself looking forward to it with the same longing which

he had formerly had as a cadet at West Point when looking

forward to a furlough.



I have never believed that the earnest effort made by

his friends at Chicago to nominate him for a third term

was really prompted by him, or that he originally desired

it.  It always seemed to me due to the devotion of friends

who admired his noble qualities, and thought that the

United States ought not to be deprived of them in obedience

to a tradition, in this case, more honored in the

breach than in the observance.



I may add here that, having seen him on several

convivial occasions, and under circumstances when, if ever,

he would be likely to indulge in what was understood to

have been, in his early life, an unfortunate habit, I never

saw him betray the influence of alcohol in the slightest

degree.



Shortly after General Grant laid down his high office,

he made his well-known journey to Europe and the East,

and I had the pleasure of meeting him at Cologne and

traveling up the Rhine with him.  We discussed American

affairs all day long.  He had during the previous week

been welcomed most cordially to the hospitalities of two

leading sovereigns of Europe, and had received endless

attentions from the most distinguished men of England

and Belgium, but in conversation he never, in the slightest

degree, referred to any of these experiences.  He seemed

not to think of them; his heart was in matters pertaining

to his own country.  He told me much regarding his

administration, and especially spoke with the greatest

respect and affection of his Secretary of State, Mr.

Hamilton Fish.



Somewhat later I again met him in Paris, had several

walks and talks with him in which he discussed American

affairs, and I remember that he dwelt with especial

admiration, and even affection, upon his colleagues Sherman

and Sheridan.



I trust that it may not be considered out of place if, in

this retrospect, which is intended, first of all, for my

children and grandchildren, I state that a personal fact,

which was known to many from other sources, was confirmed

to me in one of these conversations:  General Grant

informing me, as he had previously informed my wife, that

he had fully purposed to name me as Secretary of State

had Mr. Fish carried out his intention of resigning.  When

he told me this, my answer was that I considered it a very

fortunate escape for us both; that my training had not

fitted me for such duties; that my experience in the diplomatic

service had then been slight; that I had no proper

training as a lawyer; that my knowledge of international

law was derived far more from the reading of books than

from its application; and that I doubted my physical ability

to bear the pressure for patronage which converged

upon the head of the President's cabinet.



In the Washington of those days my memory also recalls

vividly a dinner with Senator Conkling at which I

met a number of interesting men, and among them Governor

Seymour, who had been the candidate opposed to

Grant during his first presidential campaign; Senator

Anthony, Senator Edmunds, the former Vice-President

Mr. Hamlin, Senator Carpenter, and others.  Many good

stories were told, and one amused me especially, as it was

given with admirable mimicry by Senator Carpenter.  He

described an old friend of his, a lawyer, who, coming

before one of the higher courts with a very doubtful case,

began his plea as follows:  ``May it please the court, there

is only one point in this case favorable to my client, but

that, may it please the court, is a chink in the common law

which has been worn smooth by the multitude of scoundrels

who have escaped through it.''



During the year 1878 I was sent as an honorary

commissioner from the State of New York to the Paris

Exposition, and shall give a more full account of this period in

another chapter.  Suffice it that, having on my return

prepared my official report on the provision for political

education made by the different governments of Europe,

I became more absorbed than ever in university affairs,

keeping aloof as much as possible from politics.  But in

the political campaign of 1878 I could not but be

interested.  It was different from any other that I had known,

for the ``Greenback Craze'' bloomed out as never before

and seemed likely to poison the whole country.  Great

hardships had arisen from the fact that debts which had

been made under a depreciated currency had to be paid

in money of greater value.  Men who, in what were known

as ``flush times,'' had bought farms, paid down half

the price, and mortgaged them for the other half, found

now, when their mortgages became due, that they could

not sell the property for enough to cover the lien upon it. 

Besides this, the great army of speculators throughout

the country found the constant depreciation of prices

bringing them to bankruptcy.  In the cry for more greenbacks,--

that is, for continued issues of paper money,--

demagogism undoubtedly had a large part; but there were

many excellent men who were influenced by it, and among

them Peter Cooper of New York, founder of the great

institution which bears his name, one of the purest and

best men I have ever known.



This cry for more currency was echoed from one end

of the country to the other.  In various States, and

especially in Ohio, it seemed to carry everything before it,

nearly all the public men of note, including nearly all the

leading Democrats and very many of the foremost Republicans,

bowing down to it, the main exceptions being John

Sherman and Garfield.



In central New York the mania seemed, early in the

summer, to take strong hold.  In Syracuse John Wieting, an

amazingly fluent speaker with much popular humor, who

had never before shown any interest in politics, took the

stump for an unlimited issue of government paper currency,

received the nomination to Congress from the

Democrats and sundry independent organizations, and

for a time seemed to carry everything before him.  A

similar state of things prevailed at Ithaca and the region

round about Cayuga Lake.  Two or three people much

respected in the community came out for this doctrine,

and, having a press under their control, their influence

seemed likely to be serious.  Managers of the Republican

organization in the State seemed at first apathetic; but at

last they became alarmed and sent two speakers through

these disaffected districts--only two, but each, in his way,

a master.  The first of them, in order of time, was Senator

Roscoe Conkling, and he took as his subject the National

Banking System.  This had been for a considerable time

one of the objects of special attack by uneasy and unsuccessful

people throughout the entire country.  As a matter

of fact, the national banking system, created during the

Civil War by Secretary Chase and his advisers, was one of

the most admirable expedients ever devised in any country. 

Up to the time of its establishment the whole country

had suffered enormously from the wretched currency

supplied from the State banks.  Even in those States where

the greatest precaution was taken to insure its redemption

all of it was, in time of crisis or panic, fluctuating and much

of it worthless.  But in other States the case was even

worse.  I can recall perfectly that through my boyhood

and young manhood every merchant and shopkeeper kept

on his table what was called a ``bank-note detector,''

which, when any money was tendered him, he was obliged

to consult in order to know, first, whether the bill was a

counterfeit, as it frequently was; secondly, whether it was

on a solvent bank; and thirdly, if good, what discount

should be deducted from the face of it.  Under this system

bank-notes varied in value from week to week, and even

from day to day, with the result that all buying and selling

became a sort of gambling.



When, then, Mr. Chase established the new system of

national banks so based that every bill-holder had security

for the entire amount which his note represented, so

controlled that a bill issued from any little bank in the

remotest State, or even in the remotest corner of a Territory,

was equal to one issued by the richest bank in Wall

Street, so engraved that counterfeiting was practically

impossible, there was an immense gain to every man, woman,

and child in the country.



To appreciate this gain one must have had experience

of the older system.  I remember well the panic of 1857,

which arose while I was traveling in eastern and northern

New England, and that, arriving in the city of Salem,

Massachusetts, having tendered, in payment of my hotel

bill, notes issued by a leading New York city bank,

guaranteed under what was known as the ``Safety Fund

System,'' they were refused.  The result was that I had to

leave my wife at the hotel, go to Boston, and there manage

to get Massachusetts money.



But this was far short of the worst.  Professor Roberts

of Cornell University once told me that, having in those

days collected a considerable debt in one of the Western

States, he found the currency so worthless that he

attempted to secure New York funds, but that the rate of

exchange was so enormous that, as the only way of saving

anything, he bought a large quantity of cheap clothing,

shipped it to the East, and sold it for what it would bring.



As to the way in which the older banking operations

were carried on in some of the Western States, Governor

Felch of Michigan once gave me some of his experiences

as a bank examiner, and one of them especially

amused me.  He said that he and a brother examiner made

an excursion through the State in a sleigh with a pair of

good horses in order to inspect the various banks

established in remote villages and hamlets which had the power

of issuing currency based upon the specie contained in

their vaults.  After visiting a few of these, and finding

that each had the amount of specie required by law, the

examiners began to note a curious similarity between the

specie packages in these different banks, and before long

their attention was drawn to another curious fact, which

was that wherever they went they were preceded by a

sleigh drawn by especially fleet horses.  On making a

careful examination, they found that this sleigh bore from

bank to bank a number of kegs of specie sufficient to enable

each bank in its turn to show the examiners a temporary

basis in hard money for its output of paper.



Such was the state of things which the national banks

remedied, and the system had the additional advantage of

being elastic, so that any little community which needed

currency had only to combine its surplus capital and

establish a bank of issue.



But throughout the country there were, as there will

doubtless always be, a considerable number of men who, not

being able to succeed themselves, distrusted and disliked

the successful.  There was also a plentiful supply of

demagogues skilful in appealing to the prejudices of the

ignorant, envious, or perverse, and as a result came a cry

against the national banks.



In Mr. Conkling's Ithaca speech (1878), he argued the

question with great ability and force.  He had a sledge-

hammer way which broke down all opposition, and he exulted

in it.  One of his favorite tactics, which greatly

amused his auditors, was to lead some prominent gainsayer

in his audience to interrupt him, whereupon, in the blandest

way possible, he would invite him to come forward, urge

him to present his views, even help him to do so, and then,

having gradually entangled him in his own sophistries and

made him ridiculous, the senator would come down upon

him with arguments--cogent, pithy, sarcastic--much like

the fist of a giant upon a mosquito.



In whatever town Mr. Conkling argued the question of

the national banks, that subject ceased to be a factor in

politics: it was settled; his attacks upon the anti-bank

demagogues annihilated their arguments among thinking

men, and his sarcasm made them ridiculous among

unthinking men.  This was the sort of thing which he did

best.  While utterly deficient in constructive power, his

destructive force was great indeed, and in this campaign it

was applied, as it was not always applied, for the advantage

of the country.



The other great speaker in the campaign was General

James A. Garfield, then a member of the House of Repre-

sentatives.  My acquaintance with him had begun several

years before at Syracuse, when my old school friend, his

college mate, Charles Elliot Fitch, brought him into my

library.  My collection of books was even at that date very

large, and Garfield, being delighted with it, soon revealed

his scholarly qualities.  It happened that not long before

this I had bought in London several hundred volumes from

the library left by the historian Buckle, very many of them

bearing copious annotations in his own hand.  Garfield

had read Buckle's ``History of Civilization in England''

with especial interest, and when I presented to him and

discussed with him some of these annotated volumes, there

began a friendly relation between us which ended only

with his life.



I also met him under less favorable circumstances. 

Happening to be in Washington at the revelation of the

Cr<e'>dit Mobilier operations, I found him in the House of

Representatives, and evidently in the depths of suffering. 

An effort was making to connect him with the scandal, and

while everything I know of him convinces me that he was

not dishonest, he had certainly been imprudent.  This he

felt, and he asked me, in an almost heart-broken tone, if

I really believed that this had forever destroyed his

influence in the country.  I answered that I believed nothing

of the kind; that if he came out in a straightforward,

manly way, without any of the prevarication which had so

greatly harmed some others, he would not be injured, and

the result showed that this advice was good.



On our arrival at the great hall in Ithaca (October 28,

1878), we found floor and stage packed in every part. 

Never had a speaker a better audience.  There were present

very many men of all parties anxious to hear the currency

question honestly discussed, and among them many of the

more thoughtful sort misled by the idea that a wrong had

been done to the country in the restoration of the currency

to a sound basis; and there was an enormous attendance

of students from the university.



As Garfield began he showed the effects of fatigue from

the many speeches he had been making for weeks,--morning,

noon, and night; but soon he threw himself heartily

into the subject, and of all the thousands of political

speeches I have heard it was the most effective.  It was

eloquent, but it was far more than that; it was HONESTLY

argumentative; there was no sophistry of any sort; every

subject was taken up fairly and every point dealt with

thoroughly.  One could see the supports of the Greenback

party vanishing as he went on.  His manner was the very

opposite of Mr. Conkling's: it was kindly, hearty, as of

neighbor with neighbor,--indeed, every person present,

even if greenbacker or demagogue, must have said within

himself, ``This man is a friend arguing with friends; he

makes me his friend, and now speaks to me as such.''



The main line of his argument finished, there came

something even finer; for, inspired by the presence of the great

mass of students, he ended his speech with an especial

appeal to them.  Taking as his test the noted passage in

the letter written by Macaulay to Henry Randall, the biographer

of Jefferson,--the letter in which Macaulay prophesied

destruction to the American Republic when poverty

should pinch and discontent be wide-spread in the country,

--he appealed to these young men to see to it that this

prophecy should not come true; he asked them to follow in

this, as in similar questions, their reason and not their

prejudices, and from this he went on with a statement of

the motives which ought to govern them and the line they

ought to pursue in the effort to redeem their country.



Never was speech more successful.  It carried the entire

audience, and left in that region hardly a shred of the

greenback theory.  When the election took place it was

observed that in those districts where Conkling and Garfield

had spoken, the greenback heresy was annihilated, while

in other districts which had been counted as absolutely sure

for the Republican party, and to which, therefore, these

orators had not been sent, there was a great increase in

the vote for currency inflation.



I have often alluded to this result as an answer to those

who say that speaking produces no real effect on the

convictions of men regarding party matters.  Some speaking

does not, but there is a kind of speaking which does, and

of this were these two masterpieces, so different from

each other in matter and manner, and yet converging

upon the same points, intellectual and moral.



Before I close regarding Garfield, it may be well to give

a few more recollections of him.  The meeting ended, we

drove to my house on the university grounds, and shortly

before our arrival he asked me, ``How did you like my

speech?''  I answered:  ``Garfield, I have known you too

long and think too highly of you to flatter you; but I will

simply say what I would say under oath: it was the best

speech I ever heard.  ``This utterance of mine was deliberate,

expressing my conviction, and he was evidently

pleased with it.



Having settled down in front of the fire in my library,

we began to discuss the political situation, and his talk

remains to me among the most interesting things of my

life.  He said much regarding the history of the currency

question and his relations to it, and from this ran rapidly

and suggestively through a multitude of other questions

and the relations of public men to them.  One thing which

struck me was his judicially fair and even kindly estimates

of men who differed from him.  Very rarely did he speak

harshly or sharply of any one, differing in this greatly

from Mr. Conkling, who, in all his conversations, and

especially in one at that same house not long before, seemed

to consider men who differed from him as enemies of the

human race.



Under Mr. Hayes, the successor of General Grant in the

Presidency, I served first as a commissioner at the Paris

Exposition, and then as minister to Germany.  Both these

services will be discussed in the chapters relating to my

diplomatic life, but I may refer briefly to my acquaintance

with him at this period.



I had met him but once previously, and that was during

his membership of Congress when he came to enter his son

at Cornell.  I had then been most favorably impressed by

his large, sincere, manly way.  On visiting Washington to

receive my instructions before going to Berlin, I saw him

several times, and at each meeting my respect for him was

increased.  Driving to Arlington, walking among the soldiers'

graves there, standing in the portico of General Lee's

former residence, and viewing from the terrace the Capitol

in the distance, he spoke very nobly of the history we had

both personally known, of the sacrifices it had required,

and of the duties which it now imposed.  At his dinner-

table I heard him discuss with his Secretary of State, Mr.

Evarts, a very interesting question--the advisability of

giving members of the cabinet seats in the Senate and

House of Representatives, as had been arranged in the

constitution of the so-called Confederate States; but of

this I shall speak in another chapter.



It should further be said regarding Mr. Hayes that, while

hardly any President was ever so systematically denounced

and depreciated, he was one of the truest and best men

who has ever held our Chief Magistracy.  I remember,

just at the close of his administration, dining with an

eminent German statesman who said to me:  ``I have

watched the course of your President with more and

more surprise.  We have been seeing constantly in our

German newspapers extracts from American journals

holding up your President to contempt as an ignoramus,

but more and more I have seen that he is one of the most

substantial, honest, and capable Presidents that you have

had.''



This opinion was amply justified by what I saw of Mr.

Hayes after the close of his Presidency.  Twice I met him

during conferences at Lake Mohonk, at which matters

relating to the improvement of the freedmen and Indians

were discussed, and in each he took broad, strong, and

statesmanlike views based on thoughtful experience and

permeated by honesty.



I also met him at a great public meeting at Cleveland,

where we addressed some four thousand people from the

same platform, and again I was impressed by his manly,

far-seeing grasp of public questions.



As to my after relations with Garfield, I might speak of

various pleasant interviews, but will allude to just one

incident which has a pathetic side.  During my first residence

in Germany as minister of the United States, I one day

received a letter from him asking me to secure for him the

best editions of certain leading Greek and Latin classics,

adding that it had long been his earnest desire to re-read

them, and that now, as he had been elected to the United

States Senate, he should have leisure to carry out his

purpose.  I had hardly sent him what he desired when the

news came that he had been nominated to the Presidency,

and so all his dream of literary leisure vanished.  A few

months later came the news of his assassination.



My term of service as minister in Berlin being ended, I

arrived in America in September, 1881, and, in accordance

with custom, went to present my respects to the new President

and his Secretary of State.  They were both at Long

Branch.  Mr. Blaine I saw and had with him a very interesting

conversation, but President Garfield I could not see. 

His life was fast ebbing out, and a week later, on Sunday

morning, I heard the bells tolling and knew that his last

struggle was over.



So closed a career which, in spite of some defects, was

beautiful and noble.  Great hopes had been formed regarding

his Presidency, and yet, on looking back over his life,

I have a strong feeling that his assassination was a service

rendered to his reputation.  I know from those who had

full information that during his campaign for the Presidency

he had been forced to make concessions and pledges

which would have brought great trouble upon him had he

lived through his official term.  Gifted and good as he

was, advantage had been taken of his kindly qualities, and

he would have had to pay the penalty.



It costs me a pang to confess my opinion that the

administration of Mr. Arthur, a man infinitely his inferior in

nearly all the qualities which men most justly admire, was

far better than the administration which Mr Garfield

would have been allowed to give to the country.



Upon my return to the university I was asked by my

fellow-citizens of Ithaca in general, as also by the university

faculty and students, to give the public address at the

celebration of President Garfield's funeral.  This I did

and never with a deeper feeling of loss.



One thing in the various tributes to him had struck me

painfully:  Throughout the whole country his career was

constantly referred to in funeral addresses as showing

how a young American under all the disadvantages of

poverty could rise to the highest possible position.  I have

always thought that such statements, as they are usually

presented, are injurious to the character and lowering to

the aspirations of young men.  I took pains, therefore, to

show that while Garfield had risen under the most

discouraging circumstances from complete poverty, his rise

was due to something other than mere talent and exertion

--that it was the result of talent and exertion originating

in noble instincts and directed to worthy ends.  Garfield's

life proves this abundantly, and whatever may have been

his temporary weakness under the fearful pressure

brought upon him toward the end of his career, these

instincts and purposes remained his main guiding influences

from first to last.







CHAPTER XII



ARTHUR, CLEVELAND, AND BLAINE--1881-1884



The successor of Garfield, President Arthur, I had met

frequently in my old days at Albany.  He was able,

and there never was the slightest spot upon his integrity;

but in those early days nobody dreamed that he was to

attain any high distinction.  He was at that time charged

with the main military duties under the governor; later he

became collector of the port of New York, and in both

positions showed himself honest and capable.  He was lively,

jocose, easy-going, with little appearance of devotion to

work, dashing off whatever he had to do with ease and

accuracy.  At various dinner-parties and social gatherings,

and indeed at sundry State conventions, where I met

him, he seemed, more than anything else, a bon vivant,

facile and good-natured.



His nomination to the Vice-Presidency, which on the

death of Garfield led him to the Presidency, was very curious,

and an account of it given me by an old friend who

had previously been a member of the Garfield cabinet and

later an ambassador in Europe, was as follows:



After the defeat of the ``Stalwarts,'' who had fought

so desperately for the renomination of General Grant at

the Chicago Convention of 1880, the victorious side of the

convention determined to concede to them, as an olive-

branch, the Vice-Presidency, and with this intent my

informant and a number of other delegates who had been

especially active in preventing Grant's renomination went

to the room of the New York delegation, which had

taken the leading part in his support, knocked at the door,

and called for Mr. Levi P. Morton, previously a member

of Congress, and, several years later, Vice-President of

the United States and Governor of New York.  Mr. Morton

came out into the corridor, and thereupon the visitors said

to him, ``We wish to give the Vice-Presidency to New York

as a token of good will, and you are the man who should

take it; don't fail to accept it.''  Mr. Morton answered

that he had but a moment before, in this conference

of his delegation, declined the nomination.  At this the

visitors said, ``Go back instantly and tell them that you

have reconsidered and will accept; we will see that the

convention nominates you.''  Mr. Morton started to follow

this advice, but was just too late: while he was outside the

door he had been taken at his word, the place which he

had declined had been offered to General Arthur, he had

accepted it, and so the latter and not Mr. Morton became

President of the United States.



Up to the time when the Presidency devolved upon him,

General Arthur had shown no qualities which would have

suggested him for that high office, and I remember vividly

that when the news of Garfield's assassination arrived

in Berlin, where I was then living as minister, my

first overwhelming feeling was not, as I should have

expected, horror at the death of Garfield, but stupefaction

at the elevation of Arthur.  It was a common saying of

that time among those who knew him best, `` `Chet' Arthur

President of the United States!  Good God!''  But the

change in him on taking the Presidency was amazing.  Up

to that time he had been known as one of Mr. Conkling's

henchmen, though of the better sort.  As such he had held

the collectorship of the port of New York, and as such,

during his occupancy of the Vice-Presidency, he had

visited Albany and done his best, though in vain, to secure

Mr. Conkling's renomination; but immediately on his elevation

to the Presidency all this was changed, and there is

excellent authority for the statement that when Mr. Conkling

wished him to continue, as President, in the subservient 

position which he had taken as Vice-President, Mr.

Arthur had refused, and when taxed with ingratitude he

said:  ``No.  For the Vice-Presidency I was indebted to

Mr. Conkling, but for the Presidency of the United States

my debt is to the Almighty.''



The new President certainly showed this spirit in his

actions.  Rarely has there been a better or more dignified

administration; the new Secretary of State, Mr. Frelinghuysen,

was in every respect fitted for his office, and the other men

whom Mr. Arthur summoned about him were satisfactory.



Although I had met him frequently, and indeed was on

cordial terms with him before his elevation to the

Presidency, I never met him afterward.  During his whole

administration my duties in connection with Cornell

University completely absorbed me.  I was one of the last

university presidents who endeavored to unite professorial

with executive duties, and the burden was heavy. 

The university had made at that period its first great

sale of lands, and this involved a large extension of

its activity; the famous Fiske lawsuit, involving nearly

two millions of dollars, had come on; there was every

sort of detail requiring attention at the university

itself, and addresses must be given in various parts of

the country, more especially before alumni associations,

to keep them in proper relations with the institution;

so that I was kept completely out of politics, was hardly

ever in Washington during this period, and never at the

White House.



The only matter which connected me with politics at all

was my conviction, which deepened more and more, as

to the necessity of reform in the civil service; and on this

subject I conferred with Mr. Dorman B. Eaton, Mr. John

Jay, and others at various times, and prepared an article

for the ``North American Review'' in which I presented

not only the general advantages of civil service reform,

but its claims upon men holding public office.  My main

effort was to show, what I believed then and believe still

more strongly now, that, evil as the whole spoils system

was in its effects on the country, it was quite as vexatious

and fertile in miseries and disappointments to political

leaders.  In the natural order of things, where there is no

spoils system, and where the bestowal of offices is not in the

hands of senators, representatives, and the like, these

senators and representatives, when once elected, have time to

discharge their duties, and with very little pains can

maintain their hold upon their constituents as long as they

please.  The average man, when he has cast his vote for a

candidate and sees that candidate elected, takes an interest

in him; the voter, feeling that he has, in a certain sense,

made an investment in the man thus elected, is naturally

inclined to regard him favorably and to continue him in

office.  But with the spoils system, no sooner is a candidate

elected than, as has been well observed, for every office

which he bestows he makes ``ninety-nine enemies and one

ingrate.''  The result is that the unsuccessful candidates

for appointment return home bent on taking revenge by

electing another person at the end of the present incumbent's

term, and hence comes mainly the wretched system

of rapid rotation in office, which has been in so many

ways injurious to our country.



This and other points I urged, but the evil was too

deeply seated.  Time was required to remove all doubts

which were raised.  I found with regret that my article

had especially incurred the bitter dislike of my old adviser,

Thurlow Weed, the great friend of Mr. Seward and former

autocrat of Whig and Republican parties in the State of

New York.  Being entirely of the old school, he could not

imagine the government carried on without the spoils system.



On one of my visits to New York in the interest of this

reform, I met at dinner Mr. William M. Evarts, then at the

head of the American bar, who had been Secretary of

State under Mr. Hayes, and who was afterward senator

from the State of New York.  I had met him frequently

before and heard much of his brilliant talk, and especially

his admirable stories of all sorts.



But on this occasion Mr. Evarts surpassed himself.  I

recall a series of witty repartees and charming illustrations,

but will give merely one of the latter.  Something

was said of people's hobbies, whereupon Mr. Evarts said

that a gentleman visiting a lunatic asylum went into a

room where several patients were assembled, and saw one

of them astride a great dressing-trunk, holding fast to a

rope drawn through the handle, seesawing and urging it

forward as if it were a horse at full speed.  The visitor,

to humor the patient, said, ``That 's a fine horse you

are riding.''  ``Why, no,'' said the patient, ``this is not

a horse.''  ``What is it, then?'' asked the visitor.  The

patient answered, ``It 's a hobby.''  ``But,'' said the

visitor, ``what 's the difference between a horse and a

hobby?''  ``Why,'' said the patient, ``there 's an enormous

difference; a horse you can get off from, a hobby

you can't.''



As to civil-service reform, my efforts to convert leading

Republicans by personal appeals were continued, and in

some cases with good results; but I found it very difficult

to induce party leaders to give up the immediate and direct

exercise of power which the spoils system gave them. 

Especially was it difficult with sundry editors of leading

papers and party managers; but time has wrought upon

them, and some of those who were most obdurate in those

days are doing admirable work in these.  The most serious

effort I ever made was to convert my old friend and classmate,

Thomas C. Platt, the main manager and, as he

was called, the ``boss'' of the Republican party in the

State of New York, a man of great influence throughout

the Union.  He treated me civilly, but evidently considered

me a ``crank.''  He, like Mr. Thurlow Weed, was

unable to understand how a party could be conducted

without the promise of spoils for the victors; but I have

lived to see him take a better view.  As I write these lines

word comes that his influence is thrown in favor of the bill

for reforming the civil service of the State of New York,

championed by my nephew, Mr. Horace White, a member

of the present State Senate, and favored by Colonel Roosevelt,

the governor.



It was upon a civil-service errand in Philadelphia that

I met, after a long separation, my old friend and classmate

Wayne MacVeagh.  He had been minister to Constantinople,

Attorney-General in the Garfield cabinet, and, at a

later period, ambassador at Rome.  At this period he had

returned to practise his profession in Philadelphia, and at

his hospitable table I met a number of interesting men,

and on one occasion sat next an eminent member of

the Philadelphia bar, Judge Biddle.  A subject happened

to come up in which I had taken great interest, namely,

American laxity in the punishment of crime, and especially

the crime of murder, whereupon Judge Biddle dryly remarked: 

``The taking of life, after due process of law, as

a penalty for murder, seems to be the only form of taking

life to which the average American has any objection.''



In the autumn of 1882 came a tremendous reverse for

the Republican party.  There was very wide-spread disgust

at the apparent carelessness of those in power regarding

the redemption of pledges for reforms.  Judge Folger,

who had been nominated to the governorship of New

York, had every qualification for the place, but an opinion

had widely gained ground that President Arthur, who had

called Judge Folger into his cabinet as Secretary of the

Treasury, was endeavoring to interfere with the politics

of the State, and to put Judge Folger into the governor's

chair.  There was a suspicion that ``the machine'' was

working too easily and that some of its wheels were of a

very bad sort.  All this, coupled with slowness in redeeming

platform pledges, brought on the greatest disaster the

Republican party had ever experienced.  In November,

1882, Mr. Cleveland was elected governor by the most

enormous majority ever known, and the defeat extended

not only through the State of New York, but through a

number of other States.  It was bitter medicine, but, as it

afterward turned out, very salutary.



Just after this election, being in New York to deliver an

address before the Geographical Society on the subject of

``The New Germany'' (December 27, 1882), I met a number

of distinguished men in politics at the table of General

Cullom, formerly the head of the West Point Academy. 

There was much interesting talk, and some significant

political facts were brought out; but the man who interested

me most was my next neighbor at table, General McDowell.



He was an old West Pointer, and had planned the

first battle of Bull Run, when our troops were overwhelmingly

defeated, the capital put in peril, and the

nation humiliated at home and abroad.  There is no

doubt now that McDowell's plans were excellent, but

the troops were raw volunteers, with little knowledge of

their officers and less confidence in them; and, as a

result, when, like the men in the ``Biglow Papers,'' they

found ``why bagonets is peaked,'' there was a panic, just

as there was in the first battles of the French Revolution. 

Every man distrusted every other man; there was a general

outcry, and all took flight.  I remember doing what

I could in those days to encourage those who looked with

despair on the flight from the battle-field of Bull Run, by

pointing out to them exactly similar panics and flights

in the first battles of the soldiers who afterward became

the Grande Arm<e'>e and marched triumphantly over Europe.



But of one thing the American people felt certain in

those days, and that was that at Bull Run ``General

McDowell was drunk.''  This assertion was loudly made,

widely spread, never contradicted, and generally believed. 

I must confess now with shame that I was one of those who

were so simple-minded as to take this newspaper story as

true.  On this occasion, sitting next General McDowell, I

noticed that he drank only water, taking no wine of any

sort; and on my calling his attention to the wines of our

host as famous, he answered, ``No doubt; but I never take

anything but water.''  I answered, ``General, how long has

that been your rule?''  He replied, ``Always since my boy-

hood.  At that time I was sent to a military school at

Troyes in France, and they gave us so much sour wine

that I vowed that if I ever reached America again no

drink but water should ever pass my lips, and I have kept

to that resolution.''



Of course this was an enormous surprise to me, but

shortly afterward I asked various army officers regarding

the matter, and their general answer was:  ``Why, of

course; all of us know that McDowell is the only officer

in the army who never takes anything but water.''



And this was the man who was widely believed by

the American people to have lost the battle of Bull Run

because he was drunk!



Another remembrance of this period is a dinner with

Mr. George Jones, of the ``New York Times,'' who gave

me a full account of the way in which his paper came into

possession of the documents revealing the Tammany

frauds, and how, despite enormous bribes and bitter

threats, the ``Times'' persisted in publishing the papers,

and so brought the Tweed r<e'>gime to destruction.



Of political men, the most noted whom I met in those

days was Governor Cleveland.  He was little known, but

those of us who had been observant of public affairs knew

that he had shown sturdy honesty and courage, first as

sheriff of the county of Erie, and next as mayor of Buffalo,

and that, most wonderful of all, he had risen above party

ties and had appointed to office the best men he could find,

even when some of them were earnest Republicans.



In June of 1883 he visited the university as an ex-officio

trustee, laid the corner-stone of the chapel above the

remains of Ezra Cornell, and gave a brief address.  It was

short, but surprised me by its lucidity and force.  This

being done, I conducted him to the opening of the new

chemical laboratory.  He was greatly interested in it, and

it was almost pathetic to note his evident regret that he

had never had the advantage of such instruction.  I

learned afterward that he was classically prepared to enter

college, but that his father, a poor country clergyman,

being unable to defray his expenses, the young man

determined to strike out for himself, and so began one of

the best careers known in the history of American politics.



At this same commencement of Cornell University

appeared another statesman, Justin S. Morrill of Vermont,

author of the Morrill Bill of 1862, which, by a grant of

public lands, established a college for scientific, technical,

military, and general education in every State and Territory

in the Union.  It was one of the most beneficent

measures ever proposed in any country.  Mr. Morrill had

made a desperate struggle for his bill, first as representative

and afterward as senator.  It was twice vetoed by

President Buchanan, who had at his back all the pro-slavery

doctrinaires of his time.  They distrusted, on various

accounts, any system for promoting advanced education,

and especially for its promotion by the government; but

he won the day, and on this occasion our trustees, at my

suggestion, invited him to be present at the unveiling of

his portrait by Huntington, which had been painted by

order of the trustees for the library.



He was evidently gratified at the tribute, and all who

met him were pleased with him.  The time will come, I

trust, when his statue will stand in the capital of the Union

as a memorial of one of the most useful and far-seeing

statesmen our country has known.



A week later I addressed my class at Yale on ``The

Message of the Nineteenth Century to the Twentieth.''  In

this address my endeavor was to indicate the lines on which

reforms of various sorts must be instituted, and along

which a better future for the country could be developed,

and it proved a far greater success than I had expected. 

It was widely circulated in various forms, first in the

newspapers, then as a pamphlet, and finally as a kind of

campaign document.



From July to September of that year (1883) I was

obliged to be in Europe looking after matters pertaining

to the university lawsuit, and, on returning, was called

upon to address a large meeting of Germans at the funeral

of a member of the German parliament who had

died suddenly while on a visit to our country--Edward

Lasker.  I had known him well in Berlin as a man of

great ability and high character, and felt it a duty to

accept the invitation to give one of the addresses at

his funeral.  The other address was given by my friend

of many years, Carl Schurz; and these addresses, with

some others made at the time, did, I suppose, something

to bring to me the favor of my German fellow-citizens in

New York.



Still, my main thoughts were given to Cornell University. 

This was so evident that on one occasion a newspaper

of my own party, in an article hostile to those who spoke

of nominating me for the governorship, declared:  ``Mr.

White's politics and religion are Cornell University.'' 

But suddenly, in 1884, I was plunged into politics most

unexpectedly.



As has been usual with every party in the State of New

York from the beginning of the government, the Republicans

were divided between two factions, one supporting

Mr. Arthur for the Presidency, the other hoping to nominate

Mr. Blaine.  These two factions thus standing opposed

to each other, Mr. Theodore Roosevelt, with a few

others in various parts of the State, started an independent

movement, with the result that the two main divisions of

the party, detesting each other more than they detested the

independents, supported the latter and elected independent

candidates as delegates at large to the approaching

Republican Convention at Chicago.  Without any previous

notice, I was made one of these delegates.  My position was

therefore perfectly independent; I was at liberty to vote

for whom I pleased.  Although my acquaintance with Mr.

Blaine was but slight, I had always felt strong admiration

and deep attachment for him.  As Secretary of State, during

a part of my residence in Berlin, he had stood by

me in a contest regarding the double standard of value

in which I had feared that he might waver; and, far more

than all this, his general political course had caused me,

as it had caused myriads of others, to feel grateful to

him.



But I had learned some things regarding his vulnerability

in a presidential campaign which made me sure

that it would be impossible to elect him.  An impartial

but kindly judge had, some months before, while

expressing great admiration for Mr. Blaine, informed me of

some transactions which, while they showed no turpitude,

revealed a carelessness in doing business which would

certainly be brought to bear upon him with great effect in a

heated political campaign.  It was clear to me that, if

nominated, he would be dragged through the mire, the

Republican party defeated, and the country at large

besmirched in the eyes of the whole world.



Arrived at Chicago June 2, 1884, I found the political

caldron seething and bubbling.  Various candidates

were earnestly supported, and foremost of all, President

Arthur and Mr. Blaine.  The independent delegates,

led by Theodore Roosevelt and George William Curtis,

and the Massachusetts delegation, headed by Governor

Long, Senator Hoar, and Henry Cabot Lodge, decided to

support Senator Edmunds of Vermont.  No man stood

higher than he for integrity as well as for statesmanlike

qualities and legal abilities; no one had more thoroughly

the respect of thinking men from one end of the country

to the other.



The delegates having arrived in the great hall where

the convention was sitting, a number of skirmishes took

place, and a momentary victory was gained by the

Independents in electing, as temporary chairman, a colored

delegate of great ability from one of the Southern States,

over Mr. Powell Clayton of Arkansas, who, though he

had suffered bitterly and struggled bravely to maintain

the Union during the Civil War, was supposed to be identified

with doubtful methods in Southern politics.



But as it soon became evident that the main tide was for

Mr. Blaine, various efforts were made to concentrate the

forces opposed to him upon some candidate who could

command more popular support than Mr. Edmunds.  An

earnest effort was made in favor of John Sherman

of Ohio, and his claims were presented most sympathetically

to me by my old Cornell student, Governor Foraker. 

Of all the candidates before the convention I would have

preferred to vote for Mr. Sherman.  He had borne the

stress of the whole anti-slavery combat, and splendidly;

he had rendered great services to the nation as a statesman

and financier, and was in every respect capable and worthy. 

Unfortunately there were too many old enmities against

him, and it was clear that the anti-Blaine vote could not

be concentrated on him.  My college classmate, Mr.

Knevals of New York, then urged me to vote for President

Arthur.  This, too, would have been a fairly satisfactory

solution of the question, for President Arthur had surprised

every one by the excellence of his administration. 

Still there was a difficulty in his case: the Massachusetts

delegates could not be brought to support him; it was said

that he had given some of their leaders mortal offense

by his hostility to the River and Harbor Bill.  A final

effort was then made by the Independents to induce General

Sherman to serve, but he utterly refused, and so the only

thing left was to let matters take their course.  All chance

of finding any one to maintain the desired standard of

American political life against the supporters of Mr.

Blaine had failed.



As we came into the convention on the morning of the

day fixed for making the nominations, I noticed that the

painted portraits of Washington and Lincoln, previously

on either side of the president's chair, had been removed. 

Owing to the tumultuous conduct of the crowd in the

galleries, it had been found best to remove things of an

ornamental nature from the walls, for some of these

ornaments had been thrown down, to the injury of those

sitting below.



On my calling Curtis's attention to this removal of the

two portraits, he said:  ``Yes, I have noticed it, and I am

glad of it.  Those weary eyes of Lincoln have been upon

us here during our whole stay, and I am glad that they are

not to see the work that is to be done here to-day.''  It was

a curious exhibition of sentiment, a revelation of the deep

poetic feeling which was so essential an element in Curtis's

noble character.



The various candidates were presented by prominent

speakers, and most of the speeches were thoroughly good;

but unquestionably the best, from an oratorical point of

view, was made on the nomination of Mr. Edmunds by

Governor Long of Massachusetts.  Both as to matter and

manner it was perfection; was felt to be so by the convention;

and was sincerely applauded even by the majority

of those who intended to vote for Mr. Blaine.



There was one revelation here, as there had been at

many conventions previously, which could not fail to

produce a discouraging impression upon every thoughtful

American.  The number of delegates and substitutes sent

to the convention amounted in all to a few hundreds, but

these were almost entirely lost in the immense crowd of

spectators, numbering, it was said, from twelve to fifteen

thousand.  In the only conventions which I had ever before

seen, including those at Baltimore and Philadelphia and

various State conventions of New York, the delegates had

formed the majority of those in the hall; but in this great

``wigwam'' there were times in which the most important

part was played by the spectators.  At some moments this

overwhelming mob, which encircled the seats of the delegates

on the floor and rose above them on all sides in the

galleries, endeavored to sweep the convention in the direction

of its own whims and fancies.  From time to time

the convention ceased entirely to be a deliberative body. 

As the names of certain favorite candidates were called, or

as certain popular allusions were made in speeches, this

mob really took possession of the convention and became

almost frantic.  I saw many women jumping up and down,

dishevelled and hysterical, and some men acting in much

the same way.  It was absolutely unworthy of a convention

of any party, a disgrace to decency, and a blot upon

the reputation of our country.  I am not alone in this

opinion.  More than once during my official life in Europe I

have heard the whole thing lamented by leading liberal

statesmen as bringing discredit on all democratic government.



There were times indeed when the galleries sought to

howl down those who were taking part in the convention,

and this was notably the case during a very courageous

speech by Mr. Roosevelt.



I may mention, in passing, that the country then

received the first revelation of that immense pluck and vigor

which have since carried Mr. Roosevelt through so many

political conflicts, borne him through all the dangers of

the Santiago campaign, placed him in the governor's chair

of the State of New York and in the Vice-Presidency of

the United States, leading to the Presidency, which he

holds as I revise these lines.  At the Chicago Convention,

though he was in a small minority, nothing daunted him. 

As he stood upon a bench and addressed the president,

there came from the galleries on all sides a howl and

yell, ``Sit down! sit down!'' with whistling and cat-calls. 

All to no purpose; the mob might as well have tried to

whistle down a bronze statue.  Roosevelt, slight in build

as he then was, was greater than all that crowd combined. 

He stood quietly through it all, defied the mob, and finally

obliged them to listen to him.



Toward the end of the convention this mob showed itself

even worse than before.  It became evident that large

parts of the galleries were packed in the interest of the

local candidate for the Vice-Presidency, General Logan,

and this mass of onlookers did their best to put down all

delegates supporting any other.



No more undemocratic system was ever devised.  The

tendency of this ``wigwam'' plan of holding great meetings

or conventions is to station a vast mob of sensation-

seeking men and women in the galleries between the delegates

and the country at large.  The inevitable consequence

is that the ``fog-horns'' of a convention play the most ef-

fective part, and that they seek mainly the applause of the

galleries.  The country at large is for the moment

forgotten.  The controlling influence is the mob, mainly from

the city where the convention is held.  The whole thing is

a monstrous abuse.  Attention has been called to it by

thinking Democrats as well as by Republicans, who have

seen in it a sign of deterioration which has produced many

unfortunate consequences and will produce more.  It is

the old story of the French Convention overawed by a gallery

mob and mistaking the mob whimsies of a city for the

sober judgment of the country.  One result of it the whole

nation saw when, in more recent years, a youthful member

of Congress, with no training to fit him for executive

duties, was suddenly, by the applause of such a mob,

imposed upon the Democratic National Convention as a

candidate for the Presidency.  Those who recall the way in

which ``the boy orator of the Platte'' became the Democratic

candidate for the Chief Magistracy over seventy

millions of people, on account of a few half-mawkish, half-

blasphemous phrases in a convention speech, can bear

witness to the necessity of a reform in this particular--a

reform which will forbid a sensation-seeking city mob to

usurp the function of the whole people of our Republic.



In spite of these mob hysterics, the Independents

persisted to the last in supporting Mr. Edmunds for the first

place, but in voting for the second place they separated. 

For the Vice-Presidency I cast the only vote which was

thrown for my old Cornell student, Mr. Foraker, previously

governor of Ohio, and since that time senator

from that State.



In spite of sundry ``defects of his qualities,'' which

I freely recognized, I regarded him as a fearless, upright,

downright, straightforward man of the sort who must

always play a great part in American politics.



It was at this convention that I saw for the first time

Mr. McKinley of Ohio, and his quiet self-possession in

the midst of the various whirls and eddies and storms

caused me to admire him greatly.  Calm, substantial, quick

to see a good point, strong to maintain it, he was evidently

a born leader of men.  His speeches were simple, clear,

forcible, and aided at times in rescuing the self-respect

of the body.



This Republican convention having adjourned, the

National Democratic Convention met soon afterward in the

same place and nominated Grover Cleveland of New York. 

He was a man whom I greatly respected.  As already

stated, his career as sheriff of Erie County, as mayor of

Buffalo, and as governor of the State of New York had

led me to admire him.  He had seemed utterly incapable

of making any bid for mob support; there had

appeared not the slightest germ of demagogism in him;

he had refused to be a mere partizan tool and had steadily

stood for the best ideals of government.  As governor

he showed the same qualities which had won admiration

during his previous career as sheriff and mayor.  He

made as many appointments as he could without regard

to political considerations, and it was remarked with

wonder that when a number of leading Democratic ``workers''

and ``wheel-horses'' came to the executive chamber in

Albany in order to dictate purely partizan appointments,

he virtually turned them out of the room.  Most amazing

thing of all, he had vetoed a bill reducing the fare on the

elevated railroads of New York, in the face of the earnest

advice of partizans who assured him that by doing so he

would surely array against him the working-classes of

that city and virtually annihilate his political future. 

To this his answer was that whatever his sympathies for

the working-people might be, he could not, as an honest

man, allow such a bill to pass, and, come what might, he

would not.  He had also dared, quietly but firmly, to resist

the chief ``boss'' of his party in New York City, and he

had consequently to brave the vials of Celtic wrath.  The

scenes at the convention which nominated him were stirring,

and an eminent Western delegate struck a chord in

the hearts of thousands of Republicans as well as

Democrats when he said, ``We love him for the enemies he has

made.''  Had it been a question simply between men, great

numbers of us who voted for Mr. Blaine would have voted

for Mr. Cleveland; but whatever temptation I might be

subjected to in the matter was overcome by one fact:  Mr.

Cleveland was too much like the Trojan horse, for he bore

with him a number of men who, when once brought into

power, were sure to labor hard to undo everything that

he would endeavor to accomplish, and his predestined

successor in the governorship of the State of New York was

one of those whom I looked upon as especially dangerous.



Therefore it was, that, after looking over the ground, I

wrote an open letter to Mr. Theodore Roosevelt and other

Independents, giving the reasons why those of us who had

supported Mr. Edmunds should now support Mr. Blaine,

and in this view Mr. Roosevelt, with a large number of our

Independent friends, agreed.



I had, however, small hopes.  It was clear to me that Mr.

Blaine had little chance of being elected; that, in fact, he

was too heavily weighted with the transactions which Mr.

Pullman had revealed to me some months before the

beginning of the convention.



But I made an effort to commit him to the only policy

which could save him.  For, having returned to the university,

I wrote William Walter Phelps, an old friend, who

had been his chief representative at Chicago, an earnest

letter stating that there seemed to me but one chance of

rallying to Mr. Blaine's support the very considerable

body of disaffected Republicans in the State of New York;

that, almost without exception, they were ardent believers

in a reform of the civil service; and that an out-and-out

earnest declaration in favor of it by our presidential

candidate might do much to propitiate them.  I reminded

Mr. Phelps of the unquestioned evils of the ``spoils

system,'' and said that Mr. Blaine must surely have often

observed them, suffered under pressure from them, and

felt that something should be done to remedy them; and

that if he would now express his conviction to this effect,

taking strong ground in favor of the reform and basing

his utterances on his experiences as a statesman, it would,

in my mind, do much to save the State of New York for

the Republicans.



After writing this letter, feeling that it might seem to

Mr. Phelps and to Mr. Blaine himself very presuming for

a man who had steadily opposed them at Chicago thus to

volunteer advice, I laid it aside.  But it happened that I

had been chosen one of the committee of delegates to go

to Maine to apprise Mr. Blaine formally of his nomination,

and it also happened that my old student and friend,

Judge Foraker, was another member of the committee.  It

was impossible for me to go to Maine, since the commencement

of the university, at which I was bound to preside,

came on the day appointed for Mr. Blaine's reception of

the committee at Bangor; but Judge Foraker having

stopped over at the university to attend a meeting of the

trustees as an alumni member of that body, I mentioned

this letter to him.  He asked to see it, and, having read it,

asked to be allowed to take it with him.  I consented, and

heard nothing more from him on the subject; but the

following week, at the Yale commencement, while sitting with

Mr. Evarts and Judge Shipman to award prizes in the

law department, I saw, looking toward me over the

heads of the audience in the old Centre Church, my

friend Frederick William Holls of New York, and it

was evident from his steady gaze that he had something

to say.  The award of prizes having been made and the

audience dismissed, Mr. Holls met me and said:  ``Mr.

Blaine will adopt your suggestion in his letter of

acceptance.''  Both of us were overjoyed.  It looked like a

point scored not only for the Republican party, but for the

cause which we both had so deeply at heart.



But as the campaign went on it was more and more

evident that this concession, which I believe he would have

adhered to had he been elected, was to be in vain.



It was perhaps, on the whole, and on both sides, the vilest

political campaign ever waged.  Accusations were made

against both candidates which should have forever brought

contempt on the men who made them.  Nothing could have

been further from the wish of either candidate than that

such accusations should be made against his opponent, but

each was powerless: the vile flood of slander raged on. 

But I am glad here to recall the fact that when, at a later

period, one of the worst inventors of slander against Mr.

Blaine sought reward in the shape of office from President

Cleveland, he was indignantly spurned.



In politics I took very little part.  During the summer

my main thoughts were directed toward a controversy before

the Board of Regents, in regard to the system of

higher education in the State of New York, with my

old friend President Anderson of Rochester, who had

vigorously attacked some ideas which seemed to me essential

to any proper development of university education

in America; and this was hardly finished when I was asked

to take part in organizing the American Historical Association

at Saratoga, and to give the opening address.  This,

with other pursuits of an academic nature, left me little

time for the political campaign.



But there occurred one little incident to which I still

look back with amusement.  My old friends and constituents

in Syracuse had sent me a general invitation to

come over from the university and preside at some one

of their Republican mass-meetings.  My answer was that

as to the ``hack speakers'' of the campaign, with their

venerable gags, stale jokes, and nauseating slanders, I had no

desire to hear them, and did not care to sit on the platform

with them; but that when they had a speaker to whom I

cared to listen I would gladly come.  The result was that

one day I received a letter inviting me to preside over a

mass-meeting at Syracuse, at which Mr. McKinley was to

make the speech.  I accepted gladly and on the appointed

evening arrived at the Syracuse railway station.  There

I found the mayor of the city ready to take me in his

carriage to the hall where the meeting was to be held; but we

had hardly left the station when he said to me:  ``Mr.

White, I am very sorry, but Mr. McKinley has been de-

layed and we have had to get another speaker.''  I was

greatly disappointed, and expressed my feelings somewhat

energetically, when the mayor said:  ``But this speaker is

really splendid; he carries all before him; he is a thorough

Kentucky orator.''  My answer was that I knew the breed

but too well, and that if I had known that Mr. McKinley

was not to come I certainly would not have left my work

at the university.  By this time we had arrived at the door

of the Globe Hotel, whence the speaker entered the carriage. 

He was a tall, sturdy Kentuckian, and his appearance

and manner showed that he had passed a very convivial

day with the younger members of the committee

appointed to receive him.



His first words on entering the carriage were not very

reassuring.  No sooner had I been introduced to him than

he asked where he could get a glass of brandy.  ``For,''

said he, ``without a good drink just before I go on the

platform I can't make a speech.''  I attempted to quiet

him and to show him the difficulties in the case.  I said: 

``Colonel ----, you have been with our young men here

all day, and no doubt have had a fairly good time; but in

our meetings here there is just now need of especial care. 

You will have in your audience to-night a large number of

the more sedate and conservative citizens of Syracuse,

church members, men active in the various temperance

societies, and the like.  There never was a campaign when

men were in greater doubt; great numbers of these people

have not yet made up their minds how they will vote, and

the slightest exhilaration on your part may cost us

hundreds of votes.''  He answered:  ``That's all very well, but

the simple fact is that I am here to make a speech, and I

can't make it unless I have a good drink beforehand.''  I

said nothing more, but, as he still pressed the subject on the

mayor and the other member of the committee, I quietly

said to them as I left the carriage:  ``If that man drinks

anything more before speaking, I will not go on the stage

with him, and the reason why I don't will speedily be

made known.''  The mayor reassured me, and we all went

together into the large room adjoining the stage, I keeping

close watch over the orator, taking pains to hold him

steadily in conversation, introducing as many leading

men of the town to him as possible, thus preventing any

opportunity to carry out his purpose of taking more

strong drink, and to my great satisfaction he had no

opportunity to do so before we were summoned into the hall.



Arrived there, I made my speech, and then the orator of

the evening arose.  But just before he began to speak

he filled from a water-pitcher a large glass, and drank

it off.  My thought at the moment was that this would

dilute some of the stronger fluids he had absorbed during

the day and cool him down somewhat.  He then

went on in a perfectly self-possessed way, betrayed not the

slightest effect of drinking, and made a most convincing

and effective speech, replete with wit and humor; yet,

embedded in his wit and humor and rollicking fun, were

arguments appealing to the best sentiments of his hearers.  The

speech was in every way a success; at its close I congratulated

him upon it, and was about to remind him that he

had done very well on his glass of cold water, when he

suddenly said to me:  ``Mr. White, you see that it was just

as I told you: if I had n't taken that big glass of gin from

the pitcher just before I started, I could not have made

any speech.''



``All 's well that ends well,'' and, though the laugh was

at my expense, the result was not such as to make me

especially unhappy.



But this campaign of 1884 ended as I had expected.  Mr.

Cleveland was elected to the Presidency.







CHAPTER XIII



HENDRICKS, JOHN SHERMAN, BANCROFT,

AND OTHERS--1884-1891



The following spring, visiting Washington, I met

President Cleveland again.



Of the favorable impression made upon me by his

career as Governor of New York I have already spoken,

and shall have occasion to speak presently of his

Presidency.  The renewal of our acquaintance even increased

my respect for him.  He was evidently a strong, honest

man, trying to do his duty under difficulties.



I also met again Mr. Cleveland's opponent in the previous

campaign--Mr. Blaine.  Calling on Mr. William

Walter Phelps, then in Congress, whom I had known as

minister of the United States at Vienna, and who was

afterward my successor at Berlin, I made some reference

to Mr. Blaine, when Mr. Phelps said:  ``Why don't

you go and call upon him?''  I answered that it might

be embarrassing to both of us, to which he replied:  ``I

don't think so.  In spite of your opposition to him

at Chicago, were I in your place I would certainly go

to his house and call upon him.''  That afternoon I

took this advice, and when I returned to the hotel Mr.

Blaine came with me, talking in a most interesting way. 

He spoke of my proposed journey to Virginia, and discussed

Jefferson and Hamilton, admiring both, but Jefferson

the most.  As to his own working habits, he said

that he rose early, did his main work in the morning, and

never did any work in the evening; that, having been

brought up in strongly Sabbatarian notions during his

boyhood in Pennsylvania, he had ever since, from the

force of habit, reserved Sunday as a day of complete rest. 

Speaking of the customs in Pennsylvania at that time, he

said that not even a walk for exercise was allowed, and

nothing was ever cooked on the sacred day.



I met him afterward on various occasions, and could not

but admire him.  At a dinner-party he was vexatiously

badgered by a very bumptious professor, who allowed

himself to speak in a rather offensive manner of ideas

which Mr. Blaine represented; and the quiet but decisive

way in which the latter disposed of his pestering

interlocutor was worthy of all praise.



Mr. Blaine was certainly the most fascinating man I

have ever known in politics.  No wonder that so many

Republicans in all parts of the country seemed ready to

give their lives to elect him.  The only other public man

in the United States whose personality had ever elicited

such sympathy and devotion was Henry Clay.  Perhaps

his nearest friend was Mr. Phelps, to whom I have

referred above,--one of the best, truest, and most winning

men I have ever known.  He had been especially

devoted to Mr. Blaine, with whom he had served in

Congress, and it was understood that if the latter had been

elected Mr. Phelps would have been his Secretary of State.



Mr. Phelps complained to me, half seriously, half

jocosely, of what is really a crying abuse in the United States

--namely, that there is no proper reporting of the

proceedings of the Houses of Congress in the main journals

of the country which can enable the people at large

to form any just idea as to how their representatives are

conducting the public business.  He said:  ``I may make

a most careful speech on any important subject before

Congress and it will not be mentioned in the New York

papers, but let me make a joke and it will be published all

over the United States.  Yesterday, on a wager, I tried

an experiment:  I made two poor little jokes during a short

talk in the House, and here they are in the New York

papers of this morning.''



During this visit to Washington I met at the house of

my classmate and dear friend, Randall Gibson, then a

senator from Louisiana, a number of distinguished men

among them the Vice-President, Mr. Hendricks, and General

Butler, senator from South Carolina.



Vice-President Hendricks seemed sick and sore.  He

had expected to be a candidate for the Presidency, with

a strong probability of election, but had accepted the Vice-

Presidency; and the subject which seemed to elicit his

most vitriolic ill will was reform in the civil service.  As we

sat one evening in the smoking-room at Senator Gibson's

he was very bitter against the system, when, to my surprise,

General Butler took up the cudgels against him and

made a most admirable argument.  At that moment, for

the first time, I felt that the war between North and South

was over; for all the old issues seemed virtually settled,

and here, as regarded this new issue, on which I felt very

deeply, was one of the most ardent of Confederate soldiers,

a most bitter pro-slavery man before the Civil War,

one who, during the war, had lost a leg in battle, nearer

me politically than were many of my friends and neighbors

in the North.



Senator Jones of Florida, who was present, gave us

some character sketches, and among others delineated

admirably General Williams, known in the Mexican War

as ``Cerro Gordo Williams,'' who was for a time senator

from Kentucky.  He said that Williams had a wonderful

gift of spread-eagle oratory, but that, finding no

listeners for it among his colleagues, he became utterly

disgusted and went about saying that the Senate was a

``d----d frigid, respectable body that chilled his intellect.'' 

This led my fellow-guests to discuss the characteristics of

the Senate somewhat, and I was struck by one remark in

which all agreed--namely, that ``there are no politics in

executive session.''



Gibson remarked that the best speech he had ever

heard in the Senate was made by John Sherman.



As regards civil-service matters, I found on all sides

an opinion that Mr. Cleveland was, just as far as possible,

basing his appointments upon merit.  Gibson mentioned

the fact that a candidate for an important office in his

State, who had committed three murders, had secured

very strong backing, but that President Cleveland utterly

refused to appoint him.



With President Cleveland I had a very interesting

interview.  He referred to his visit to Cornell University,

said that he would have liked nothing so well as to go

more thoroughly through its various departments, and, as

when I formerly saw him, expressed his regret at the loss

of such opportunities as an institution of that kind affords.



At this time I learned from him and from those near

him something regarding his power for hard work.  It

was generally understood that he insisted on writing out

all important papers and conducting his correspondence

in his own hand, and the result was that during a

considerable period of the congressional sessions he sat at

his desk until three o'clock in the morning.



It was evident that his up-and-down, curt, independent

way did not at all please some of the leading members

of his party; in fact, there were signs of a serious

estrangement caused by the President's refusals to yield

to senators and other leaders of the party in the matter

of appointments to office.  To illustrate this feeling, a

plain, bluff Western senator, Mr. Sawyer of Wisconsin,

told me a story.



Senator Sawyer had built up a fortune and gained a

great influence in his State by a very large and extensive

business in pine lumber, and he had a sort of rough,

quaint woodman's wit which was at times very amusing. 

He told me that, some days before, two of his most eminent

Democratic colleagues in the Senate were just leaving the

Capitol, and from something they said he saw that they

were going to call upon the President.  He therefore

asked them, ``How do you like this new President of

yours?''  ``Oh,'' answered the senators in chorus, ``he is

a very good man--a very good man indeed.''  ``Yes,''

said Senator Sawyer, ``but how do you LIKE him?''  ``Oh,''

answered the senators, ``we like him very much--very

much indeed.''  ``Well,'' said Sawyer, ``I will tell you a

story before you go to the White House if you will agree

when you get back, to tell me--`honest Injun'--whether it

suits your case.''  Both laughingly agreed, and Mr. Sawyer

then told them the following story:  When he was a

young man with very small means, he and two or three

other young wood-choppers made up an expedition for

lumber-cutting.  As they were too poor to employ a cook

for their camp, they agreed to draw lots, and that the

one on whom the lot fell should be cook, but only until

some one of the company found fault; then the fault-

finder should become cook in his turn.  Lots being

drawn, one of them, much to his disgust, was thus chosen

cook, and toward the close of the day he returned to camp,

before the others, to get supper ready.  Having taken

from the camp stores a large quantity of beans, he put

them into a pot boiling over the fire, as he had seen his

mother do in his boyhood, and then proceeded to pour in

salt.  Unfortunately the salt-box slipped in his hand, and

he poured in much more than he had intended--in fact, the

whole contents of the box.  On the return of the woodmen

to the cabin, ravenously hungry, they proceeded to dish

out the boiled beans, but the first one who put a spoonful

in his mouth instantly cried out with a loud objurgation,

``Thunder and lightning! this dish is all salt''; but, in a

moment, remembering that if he found fault he must himself

become cook, he said very gently, ``BUT I LIKE SALT.''

Both senators laughed and agreed that they would give

an honest report of their feelings to Senator Sawyer

when they had seen the President.  On their return, Sawyer

met them and said, ``Well, honest Injun, how was it?'' 

They both laughed and said, ``Well, we like salt.''



Among many interesting experiences I recall especially

a dinner at the house of Mr. Fairchild, Secretary

of the Treasury.  He spoke of the civil service, and said

that a short time previously President Cleveland had

said to him, regarding the crowd pressing for office:  ``A

suggestion to these office-seekers as to the good of the

country would make them faint.''



During this dinner I happened to be seated between

Senators John Sherman of Ohio and Vance of Georgia,

and presently Mr. Vance--one of the jolliest mortals I

have ever met--turned toward his colleague, Senator Sherman,

and said, very blandly:  ``Senator, I am glad to see

you back from Ohio; I hope you found your fences in

good condition.''  There was a general laugh, and when

it was finished Senator Sherman told me in a pleasant

way how the well-known joke about his ``looking after his

fences'' arose.  He said that he was the owner of a large

farm in Ohio, and that some years previously his tenant

wrote urging him most earnestly to improve its fences,

so that finally he went to Ohio to look into the matter. 

On arriving there, he found a great crowd awaiting

him and calling for a speech, when he excused himself

by saying that he had not come to Ohio on political

business, but had merely come ``to look after his fences.'' 

The phrase caught the popular fancy, and ``to look after

one's fences'' became synonymous with minding one's

political safeguards.



I remember also an interesting talk with Mr. Bayard,

who had been one of the most eminent senators in his time,

who was then Secretary of State, and who became, at a

later period, ambassador of the United States to Great

Britain.  Speaking of office-seeking, he gave a comical

account of the developing claims of sundry applicants

for foreign missions, who, he said, ``are at first willing to

go, next anxious to go, and finally angry because they

cannot go.''



On another social occasion, the possibility of another

attempt at secession by States being discussed, General

Butler of South Carolina said:  ``No more secession for

me.''  To this, Senator Gibson, who also had been a brigadier-

general in the Confederate service, and had seen

much hard fighting, said, ``And no more for me.'' Butler

rejoined, ``We may have to help in preventing others from

seceding one of these days.''  I was glad to note that both

Butler and Gibson spoke thoroughly well of their former

arch-enemy, General Grant.



Very interesting was it to meet again Mr. George

Bancroft.  He referred to his long service as minister at

Berlin, expressed his surprise that Bismarck, whom he

remembered as fat, had become bony, and was very severe

against both clericals and liberals who had voted against

allowing aid to Bismarck in the time of his country's

greatest necessity.



I also met my Cornell colleague Goldwin Smith, the

former Oxford professor and historian, who expressed his

surprise and delight at the perfect order and decorum of

the crowd, numbering nearly five thousand persons, at the

presidential levee the night before.  In order to understand

what an American crowd was like, instead of going

into the White House by the easier way, as he was entitled

by his invitation to do, he had taken his place in the long

procession far outside the gate and gradually moved

through the grounds into the presidential presence, taking

about an hour for the purpose.  He said that there was

never any pressing, crowding, or impatience, and he

compared the crowd most favorably with any similar body in

a London street.



Chief Justice Waite I also found a very substantial

interesting man; but especially fascinating was General

Sheridan, who, at a dinner given by my Berlin predecessor,

Mr. Bancroft Davis, described the scene at the battle

of Gravelotte when, owing to a rush by the French, the

Emperor of Germany was for a time in real danger and

was reluctantly obliged to fall back.  He said that during

the panic and retreat toward Thionville he saw the Emperor

halt from time to time to scold soldiers who threw

away their muskets; that very many German soldiers,

during this panic, cast aside everything except the clothes

they wore--not only their guns, but their helmets; that

afterward the highways and fields were strewn thickly

with these, and that wagons were sent out to collect them. 

He also said that Bismarck spoke highly to him regarding

the martial and civil qualities of the crown prince,

afterward the Emperor Frederick, but that regarding

the Red Prince, Frederick Charles, he expressed a very

different opinion.



Speaking of a statement that some one had invented

armor which would ward off a rifle-ball, Sheridan said

that during the Civil War an officer who wore a steel vest

beneath his coat was driven out of decent society by

general contempt; and at this Goldwin Smith told a story of

the Duke of Wellington, who, when troubled by an inventor

of armor, nearly scared him to death by ordering

him to wear his own armor and allow a platoon of soldiers

to fire at him.



During the course of the conversation Sheridan said

that soldiers were braver now than ever before--braver,

indeed, than the crusaders, as was proved by the fact

that in these days they wear no armor.  To this Goldwin

Smith answered that he thought war in the middle ages

was more destructive than even in our time.  Sheridan

said that breech-loading rifles kill more than all the

cannon.



At a breakfast given by Goldwin Smith at Wormley's,

Bancroft, speaking of Berlin matters, said that the Emperor

William did not know that Germany was the second

power in the world so far as a mercantile navy was

concerned until he himself told him; and on the ignorance

of monarchs regarding their own domains, Goldwin

Smith said that Lord Malmesbury, when assured by Napoleon

III that in the plebiscite he would have the vote of

the army, which was five hundred thousand, answered,

``But, your majesty, your army numbers seven hundred

thousand,'' whereupon the Emperor was silent.  The in-

ference was that his majesty knew a large part of his

army to be merely on paper.



At this Mr. John Field, of Philadelphia, said that on

the breaking out of the Franco-Prussian War he went to

General Grant at Long Branch, and asked him how the

war was likely to turn out, to which the general answered,

``As I am President of the United States, I am unable to

answer.''  ``But,'' said Field, ``I am a citizen sovereign

and ask an opinion.''  ``Well,'' said General Grant,

``confidentially, the Germans will beat the French thoroughly

and march on Paris.  The French army is a mere shell.'' 

This reminded me that General Grant, on my own visit

to him some weeks before, had foretold to me sundry

difficulties of Lord Wolseley in Egypt just as they afterward

occurred.



At a dinner with Senator Morrill of Vermont I met

General Schenck, formerly a leading member of Congress

and minister to Brazil and to England.  He was very

interesting in his sketches of English orators; thought

Bright the best, Gladstone admirable, and Sir Stafford

Northcote, with his everlasting hawing and humming,

intolerable.  He gave interesting reminiscences of Tom

Corwin, his old preceptor, and said that Corwin's power

over an audience was magical.  He added that he once

attended a public dinner in Boston, and, sitting near

Everett, who was the chief speaker, noticed that when the

waiters sought to clear the table and were about to remove

a bouquet containing two small flags, Everett would not

allow them to do it, and that later in the evening, during

his speech, just at the proper point, he caught up these

flags, as if accidentally, and waved them.  He said that

everything with Everett and Choate seemed to be cut and

dried; that even the interruptions seemed prepared beforehand.



Senator Morrill then told a story regarding Everett's

great speech at the opening of the Dudley Observatory

at Albany, which I had heard at the time of its delivery. 

In this speech Everett said:  ``Last night, crossing the

Connecticut River, I saw mirrored in its waters Arcturus,

then fully at the zenith, and I thought,'' etc., etc.; ``but,''

said Morrill, ``some one looked into the matter and found

that Everett, before leaving home, had evidently turned

the globe in his study wrong side up, for at that time

Arcturus was not at the zenith, but at the nadir.''



At the Cornell commencement of this year (1885) I

resigned my presidency of the university.  It had

nominally lasted eighteen years, but really more than twenty,

since I had taken the lead in the work of the university

even before its charter was granted, twenty years previously,

and from that day the main charge of its organization

and of everything except providing funds had been

intrusted to me.  Regarding this part of my life I shall

speak more fully in another chapter.



Shortly after this resignation two opportunities were

offered me which caused me considerable thought.



As to the first, President Cleveland was kind enough

to write me an autograph letter asking whether I would

accept one of the positions on the new Interstate Railway

Commission.  I felt it a great honor to be asked to act as

colleague with such men as Chief Justice Cooley, Mr.

Morrison, and others already upon that board, but I

recognized my own incompetence to discharge the duties of

such a position properly.  Though I had been, some years

before, a director in two of the largest railway corporations

in the United States, my heart was never in that

duty, and I never prepared myself to discharge it. 

Thinking the matter over fully, I felt obliged to decline

the place.  My heart was set on finishing the book which

I had so long wished to publish,--my ``History of the

Warfare of Science with Theology,''--and in order to

cut myself off from other work and get some needed

rest I sailed for Europe on October 3, 1885, but while

engaged most delightfully in visits to Oxford,

Cambridge, and various places on the Continent, I received

by cable an offer which had also a very tempting side. 

It was sent by my old friend Mr. Henry Sage of Ithaca,

urged me to accept the nomination to Congress from that

district, and assured me that the nomination was equivalent

to an election.  There were some reasons why such a

position was attractive to me, but the more I thought of

it the more it seemed to me that to discharge these duties

properly would take me from other work to which I was

pledged.  Before deciding the question, however, I determined

to consult two old friends who were then living in

London hotels adjacent to my own.  The first of these was

my dear old instructor, with whom my relations had been

of the kindest ever since my first year at Yale--President

Porter.



On my laying the matter before him, he said, ``Accept

by all means''; but as I showed him the reasons on both

sides, he at last reluctantly agreed with me that probably

it was best to send a declination.



The other person consulted was Mr. James Belden of

Syracuse, afterward a member of Congress from the

Onondaga district, a politician who had a most intimate

knowledge of men and affairs in our State.  We had been

during a long period, political adversaries, but I had

come to respect sundry qualities he had more lately

exhibited, and therefore went to him as a practical man

and laid the case before him.  He expressed his great

surprise that I should advise with him, my old political

adversary, but he said, ``Since you do come, I will give

you the very best advice I can.''



We then went over the case together, and I feel sure

that he advised me as well as the oldest of my friends

could have done, and with a shrewdness and foresight

all his own.



One of his arguments ran somewhat as follows:  ``To

be successful in politics a man must really think of

nothing else; it must be his first thought in the morning and

his last at night; everything else must yield to it.  Heretofore

you have quietly gone on your way, sought nothing,

and taken what has been freely tendered you in the interest

of the party and of the public.  I know the Elmira

district, and you can have the nomination and the election

without trouble; but the question is whether you could

ever be happy in the sort of work which you must do in

order to take a proper place in the House of Representatives. 

First of all, you must give up everything else and

devote yourself to that alone; and even then, when you

have succeeded, you have only to look about you and see

the men who have achieved success in that way, and who,

after all, have found in it nothing but disappointment.'' 

In saying this he expressed the conclusion at which I had

already arrived.



I cabled my absolute declination of the nomination, and

was reproved by my friends for not availing myself of

this opportunity to take part in political affairs, but have

nevertheless always felt that my decision was wise.



To tell the truth, I never had, and never desired to

have, any capacity for the rough-and-tumble of politics. 

I greatly respect many of the men who have gifts of

that sort, but have recognized the fact that my influence

in and on politics must be of a different kind.  I have

indeed taken part in some stormy scenes in conventions,

meetings, and legislatures, but always with regret.  My

true r<o^>le has been a more quiet one.  My ambition,

whether I have succeeded in it or not, has been to set

young men in trains of fruitful thought, to bring mature

men into the line of right reason, and to aid in devising

and urging needed reforms, in developing and supporting

wise policies, and in building up institutions which shall

strengthen what is best in American life.



Early in 1891 I was asked by Mr. Sherman Rogers

of Buffalo, one of the best and truest men in political

life that I have ever known, to accompany him and

certain other gentlemen to Washington, in order to

present to Mr. Harrison, who had now become President of

the United States, an argument for the extension of the

civil-service rules.  Accompanied by Mr. Theodore

Roosevelt and Senator Cabot Lodge, our delegation reached

the Executive Mansion at the time fixed by the President,

and were received in a way which surprised me.  Mr.

Harrison seemed, to say the least, not in good humor.  He

stood leaning on the corner of his desk, and he asked none

of us to sit.  All of us had voted for him, and had come

to him in his own interest as well as in the interest of the

country; but he seemed to like us none the better for all

that.  The first speech was made by Mr. Rogers.  Dwelling

on the disappointment of thoughtful Republicans

throughout the country at the delay in redeeming pledges

made by the Republican National Convention as to the

extension of the civil service, and reiterated in the

President's own speeches in the United States Senate, he in a

playful way referred to the conduct of certain officials in

Buffalo, when the President interrupted him, as it seemed

to me at the time very brusquely and even rudely

saying:  ``Mr. Rogers, you have no right to impute evil

motives to any man.  The motives of these gentlemen to

whom you refer are presumably as good as your own.  An

argument based upon such imputations cannot advance the

cause you support in the slightest degree.''  Mr. Rogers

was somewhat disconcerted for a moment, but, having

resumed his speech, he presented, in a very dignified and

convincing way, the remainder of his argument.  He was

followed by the other members from various States, giving

different sides of the case, each showing the importance

which Republicans in his own part of the country

attributed to an extension of the civil-service rules.



My own turn came last.  I said:  ``Mr. President:  I will

make no speech, but will simply state two facts.



``First: Down to a comparatively recent period every

high school, college, and university in the Northern States

has been a center of Republican ideas: no one will gainsay

this for a moment.  But recently there has come a change. 

During nearly twenty years it has been my duty to nominate

to the trustees of Cornell University candidates for

various positions in its faculty; the fundamental charter

of the institution absolutely forbids any consideration, in

such cases, of the party or sect to which any candidate

belongs, and I have always faithfully carried out that

injunction, never, in any one of the multitude of nominations

that I have made, allowing the question of politics to

enter in the slightest degree.  But still it has happened that,

almost without exception, the candidates have proved to be

Republicans, and this to such an extent that at times I have

regretted it; for the university has been obliged frequently

to ask for legislation from a Democratic legislature,

and I have always feared that this large preponderance

of Republican professors would be brought up

against us as an evidence that we were not true to the

principles of our charter.  As a matter of fact, down to

two or three years since, there were, as I casually learned,

out of a faculty of about fifty members, not over eight

or ten Democrats.  But during these recent years all this

has been changed, and at the State election, when Judge

Folger was defeated for the governorship, I found to my

surprise that, almost without exception, my colleagues in

the faculty had voted the Democratic ticket; so far as I

could learn, but three besides myself had voted for the

Republican candidate.''  President Harrison immediately

said:  ``Mr. White, was that not chiefly due to the free-

trade tendencies of college-men?''  I answered:  ``No, Mr.

President; the great majority of these men who voted

with the Democrats were protectionists, and you will

yourself see that they must have been so if they had

continued to vote for the Republican ticket down to that

election.  All that I hear leads me to the conviction

that the real cause is disappointment at the delay of the

Republican party in making good its promises to improve

the public service.  In this question the faculties of our

colleges and universities, especially in the Eastern, Middle,

and Northern States, take a deep interest.  In fact, it

is with them the question of all questions; and I think

this is one of the things which, at that election in New

York, caused the most overwhelming defeat that a candidate

for governor had ever experienced.''  To this the

President listened attentively, and I then said:  ``Mr.

President, my second point is this:  The State of New

York is, of course, of immense importance to the Republican

party, and it has been carried in recent years by a

majority of a few hundred votes.  There are more than

fourteen thousand school districts in the State, and in

nearly every one of these school districts there are a

certain number of earnest men--anywhere from a handful

to a houseful--who believe that since the slavery question

is removed from national politics, the only burning

question which remains is the `spoils system' and the

reform of the civil service.  Now, you have only to multiply

the fourteen thousand school districts by a very

small figure, and you will see the importance of this question

as regards the vote of the State of New York.  I know

whereof I speak, for I have myself addressed meetings

in many of these districts in favor of a reform of the civil

service, have had correspondence with other districts in

all parts of the State, and am sure that there is a deep-

seated feeling on the subject in great numbers of them,--

a feeling akin to what used to be called in the anti-slavery

days `fanaticism,'--that is, a deep-seated conviction that

this is now the most important question before the American

people, and that it must be settled in precedence

to all others.''



The President received what I had to say courteously,

and then began a reply to us all.  He took at first rather

a bitter tone, saying that he had a right to find fault

with all of us; that the Civil Service League had

denounced his administration most unjustly for its relation

to the spoils system; that he was moving as rapidly in the

matter as circumstances permitted; that he was anxious

to redeem the promises made by the party and by himself;

that he had already done something and purposed to do

more; and that the glorifications of the progress made by

the previous administration in this respect, at the expense

of his own, had been grossly unjust.



To this we made a short rejoinder on one point, stating

that his complaint against us was without foundation;

that not one of us was a member of the Civil Service

League; that not one of us had taken any part in its

deliberations; and that we could not, therefore, be made

responsible in any way for its utterances.  The President

now became somewhat more genial, though he did not

ask us to be seated, alluding in a pungent but good-natured

way to the zeal for reform shown by Mr. Roosevelt,

who was standing by, and closing in considerably better

humor than he had begun.  Although I cannot say that I

was greatly pleased with his treatment of the committee,

I remembered that, although courtesy was not generally

considered his strong point, he was known to possess

many sterling qualities, and I felt bound to allow that his

speech revealed a man of strength and honest purpose. 

All of us, even Mr. Roosevelt and Senator Lodge, came

away believing that good had been done, and that the

President, before his term of office had expired, would do

what he could in the right direction; and I am glad to say

that this expectation was fulfilled.







CHAPTER XIV



McKINLEY AND ROOSEVELT--1891-1904



During the summer of 1891 came a curious episode in

my life, to which, as it was considerably discussed in

the newspapers at the time, and as various sensational

news-makers have dwelt upon it since, I may be permitted

to refer.  During several years before,--in fact, ever since

my two terms in the State Senate,--various people, and

especially my old Cornell students throughout the State,

had written to me and published articles in my behalf

as a candidate for governor.  I had never encouraged

these, and whenever I referred to them deprecated

them, since I preferred a very different line of life,

and felt that the grapple with spoilsmen which every

governor must make would wear me out very rapidly. 

But the election which was that year approaching was felt

to be very important, and old friends from various

parts of the State thought that, in the severe contest

which was expected, I stood a better chance of election

than any other who could be named at that particular

time, their theory being that the German vote of the State

would come to me, and that it would probably come to no

other Republican.



The reason for this theory was that I had received part

of my education in Germany; had shown especial interest

in German history and literature, lecturing upon them at

the University of Michigan and at Cornell; had resided in

Berlin as minister; had, on my return, delivered in New

York and elsewhere an address on the ``New Germany,''

wherein were shown some points in German life which

Americans might study to advantage; had also delivered

an address on the ``Contributions of Germany to American

Civilization''; and had, at various times, formed pleasant

relations with leading Germans of both parties.  The fact

was perfectly well known, also, that I was opposed to the

sumptuary laws which had so largely driven Germans out

of the Republican party, and had declared that these were

not only unjust to those immediately affected by them, but

injurious to the very interests of temperance, which they

were designed to promote.



I was passing the summer at Magnolia, on the east

coast of Massachusetts, when an old friend, the son of

an eminent German-American, came from New York and

asked me to become a candidate for the governorship. 

I was very reluctant, for special as well as general

reasons.  My first wish was to devote myself wholly to

certain long-deferred historical work; my health was not

strong; I felt utterly unfitted for the duties of the

campaign, and the position of governor, highly honorable as

it is, presented no especial attractions to me, my ambition

not being in that line.  Therefore it was that at first I

urged my friends to combine upon some other person;

but as they came back and insisted that they could

agree on no one else, and that I could bring to the


support of the party men who would otherwise oppose it,

I reluctantly agreed to discuss the subject with some of

the leading Republicans in New York, and among them

Mr. Thomas C. Platt, who was at the head of the organized

management of the party.



In our two or three conversations Mr. Platt impressed

me curiously.  I had known him slightly for many years;

indeed, we had belonged to the same class at Yale, but as

he had left it and I had entered it at the beginning of the

sophomore year we did not know each other at that period. 

We had met occasionally when we were both supporting

Mr. Conkling, but had broken from each other at the time

when he was supporting Mr. Blaine, and I, Mr. Edmunds,

for the nomination at Chicago.  Our discussion now took

a form which somewhat surprised me.  The general belief

throughout the State was, I think, that Mr. Platt's

first question, or, at any rate, his main question, in any such

discussion, would be, necessarily, as to the attitude of the

candidate toward Mr. Platt's own interests and aspirations. 

But I feel bound to say that in the discussions between

us no such questions were ever asked, approached,

or even hinted at.  Mr. Platt never asked me a question

regarding my attitude toward him or toward his friends;

he never even hinted at my making any pledge or promise

to do anything or not to do anything with reference to

his own interests or to those of any other person; his

whole effort was directed to finding what strength my

nomination would attract to the party and what it would

repel.  He had been informed regarding one or two

unpopular votes of mine when I was in the State Senate--as

for example, that I had opposed the efforts of a powerful

sectarian organization to secure the gift of certain

valuable landed property from the city of New York; he had

also been informed regarding certain review and magazine

articles in which I had spoken my mind somewhat

freely against certain influences in the State which were

still powerful, and it had been hinted to him that my

``Warfare of Science'' chapters might have alienated a

considerable number of the more narrow-minded clergymen

and their flocks.



I told Mr. Platt frankly that these fears seemed quite

likely to be well founded, and that there were some other

difficulties which I could myself suggest to him: that I had

in the course of my life, made many opponents in supporting

Cornell University, and in expressing my mind

on various questions, political and religious, and that

these seemed to me likely to cost the party very many

votes.  I therefore suggested that he consult certain

persons in various parts of the State who were entitled to

have an opinion, and especially two men of the highest

judgment in such matters--Chief Justice Andrews of

Syracuse, and Carroll Earl Smith, editor of the leading

Republican journal in central New York.  The result was

that telegrams and letters were exchanged, these gentlemen

declaring their decided opinion that the matters referred

to were bygones, and could not be resuscitated in

the coming contest; that they would be lost sight of in the

real questions sure to arise; and that even in the election

immediately following the vote which I had cast against

giving a large tract of Ward's Island to a Roman Catholic

institution, I had lost no votes, but had held my own with

the other candidates, and even gained upon some of them.



Mr. Platt also discussed my relations to the Germans

and to the graduates of Cornell University who were scattered

all over the State; and as these, without exception,

so far as could be learned, were my warm personal

friends, it was felt by those who had presented my name,

and finally, I think, by Mr. Platt, that these two elements

in my support might prove valuable.



Still, in spite of this, I advised steadily against my own

nomination, and asked Mr. Platt:  ``Why don't you support

your friend Senator Fassett of Elmira?  He is a

young man; he has very decided abilities; he is popular;

his course in the legislature has been admirable; you have

made him collector of the port of New York, and he is

known to be worthy of the place.  Why don't you ask

him?''  Mr. Platt's frankness in reply increased my

respect for him.  He said:  ``I need not confess to you that,

personally, I would prefer Mr. Fassett to yourself; but if

he were a candidate he would have to carry the entire

weight of my unpopularity.''



Mr. Platt was from first to last perfectly straightforward. 

He owed me nothing, for I had steadily voted

against him and his candidate in the National Convention

at Chicago.  He had made no pledges to me, for I had

allowed him to make none--even if he had been disposed

to do so; moreover, many of my ideas were opposed to his

own.  I think the heaviest piece of work I ever undertook

was when, some months before, I had endeavored to convert 

him to the civil-service-reform forces; but while I had

succeeded in converting a good many others, he remained

intractable, and on that subject we were at opposite poles. 



It therefore seems to me altogether to his credit that,

in spite of this personal and theoretical antagonism

between us, and in spite of the fact that I had made, and he

knew that I would make, no pledges or promises whatever

to him in view of an election, he had favored my

nomination solely as the best chance of obtaining a

Republican victory in the State; and I will again say that I

do not believe that his own personal advantage entered

into his thoughts on this occasion.  His pride and his

really sincere devotion to the interests of the Republican

party, as he understood them, led him to desire, above all

things, a triumph over the Democratic forces, and the

only question in his mind was, Who could best secure the

victory?



At the close of these conferences he was evidently in my

favor, but on leaving the city I said to him:  ``Do not

consider yourself as in any way pledged to my support.  Go

to the convention at Rochester, and decide what is best

after you get there.  I have no desire for the nomination--

in fact, would prefer that some one else bear the burden

and heat of the day.  I have been long out of touch with

the party managers in the State.  I don't feel that they

would support me as they would support some man like

Mr. Fassett, whom they know and like personally, and I

shall not consider you as pledged to me in the slightest

degree.  I don't ask it; I don't wish it; in fact, I prefer

the contrary.  Go to Rochester, be guided by circumstances,

and decide as you see fit.''



In the meantime various things seemed to strengthen

my candidacy.  Leading Germans who had been for some

time voting with the Democratic party pledged themselves

to my support if I were nominated, and one of them could

bring over to my side one of the most powerful Democratic

journals in the State; in fact, there were pledged

to my support two leading journals which, as matters

turned out afterward, opposed the Republican nomination.



At the convention which met shortly afterward at

Rochester (September, 1891), things went as I had

anticipated, and indeed as I had preferred.  Mr. Platt found

the elements supporting Mr. Fassett even stronger than

he had expected.  The undercurrent was too powerful for

him, and he was obliged to yield to it.



Of course sundry newspapers screamed that he had

deceived and defeated me.  I again do him the justice to say

that this was utterly untrue.  I am convinced that he went

to Rochester believing my candidacy best for the party;

that he really did what he could in my favor, but that he

found, what I had foretold, that Mr. Fassett, young,

energetic, known, and liked by the active political men in

various parts of the State, naturally wished to lead the

forces and was naturally the choice of the convention--a

choice which it was not within Mr. Platt's power to change.



Mr. Fassett was nominated, and I do not know that I

have ever received a message which gave me a greater

sense of relief than the telegram which announced this fact

to me.



As regards the inside history of the convention, Professor

Jenks of Cornell University, a very thoughtful

student of practical politics, who had gone to Rochester

to see the working of a New York State convention, told

me some time afterward that he had circulated very freely

among the delegates from various rural districts; that they

had no acquaintance with him, and therefore talked freely

in his presence regarding the best policy of the convention. 

As a rule, the prevailing feeling among them was

expressed as follows:  ``White don't know the boys; he

don't know the men who do the work of the party; he

supports civil-service reform, and that means that after

doing the work of the campaign we shall have no better

chance for the offices than men who have done nothing--in

fact, not so good, perhaps, as those who have opposed

us.''  No doubt this feeling entered into the minds of a

large number of delegates and conduced to the result.



A few weeks afterward Mr. Fassett came to Ithaca.  I

had the pleasure of presiding and speaking at the public

meeting which he addressed, and of entertaining him at

my house.  He was in every way worthy of the position

to which he had been nominated, but, unfortunately, was

not elected.



Having made one or two speeches in this campaign, I

turned to more congenial work, and in the early spring

of the following year (February 12 to May 16, 1892)

accepted an election as non-resident professor at Stanford

University in California, my duty being to deliver a

course of twenty lectures upon ``The Causes of the French

Revolution.''  Just as I was about to start, Mr. Andrew

Carnegie very kindly invited me to go as his guest in his

own car and with a delightful party.  There were eight of

us--four ladies and four gentlemen.  We went by way of

Washington, Chattanooga, and New Orleans, stopping at

each place, and meeting many leading men; then to the

city of Mexico, where we were presented to Porfirio Diaz,

the president of that republic, who seemed to be a man of

great shrewdness and strength.  I recall here the fact that

the room in which he received us was hung round with

satin coverings, on which, as the only ornament, were the

crown and cipher of Diaz' unfortunate predecessor, the

Emperor Maximilian.  Thence we went to California, and

zigzag along the Pacific coast to Tacoma and Seattle;

then through the Rocky Mountains to Salt Lake City

meeting everywhere interesting men and things, until at

Denver I left the party and went back to give my lectures

at Stanford.



Returning to Cornell University in the early summer

I found myself in the midst of my books and happy in

resuming my work.  But now, July 21, 1892, came my

nomination by President Harrison to the position of envoy

extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary at St.

Petersburg.  On thinking the matter over, it seemed to me

that it would be instructive and agreeable to have a second

diplomatic experience in Russia after my absence of

nearly forty years.  I therefore accepted, and in the autumn

of 1892 left America for St. Petersburg.



While in Washington to receive my instructions before

leaving, I again met Mr. Harrison, and must say that he

showed a much more kindly and genial side than that

which had formerly been revealed to me, when I had

discussed shortcomings of his administration as regarded

the civil service.



My occupancy of this new position lasted until the

autumn of 1894, and there was one thing in it which I have

always regarded as a great honor.  Mr. Harrison had

appointed me at about the close of the third year of his term

of office; I therefore naturally looked forward to a stay of

but one year in Russia, and, when I left America, certainly

desired no more.  A little of Russian life goes very far.  It is

brilliant and attractive in many ways; but for a man who

feels that he has duties and interests in America it soon

becomes a sort of exile.  At the close of Mr. Harrison's

administration, therefore, I tendered my resignation, as is

customary with ministers abroad at such times, so that it

would arrive in Washington on the fourth day of March,

and then come under the hand of the new President, Mr.

Cleveland.  I had taken its acceptance as a matter of

course, and had made all my arrangements to leave Russia

on the arrival of my successor.  But soon I heard that

President Cleveland preferred that I should remain, and

that so long as I would consent to remain no new appointment

would be made.  In view of the fact that I had steadily

voted against him, and that he knew this, I felt his

conduct to be a mark of confidence for which I ought to be

grateful, and the result was that I continued at the post

another year, toward the close of which I wrote a private

letter to him, stating that under no circumstances could I

remain longer than the 1st of October, 1894.  The fact was

that the book which I considered the main work of my life

was very nearly finished.  I was anxious to have leisure to

give it thorough revision, and this leisure I could not have

in a diplomatic position.  Therefore it was that I insisted

on terminating my career at St. Petersburg, and that the

President finally accepted my declination in a letter which

I shall always prize.



During the following winter (1894-1895), at Florence

Sorrento, and Palermo, my time was steadily given to my

historical work; and having returned home and seen it

through the press, I turned to another historical treatise

which had been long deferred, and never did a man more

thoroughly enjoy his leisure.  I was at last apparently my

own master, and could work in the midst of my books and

in the library of the university to my heart's content.



But this fair dream was soon brought to naught.  In

December, 1895, I was appointed by President Cleveland

a member of the commission to decide upon the boundary

line between the British possessions in South America and

Venezuela.  The circumstances of the case, with the manner

in which he tendered me the position, forbade me to

decline it, and I saw no more literary leisure during the

following year.



As the presidential campaign of 1896 approached I had

given up all thoughts of politics, and had again resumed the

historical work to which I proposed to devote, mainly, the

rest of my life--the preparation of a biographical history

of modern Germany, for which I had brought together a

large amount of material and had prepared much manuscript. 

I also hoped to live long enough to put into shape

for publication a series of lectures, on which I had

obtained a mass of original material in France, upon ``The

Causes of the French Revolution''; and had the new campaign

been like any of those during the previous twenty

years, it would not have interested me.  But suddenly news

came of the nomination by the Democrats of Mr. Bryan. 

The circumstances attending this showed clearly that the

coming contest involved, distinctly, the question between

the forces of virtual repudiation, supporting a policy which

meant not merely national disaster but generations of 

dishonor on the one side, and, on the other, Mr. McKinley,

supporting a policy of financial honesty.  Having then

been called upon to preside over a Republican meeting at

Ithaca, I made a speech which was published and widely

circulated, giving the reasons why all thinking men of both

parties ought to rally in support of the Republican candidate,

and this I followed with an open letter to many leading

Democrats in the State.  It was begun as a private

letter to a valued Democratic friend, Mr. Oscar S. Straus,

who has twice proved himself a most useful and patriotic

minister of the United States at Constantinople.  But,

as my pen was moving, another Democratic friend came

into my mind, then another, and again another, until

finally my views were given in an open letter to them all;

and this having been submitted to a friend in New York,

with permission to use it as he thought best, he published

it.  The result seemed fortunate.  It was at once caught

up by the press and republished in all parts of the country. 

I cannot claim that the gentlemen to whom I wrote were

influenced by it, but certain it is that in spite of their

earnest differences from President McKinley on very important

questions, their feeling that this campaign involved

issues superior to any of those which had hitherto existed,

led all of them, either directly or indirectly, to

support him.



At the suggestion of various friends, I also republished

in a more extended form my pamphlet on ``Paper Money

Inflation in France:  How it Came, What it Brought, and

How it Ended,'' which had first been published at the

suggestion of General Garfield and others, as throwing light

on the results of a debased currency, and it was now widely

circulated in all parts of the country.



Mr. McKinley was elected, and thus, in my judgment,

was averted the greatest peril which our Republic has

encountered since the beginning of the Civil War.  Having

now some time for myself, I accepted sundry invitations

to address the students of two of the greater State universities

of the West.  It gave me pleasure to visit them, on

many accounts, and above all for the purpose of realizing

the magnificent advance that has been made by them in

becoming universities worthy of our country.



My anticipations were far more than met.  My old student

and successor at the University of Michigan as professor

and at Cornell University as president, Dr. Charles

Kendall Adams, welcomed me to the institution over which

he so worthily presided--the State University of Wisconsin;

and having visited it a quarter of a century before,

I was now amazed at its progress.  The subject of

my address, in the presence of the whole body of students

was ``Evolution versus Revolution in Politics,'' and never

have I spoken with more faith and hope.  Looking into

the faces of that immense assembly of students, in training

for the best work of their time, lifted me above all doubts

as the future of that commonwealth.



From Madison I went to Minneapolis under an invitation

to address the students at the State University of

Minnesota, and again my faith and hope were renewed as

I looked into the faces of those great audiences of young

men and young women.  They filled me with confidence

in the future of the country.  At Minneapolis I also met

various notable men, among them Archbishop Ireland,

who had interested me much at a former meeting in

Philadelphia.  I became sure that whatever ecclesiastics of his

church generally might feel toward the United States, he

was truly patriotic.  Alas for both church and state that

such prelates as Gibbons, Ireland, Keane, Spalding, and

the like, should be in a minority!



But my most curious experience was due to another

citizen of Minnesota.  Having been taken to the State

House, I was introduced, in the lower branch of the legislature,

to no less a personage than Mr. Ignatius Donnelly, so

widely known by his publications regarding the authorship

of Shakspere's writings; and on my asking him whether

he was now engaged on any literary work, he informed me

that he was about to publish a book which would leave no

particle of doubt, in the mind of any thinking man, that

the writings attributed to Shakspere were really due to

Francis Bacon.  During this conversation the house was

droning on in committee of the whole, and the proceedings

fell upon my ear much like the steady rumble of a mill; but

suddenly the mill seemed to stop, my own name was called,

and immediately afterward came the words:  ``Mr. ----

of ---- and Mr. ---- of ---- will escort Mr. White to

the chair.''  It was a very sudden awakening from my talk

with Mr. Donnelly on literature, but there was no help for

it.  ``Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,'' and, in a long fur-

lined coat much the worse for wear and bespattered with

mud, was conducted to the speaker, who, after formal

greetings, turned me loose on the audience.  Naturally my

speech revealed what was uppermost in my mind--wonder

at the progress made by the State, admiration for its

institutions, confidence in its future, pride in its relation to

the Union.  At the close of this brief talk a few members

set up a call for Mr. Donnelly to respond, whereupon he

promptly arose, and of all the speeches I have ever heard

his was certainly the most surprising.  It had seemed to

me that my own remarks had glorified Minnesota up to the

highest point; but they were tame indeed compared to his. 

Having first dosed me with blarney, he proceeded to deluge

the legislature with balderdash.  One part of his speech

ran substantially on this wise:



``Mr. Speaker, I ask the gentleman, when he returns to

his home, to tell his fellow-citizens of the East what he has

seen during his visit to this great State; and, sir, we also

wish him to tell them that Minnesota and the great Northwest

will no longer consent to be trodden under the feet

of the East.  The strength of the United States and the

future center of American greatness is here in Minnesota. 

Mr. Speaker, not far from this place I own a farm.''  (Here

I began to wonder what was coming next.)  ``From that

farm, on one side, the waters trickle down until they reach

the rivulets, and then the streams, and finally the great

rivers which empty into Hudson Bay.  And from the

other side of that farm, sir, the waters trickle down into

the rivulets, thence pass into the streams, and finally into

the great Father of Waters, until they reach the Gulf of

Mexico.  Mr. Speaker, on this plateau are now raised the

great men of the Republic.  Formerly Virginia was the

mother of statesmen; that is so no longer.  The mother of

statesmen in these days, and of the men who are to control

the destinies of this Republic, is Minnesota.''



Never before had I any conception of the height to which

``tall talk'' might attain.  It was the apotheosis of blather;

but as my eye wandered over the assemblage, I noticed

that many faces wore smiles, and it was clear to me that

the members had merely wished to exhibit their most

amusing specimen.



I felt that if they could stand it I could, and so, having

bidden the Speaker and Mr. Donnelly good-bye, passed out

and made the acquaintance of the neighboring city of St.

Paul, which struck me as even more beautiful than Edinburgh

in the views from its principal streets over hills,

valleys, and mountains.



At the University of Michigan, in view of my recent

visit, I did not again stop, but at Harvard and Yale I

addressed the students, and returned home from the excursion

with new faith in the future of the country.  James

Bryce is right when he declares that in our universities lie

the best hopes of the United States.



Early in the year following the election I was

appointed by the President ambassador to Germany.  I had

not sought the position; indeed, I had distinctly declined

to speak of the matter to any of those who were supposed

to have the management of political affairs in the State. 

It came to me, directly and unsought, from President

McKinley; I therefore prized it, and shall ever prize the

remembrance of it.



While it was announced as pending, I was urged by

various friends to speak of the subject to Mr. Platt, who

as the only Republican senator from New York and the

head of the Republican organization, was supposed to

have large rights in the matter.  It was hinted to me that

some statement to Mr. Platt on the subject was required

by political etiquette and would smooth the President's

way.  My answer was that I felt respect and friendship

for Mr. Platt; that I called at his rooms from time to

time socially, and discussed various public matters with

him; but that I could never make a request to him in the

premises; that I could not put myself in the attitude of a

suppliant, even in the slightest degree, to him or even to

the President.



The result was that the President himself spoke to Mr.

Platt on the subject, and, as I was afterward informed, the

senator replied that he would make no objection, but that

the appointment ought not to be charged against the claims

of the State of New York.



The presidential campaign of 1900, in which Mr. McKinley

was presented for re<e:>lection, touched me but slightly. 

There came various letters urging me to become a candidate

for the Vice-Presidency, and sundry newspapers presented

reasons for my nomination, the main argument

being the same which had been formerly used as regarded

the governorship of New York--that the German-Americans

were estranged from the Republican party by the

high tariff, and that I was the only Republican who could

draw them to the ticket.  All this I deprecated, and refused

to take any part in the matter, meantime writing my

nephew, who had become my successor in the State Senate,

my friend Dr. Holls, and others, to urge the, name of

Theodore Roosevelt.  I had known him for many years

and greatly admired him.  His integrity was proof against

all attack, his courage undoubted, and his vigor amazing. 

It was clear that he desired renomination for the place he

already held--the governorship of New York--partly

because he was devoted to certain reforms, which he could

carry out only in that position, and partly because he

preferred activity as governor of a great State to the usually

passive condition of a Vice-President of the United States. 

Moreover, he undoubtedly had aspirations to the Presidency. 

These were perfectly legitimate, and indeed hon-

orable, in him, as they are in any man who feels that he

has the qualities needed in that high office.  He and his

friends clearly felt that the transition from the governorship

of New York to the Presidency four years later would

be more natural than that from the Vice-Presidency; but

in my letters I insisted that his name would greatly

strengthen the national ticket, and that his road to the

Presidency seemed to me more easy from the Vice-Presidency

than from the governorship; that, although during

recent years Vice-Presidents had not been nominated to

the higher office, during former years they had been; and

that I could see no reason why he might not bring about

a return to the earlier custom.  As to myself, at my age, I

greatly preferred the duties of ambassador to those of

Vice-President.  The Republican party was wise enough

to take this view, and at the National Convention he was

nominated by acclamation.



Early in August, having taken a leave of absence for

sixty days, I arrived in New York, and on landing received

an invitation from Mr. Roosevelt to pass the day with him

at his house in the country.  I found him the same earnest,

energetic, straightforward man as of old.  Though nominated

to the Vice-Presidency against his will, he had

thrown himself heartily into the campaign; and the discussion

at his house turned mainly on the securing of a proper

candidate for the governorship of the State of New York. 

I recommended Charles Andrews, who, although in the

fullest vigor of mind and body, had been retired from the

chief-justiceship of the State on his arrival at the age of

seventy years.  This recommendation Mr. Roosevelt received

favorably; but later it was found impossible to

carry it out, the Republican organization in the State

having decided in favor of Mr. Odell.



During my entire stay in the United States I was

constantly occupied with arrears of personal business

which had been too long neglected; but, at the request of

various friends, wrote sundry open letters and articles,

which were widely circulated among German-Americans,

showing the injustice of the charge so constantly made

against President McKinley, of hostility to Germany and

German interests.  Nothing could be more absurd than

such an imputation.  The very opposite was the case.



I also gave a farewell address to a great assemblage of

students at Cornell University, my topic being ``The True

Conduct of Student Life''; but in the course of my speech,

having alluded to the importance of sobriety of judgment,

I tested by it sundry political contentions which were

strongly made on both sides, alluding especially to Goldwin

Smith's very earnest declaration that one of the

greatest dangers to our nation arises from plutocracy. 

I took pains to show that the whole spirit of our laws

is in favor of the rapid dispersion of great properties,

and that, within the remembrance of many present, a

large number of the greatest fortunes in the United States

had been widely dispersed.  As to other declarations

regarding dangers arising from the acquisition of foreign

territory and the like, I insisted that all these dangers were

as nothing compared to one of which we were then having

a striking illustration--namely, demagogism; and I urged,

what I have long deeply felt, that the main source of

danger to republican institutions is now, and always has

been, the demagogism which seeks to array labor against

capital, employee against employer, profession against

profession, class against class, section against section.  I

mentioned the name of no one; but it must have been clear

to all present how deeply I felt regarding the issues which

each party represented, and especially regarding the resort

to the lowest form of demagogism which Mr. Bryan was then 

making, in the desperate attempt to save his falling fortunes.



During this stay in America I made two visits to Washington

to confer with the President and the State Department. 

The first of these was during the hottest weather I

have ever known.  There were few people at the capital

who could leave it, and at the Arlington Hotel there

were not more than a dozen guests.  All were distressed

by the heat.  Moreover, there was an amazing complication

of political matters at this time, calculated to prostrate

the Washington officials, even if the heat had not done

so; and, among these, those relating to American control in

the Philippine Islands; the bitter struggle then going on in

China between the representatives of foreign powers,

including our own, and the Chinese insurrectionists; the

difficulties arising out of the successful result of the

Spanish War in Cuba; complications in the new administration

of Porto Rico; and the myriad of questions arising in a

heated political campaign, which was then running fast

and furious.



Arriving at the White House, I passed an hour with the

President, and found him, of all men in Washington, the

only one who seemed not at all troubled by the heat, by

the complications in China, by the difficulties in Cuba and

Porto Rico, or by the rush and whirl of the campaign.  He

calmly discussed with me the draft of a political note

which was to be issued next day in answer to the Russian

communications regarding the mode of procedure in

China, which had started some very trying questions; and

then showed me a letter from ex-President Cleveland

declining a position on the International Arbitration

Tribunal at the Hague, and accepted my suggestion not to

consider it a final answer, but to make another effort for

Mr. Cleveland's acceptance.  During this first visit of

mine, the Secretary of State and the First Assistant

Secretary were both absent, having been almost prostrated by

the extreme heat.  At a second visit in October, I again

saw the President, found him in the same equable frame of

mind, not allowing anything to trouble him, quietly

discharging his duties in the calm faith that all would turn

out well.  Dining with Secretary Hay, I mentioned this

equanimity of the President, when he said:  ``Yes; it is a

source of perpetual amazement to us all.  He allows no

question, no matter how complicated or vexatious, to disturb

him.  Some time since, at a meeting of the cabinet,

one of its members burst out into a bitter speech against

some government official who had been guilty of gross

rudeness, and said, `Mr. President, he has insulted you,

and he has insulted me'; thereupon the President said

calmly, `Mr. Secretary, if he has insulted ME, I forgive him; 

if he has insulted you, I shall remove him from office.' ''



Newspapers were teeming with misrepresentations of

the President's course, but they failed to ruffle him.  On

his asking if I was taking any part in the campaign, I

referred to a speech that I had made on the Fourth of July

in Leipsic, and another to the Cornell University students

just before my departure, with the remark that I felt that

a foreign diplomatic representative coming home and

throwing himself eagerly into the campaign might possibly

do more harm than good.  In this remark he acquiesced,

and said:  ``I shall not, myself, make any speeches

whatever; nor shall I give any public receptions.  My record

is before the American people, and they must pass

judgment upon it.  In this respect I shall go back to what

seems to me the better practice of the early Presidents.'' 

I was struck by the justice of this, and told him so,

although I felt obliged to say that he would be under fearful

temptation to speak before the campaign had gone much

farther.  He smiled, but held to his determination, despite

the fact that his opponent invaded all parts of the Union

in an oratorical frenzy, in one case making a speech at

half-past two in the morning to a crowd assembled at a

railway station, and making during one day thirty-one

speeches, teeming with every kind of campaign misrepresentation;

but the President was faithful to his promise,

uttered no word in reply, and was re<e:>lected.



Not only at home, but abroad, as I can amply testify, the

news of his re<e:>lection was received with general satisfaction,

and most of all by those who wish well to our country

and cherish hopes that government by the people and for

the people may not be brought to naught by the wild

demagogism which has wrecked all great republics thus

far.



But alas! the triumph was short-lived.  One morning

in September, while I was slowly recovering from two of

the greatest bereavements which have ever befallen me,

came the frightful news of his assassination.  Shortly

afterward, for family and business reasons, I went for a

few weeks to the United States, and, in the course of my

visit, conferred with the new President three times--first

at the Yale bicentennial celebration, afterward in his

private office, and finally at his table in the White House. 

Hard indeed was it for me to realize what had taken place

--that President McKinley, whom I had so recently seen in

his chair at the head of the cabinet table, was gone forever;

that in those rooms, where I had, at four different times,

chatted pleasantly with him, he was never to be seen

more; and that here, in that same seat, was sitting my old

friend and co-laborer.  Hard was it to realize that the last

time I had met Mr. Roosevelt in that same room was when

we besought President Harrison to extend the civil service. 

Interesting as the new President's conversation was,

there was constantly in my mind, whether in his office or

his parlors or the dining-room at the White House, one

deep undertone.  It was like the pedal bass of an organ,

steadily giving the ground tone of a requiem--the vanity

and evanescence of all things earthly.  There had I seen,

in the midst of their jubilant supporters, Pierce, Lincoln,

Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Cleveland, Harrison, and, finally,

so short a time before, McKinley.  It seemed all a dream. 

In his conversations the new President showed the same

qualities that I had before known in him--earnestness,

vigor, integrity, fearlessness, and, at times, a sense of

humor, blending playfully with his greater qualities.  The

message he gave me to the Emperor William was characteristic. 

I was naturally charged to assure the Emperor of

the President's kind feeling; but to this was added, in a

tone of unmistakable truth:  ``Tell him that when I say

this, I mean it.  I have been brought up to admire and

respect Germany.  My life in that country and my reading

since have steadily increased this respect and admiration.'' 

I noticed on the table a German book which he had just

been reading, its author being my old friend Professor

Hans Delbr<u:>ck of the Berlin University.  At the close of

the message, which referred to sundry matters of current

business, came a playful postlude.  ``Tell his Majesty,''

said the President, ``that I am a hunter and, as such, envy

him one thing especially: he has done what I have never

yet been able to do--he has killed a whale.  But say to

him that if he will come to the United States, I will take

him to the Rocky Mountains to hunt the mountain lions,

which is no bad sport,--and that if he kills one, as he

doubtless will, he will be the first monarch who has killed

a lion since Tiglath-Pileser.''  I need hardly add that

when, a few weeks later, I delivered the message to

the Emperor at Potsdam, it pleased him.  Many people

on both sides of the Atlantic have noted a similarity in

qualities between these two rulers, and, from close

observation, I must confess that this is better founded than are

most such attributed resemblances.  The Emperor has

indeed several accomplishments, more especially in artistic

matters, which, so far as I can learn, the President has

not; but both are ambitious in the noblest sense; both are

young men of deep beliefs and high aims; earnest, vigorous,

straightforward, clear-sighted; good speakers, yet

sturdy workers, and anxious for the prosperity, but above

all things jealous for the honor of the people whose

affairs they are called to administer.  The President's

accounts of difficulties in finding men for responsible

positions in various branches of the service, and his clear

statements of the proper line to be observed in political

dealings between the United States and Europe where

South American interests were concerned, showed him to

be a broad-minded statesman.  During my stay with him,

we also discussed one or two points in his forthcoming

message to Congress, and in due time it was received at

Berlin, attracting general respect and admiration in Germany,

as throughout Europe generally.


