



Natural Value

	by Friedrich Wieser



Book 4: The Natural Value of Land, Capital, and Labour

Chapter 1

Introduction

    We have now to retrace our steps. Having made clear the
principles according to which the return, jointly obtained, may
be imputed to the separate productive factors, we have now to
return to the question as to the value of these factors. The
general law we are already acquainted with: the value of the
product determines the value of the production good. The point
which we must now take up is the application of this proposition
to the special circumstances of land, capital, and labour.
    In this by far the greatest difficulties meet us in the case
of capital. It seems as if our explanation of its value came into
direct collision with the facts of experience. Assume that a
capital, employed for one year and thereby completely used up,
yields, at the end of the year, a return of the value of 105;
experience tells us that the value of the capital will not be
estimated at 105, but at a somewhat less amount according to the
current rate of interest. At a 5% rate, e.g., the capital will be
estimated at 100. The remainder of the return will be regarded as
net return of interest. How does this go with our explanation? On
what ground is this deduction made? Ought not rather the full
value of the gross return to go into the capital value without
any deduction whatever? But if that were so, how should we
explain the contradiction of experience which interest presents?
How is the interest to be explained? Or does natural valuation
exclude interest? Is it, perhaps, merely a phenomenon of
present-day exchange and price, which would not re-emerge in the
communistic state?
    One of the most conclusive and brilliant among Bohm-Bawerk's
critical examinations is that directed towards the attempts to
deduce interest from the productivity of capital. Bohm-Bawerk
himself in fact arrives at the conclusion that the attempt is
hopeless. To quote his own words: "It was not simply an
unfortunate chance that no one found the Open Sesame which had
the power to discover the mysterious origination of interest in
the productivity of capital. It was rather that on the road to
the truth a wrong turning had been taken. From the first it was a
hopeless endeavour to explain interest wholly and entirely from a
productive power of capital. It would be different if there were
a power that could make value grow directly as wheat grows from
the field. But there is no such power. What the productive power
can do is only to create a quantity of products, and perhaps at
the same time to create a quantity of value, but never to create
surplus value. Interest is a surplus, a remainder left when
product of capital is the minuend and value of consumed capital
is the subtrahend. The productive power of capital may find its
result in increasing the minuend. But so far as that goes it
cannot increase the minuend without at the same tine increasing
the subtrahend in the same proportion. For the productive power
is undeniably the ground and measure of the value of the capital
in which it resides. If with a particular form of capital one can
produce nothing, that form of capital is worth nothing. If one
can produce little with it, it is worth little; if one can
produce much with it, it is worth much, and so on; -- always
increasing in value as the value that can be produced by its help
increases, i.e. as the value of its product increases. And so,
however great the productive power of capital may be, and however
greatly it may increase the minuend, yet so far as it does so,
the subtrahend is increased in the same proportion, and there is
no remainder, no surplus of value" (Capital and Interest,
translated by William Smart, page 179).
    When we turn to land we find also a striking contrast between
the apparent demands of our theory and experience. Land yields
returns that stretch away into the farthest future. The value of
land, then, should surely be not merely twenty or thirty times
the annual rent, as experience tells us it is, but rather an
indefinite and incalculable number of times the annual rent;
perhaps it should be estimated as an infinite amount (see also on
this point Capital and Interest, page 67). But the same line of
argument may be applied to capital. Capital also, when well
employed, promises to yield its net return on into the indefinite
future, so perhaps its value also ought to be estimated as an
infinite amount.
    It will be seen that the difficulties which meet us are not
trifling. If, nevertheless, I believe that they can be overcome,
it is because I trust to the support given by the results of our
investigation into the imputation of return. None of the writers
who tried to derive interest from the productivity of capital had
this support, and even in Bohm-Bawerk's critique it is not
foreseen. Have we not in fact found a productive power, which,
although not capable, as Bohm-Bawerk claims, of creating "more
value," can and does create what amounts to the same thing, "more
return"; in other words, a surplus?
    We shall begin with the most difficult, the theory of the
value of capital. After what has been said it is clear that it
cannot be taken up without taking up the theory of interest.
    Almost everything in this book will find its complement in
the discussion upon costs which is to follow.

Chapter 2

The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital. I --
Discounting

    Capital receives its value from its fruits. If, then, we are
calculating the final return of any production, and, for that
purpose, deduct from the value of these fruits the capital
consumed, with its value, the result will be zero, inasmuch as,
sooner or later, all capital is consumed in production. The
deduction made must always amount to the value of the fruits,  -- 
indeed, that value measures the deduction  --  and consequently
the value calculation leaves no net return whatever. Not only is
interest not explained; it is absolutely excluded. And, if we
consider that means of production renew themselves again and
again indefinitely, and yield results indefinitely, we come
across another contradiction of experience, for experience shows
that the value of capital is not infinite but always finite and
limited.
    These are the problems which lie before us for solution when
we now go on to examine the value of capital and the interest on
capital.
    For their solution we may avail ourselves of the results of
our analysis of the physical productivity of capital. All capital
transforms itself in the last resort into gross return. In this
gross return the capital reproduces itself with a physical
surplus, the net return. These two facts, which we have already
established, will suffice us to deduce the value-productivity of
capital, and to solve all the contradictions with experience.
    First: all capital transforms itself in the last resort into
gross return; it follows from this that the value of the capital
can never exceed the value of the gross return. The value of
capital is thus a limited finite amount, although the working of
the ever-renewed production extends away into an illimitable
future. The materials and apparatus out of which, and with whose
help, bread is produced, cannot possibly be worth more than the
bread itself. And those things from which the materials and
apparatus themselves are produced, and which, consequently, are
the producers of bread one stage removed, have, in the
prospective gross return -- the perishable bread -- a maximum
limit of value. So with all capitals, however far their primary
products may be removed from direct employment in the
satisfaction of want. To put it into figures,  -- if a capital
transforms itself sooner or later into a gross return of the
value of 105, its own value cannot be put at anything above 105.
    Second: in the gross return capital reproduces itself with a
physical surplus, the net return. It follows that the capital
value cannot be credited with the whole value of the gross
return. In the reproduction capital represents only a portion of
its own gross return, and can therefore absorb only a portion of
the value of that gross return. If, from the value of 105, 5 are
set aside as fruits which may be consumed without preventing the
full replacement of the capital, only the remainder of 100 can be
reckoned as capital value. The prospect of having this residual
value of 100 transformed once more, at the close of the next
period of production, into the gross return of 105  --  by again
employing it productively cannot make any change on this
valuation; since the expected return of 105 is always divided in
the same way, assuming the same conditions; viz. 100 goes to
capital and 5 to the increment on capital.
    Gross return and net return are thus the two given amounts
from which capital gets its value. The whole difficulty of the
problem lies essentially in the recognition of the fact that
those two amounts are given. For proof of this we refer to our
former disquisition upon imputation in general, and the
imputation in the case of capital in particular. If physical
productivity of capital involves, as we have maintained, the
imputation of gross return and the imputation of net return, we
have at once a clear and simple principle for the valuation of
capital.
    There is in common use a definite name for the method of
calculating value required by this principle. To fix the present
value of a money claim, carrying no interest, which falls due at
a future date, we make use, as every one knows, of the method
known as "discounting." That is, we deduct the usual interest
from the future sum. Now every capital value,  -- not alone the
value of a sum of money but of every perishable productive
instrument  -- is calculated by discounting; that is to say, from
the value of the future expected sum of products into which the
capital will be transformed, the corresponding net return is
deducted. Only that, practically, in discounting money claims, a
fixed rate of interest -- i.e. a definite relation between
capital value and net return -- is always assumed, and always
emerges, while we are explaining the formation of this relation
by first discovering the principle for estimating capital value.
    Bohm-Bawerk, arguing against Thunen's explanation of interest
-- which has much in common with that just given -- asks with
what right it can be assumed that the value of the gross return
never raises the value of capital to its level, or, inversely,
that capital value never depresses that of the gross return to
its level? If a return of 105 can be obtained with an outlay of
100, will there not be competition in production, or levelling of
the valuations, until either the outlay come to be valued at 105
or the return at 100, or both settle at some figure half-way
between the two? Bohm-Bawerk is right in raising the question,
seeing that he does not start, as we do, with a physical net
return to capital. But assuming this physical net return the
question is at once answered and settled. So long as the gross
return remains large enough to replace the capital and yield a
net return, the value of gross return and the value of capital
can never be assimilated: there will always be a difference --
viz. the value of the net return. This difference could only
disappear with the disappearance of physical productivity. So
long as it exists, so long does physical-productivity guarantee
value-productivity to capital, and so long does capital also
create more in value than itself;  -- to apply again the words of
Bohm-Bawerk, it creates "more value." And if, in order to
calculate the amount of capital consumed, the capital value be
deducted from the gross return, it is not the whole amount of
gross return that is deducted; the subtrahend is somewhat less
than the minuend, and the required residue of interest must be
the result.
    If this be so, then, in the communistic state also, capital
value must be estimated in such wise that it absorbs only a
portion of the gross return to capital; so long at least as
capital retains the same efficiency, as an auxiliary of
production, which general experience from time immemorial has
shown it to do. And for so long, consequently, must it, even in
the communistic state, bear interest. Calculation of the net
return to capital, and deduction or discount of the same from the
gross return, in order to find the value of capital; -- these are
natural economic calculations, indispensable in every economy so
long as the fundamental conditions of production known to general
experience remain in force.
    A capital which, in twelve months from the date of
possession. yields the same gross return (say 105) and the same
net return (say 5), is valued at the date of possession at the
same amount (say 100). It is, nevertheless, not a matter of
indifference whether the capital comes into our possession now or
only at the end of the twelve months, inasmuch as possession now
guarantees a return of interest besides. It would, therefore, be
incorrect if we were to take the equivalence of valuation put
upon capitals in the present and in the future, and argue from
that to the full economic equivalence of the present and the
future possession. A present sum is always worth more than the
same sum at a future date, or, as we may say, the future sum is
always worth less, and that in proportion to the futurity of the
time when it will come into our possession. If in the course of a
year I can make 105 out of 100, the sum of 100 which I shall
obtain only at the end of a year, is, to-day, worth only about
95. To reduce future capital values to present value, they must
be discounted, just as the values of future gross returns are.
    The reader will remember that, in chapter vi of Book I, we
defended the proposition that present and future wants, coming
into competition with each other, are, as a rule, to be regarded
as equal; that is to say, the difference in time does not
necessitate any difference in valuation. To this proposition we
have now to add a second: -- that, within the sphere of
production, the difference in time does necessitate a difference
in valuation of the goods employed in production. The two
propositions are in perfect accord, and mutually supplement one
another. If wants are continuously to find the same satisfaction,
equal amounts of return must continuously be produced. And if
equal amounts of return are continuously produced, capital must
remain continuously the same in substance. But if capital is
actually to remain the same in substance, and so is able to yield
continuously the same returns, this must find expression in a
valuation which ascribes to capital a higher value, the earlier
the point of time it comes into our possession. For the earlier
the point of time, the earlier, and consequently the greater, the
return that may be expected.
    The business man who takes note of his own calculations, who
tests his recollections and impressions, and asks himself why he
calculates interest, and on what principle he graduates the value
of his capital, will arrive substantially at the same conclusions
as those to which we have just come. The value of goods is
derived from their utility; the value of capital goods from their
useful returns; interest represents a net increment to or fruit
of capital: -- these are the axioms of practical life so much
contradicted, even libelled, by theorists. They are axioms which
every layman recognises, in his own way, as the motives by which
he believes himself guided in his economic operations. A theory
which should succeed in vindicating these axioms of ripened
experience, which should give a distinct form to the vague
impression, and a good and necessary content to opinions not
quite conscious of their own raison d'etre, could have no better
testimony to its correctness.

NOTES:

1. Compare Menger, p. 135.

Chapter 3

The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). II
-- The Rate of Interest

    Interest is the return to capital when that return, with its
value, is considered in relation to capital value. The relation
existing between capital value and interest, when considered in
the individual case, may be described as the percentage of
increment; it becomes the "rate of interest" only when it obtains
in a large number of connected cases. The rate of interest is the
general percentage of increment to all the capital in the market.
    The fact that, in one and the same sphere of production,
there emerges a general percentage of increment, or at least a
constant tendency toward it, arises from the many-sided
connections between various kinds of production. In consequence
of the comparatively great freedom of choice in the destination
of most capital, land, and labour, it is almost always possible
to extend any single production at the cost of some other, or to
limit it in favour of some other. Of this possibility people will
avail themselves whenever, and according as, any one production
shows a particularly favourable or particularly unfavourable
percentage of increment. In seeking for the most favourable
percentage of increment, and in striving towards the equalising
of all differences, a general percentage of increment will be
created, or at all events will be aimed at, so far as there is
competition between the various productions.
    The organisations which at present contribute most to the
equalisation of the interest rate are the money markets, where
the principal amounts of capital in the shape of money are lent.
In the money markets it is, of course, in the first instance only
interest on loans that is determined, but the state of the loan
market in the last instance affects also the return to
production, inasmuch as it influences the extending of industries
carried on with borrowed capital. Not only loan capital, however,
but also that capital which is the personal property of
undertakers, moves perpetually in the direction of the highest
percentage of increment. Under a communistic regime all capital
would belong to the one single undertaker, the state; capital
would no longer be lent for production; and the interest on loans
would cease to influence the percentage of increment in
production. But this would simply leave capital still more free
to shift from one production to another; it would no longer be
hindered by those barriers which the circumstances of private
ownership at present oppose.
    Every one knows that the rate of interest, in spite of the
tendencies to equalise it, is never really the same all over.
This is chiefly caused by the fact that the unity or organisation
of production is by no means perfect. There is no such thing as a
united money market, and much less is there any thing like a
united way of conducting productive business. The individualism
of the present economic order distributes production among
individual undertakings. These, of course, under the influence of
competition and the desire for gain, are built into one coherent
structure, which to some extent realises the economic order that
an ideal plan of production would present. Yet at how many points
do we find great gaps; how many dislocations through excessive
accumulation of means of production at the wrong places; how
often things go too quickly, how often not fast enough! And
mistakes like these are all the greater the more distant the
groups compared are from one another. The separate branches of
agricultural production may be, relatively speaking, more in
harmony with each other, than, for example, agriculture as a
whole with manufacture as a whole. The transferences from
agriculture to manufacturing, and vice versa, take place too
seldom to allow of the proper balance between them being
maintained.
    This results, as we have said, in differences of percentage
of increment among the individual productive groups. It is
scarcely necessary to emphasise the fact that every difference in
rate of interest, arising from this cause, is a misfortune. Every
such difference implies a violation of the very first principle
of employing goods; that they shall first be used in the most
favourable employments, and that the less favourable shall be
allowed only in so far as there is not enough of the more
favourable. In one group people are content with a less
percentage of increment, while in others they may be obtaining
higher percentages. The hurtful consequences of this are by no
means confined to the use of capital; they go further, and
misdirect the production of capital. Capitals which yield a
trifling interest are produced far more largely, and capitals
which might yield a high interest, to a much less extent than
they ought to be.
    On the other hand, uniformity in the percentages of
increment, and a uniform rate of interest, are, where they exist,
proofs, economically speaking, of a well-balanced distribution
and disposal of capital. They are proofs that the economically
indicated limits of the employment of capital are everywhere
equally respected; that nowhere is there any falling short, and
nowhere any overstepping of them. In the principle which demands
that the employment of capital shall be guided by the rate of
interest, and that all employments which fail to return the
customary interest be left alone, we find the marginal law
brought into one common expression as regards all the different
forms of capital. The net return is a definite quota of the gross
return, and where the quota of net return is controlled, the
direction of capital generally is controlled.
    In the communistic state, when production is directed from
one point and to one end, the differences in percentage of
increment, so far as these are occasioned by the inorganic nature
of our system of production, would disappear. Of course, even
there, certain differences would still remain; all those, namely,
which could not be further equalised by transferences from one
production to another. In the nature of things, by reason of the
variety in the properties of things, no production can be
increased at the cost of others beyond a certain point, and, on
similar grounds, no production can be limited in favour of others
below a certain point. Agricultural capital could never be
completely transferred to trade, nor trade capital all
transferred to agriculture. But what does observation here show?
It shows that those very differences, which it seems quite
impossible to remove, are always removed, and that through an
instrumentality which is permissible even where transferences of
capital are not permissible; by means, that is to say, of
calculation.
    How this happens and what it means, we shall now try to show.

Chapter 4

The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). III
-- The Law of the Uniform Calculation of the Interest Rate

    A capital which, in a one year's production period,
transforms itself into a gross return of ?05, will be valued at
?00 if the general rate of interest be 5%: the residue ? is net
return. If the gross return should rise suddenly and greatly,
say, e.g., to ?26, -- the general rate of interest remaining
unaltered -- it appears at first sight that the rise must affect
the net return, and cause it to be calculated at ?6 instead of
at ? as formerly. But, as a matter of fact, is the return so
calculated? It is in one particular case; that, namely, where the
rise is regarded as a solitary instance. But if it is regarded as
permanent the calculation will be different. The owner certainly
reckons the entire increase of ?6 as gain, but he distributes it
by putting ?0 to capital and ? to net return. From this time
onward he will reckon his capital, and consequently his
consumption of capital, at ?20, and his net return at ?; so
that he does not assume an increment of 26%, but only of 5%,
corresponding to the general rate of interest.(1*) In the same
way, should the gross return of a capital sink permanently, while
the rate of interest remains unaltered, a portion of the loss
will be written off the capital value, in such a manner that the
relation between capital value and net return shall again
correspond to the general rate of interest.
    In this way it comes about that, where transferences from
production to production are no longer permissible, the
individual percentages of increment on individual capitals are,
by calculation, regulated according to the general rate of
interest.
    The rate of interest which obtains in the particular
productive group, or in the particular market to which the
capital in question belongs, is the rate that decides.
    The meaning of this act of calculation is easy to understand.
A capital yielding 26% interest and one yielding 5%, are not
equivalent to one another, although both may be expressed in the
same figures. Only equal capitals bearing equal interest are
equivalent. Capitals, then, can be calculated off-hand -- i.e.
without consideration to the interest they bear -- only where the
rate of interest is the same. That is the reason why, when the
rate of interest cannot be made equal, it is at least calculated
as such, by means of shifting the differences to the capital
value, and giving them expression there.
    A 3% capital and a 6% capital of ?00 are not equivalent to
one another; they are put into terms fit for comparison by
calculating the 3% capital at 6%, and so reducing the capital to
?0, or by calculating the 6% capital at 3% and raising capital
value to ?00.
    As a means of simplifying calculation, it might be
exceedingly desirable that the rate of interest should be the
same in all markets, and in all productive groups. The rate,
however, is not the same, and the fact must be reckoned with. If
the rate of interest on bonds amount to 4% and the bank rate to
3%, it is a consequence of the fact that the two loan markets are
separated from one another, and that demand and supply in the one
do not approximate to demand and supply in the other, or, at all
events, approximate only in trifling degree. This want of touch,
however, which renders impossible the equalisation of rates of
interest, also renders it less necessary; it is only when capital
is transferred from one market to the other that the difference
in rates of interest has any practical importance for the
valuation of capital. It is different where one and the same
market is concerned. Here capitals are continually valued against
each other, and here, therefore, differences in percentage of
increment could not be put up with. They are overcome either by
regulation of production, or, where that is not practicable, by
calculation. In the communistic state, where all capitals would
be under a uniform administration, it would be an obvious
expedient of calculation to regulate all individual percentages
of increment according to the prevailing rate of interest.
    We now proceed to further applications of the fundamental
proposition that the rate of interest, when possible, should be
uniformly calculated.

NOTES:

1. In the above example I assume (1) circulating capital, and (2)
circulating capital whose value is not depressed to a lower level
by cheaper costs of production; -- say, a scarce raw material.
Suppose there is an increased demand for articles made from
amber, while amber cannot be obtained in greater quantities; it
will rise in value. Those undertakings which work with amber
certainly obtain thereby a rise in their gross returns; but there
is, on the other hand, a similar rise in the amount deducted for
consumption of capital, and this must be taken into consideration
in their estimate of gain. In the long run there remains a higher
net return, but it is only relatively to the increased outlay of
capital.
    A much more complicate calculation has to be made as regards
fixed capital, as also as regards capital whose value is
influenced by the costs of production. I must leave the reader to
think out for himself -- in the light of the principles now to be
discussed -- the corresponding modifications in the valuation of
fixed capital and in the influence of costs.

Chapter 5

The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). IV
-- Change in the Rate of Interest

    It has just been shown that, when the value of the service of
any individual form of capital -- e.g. a raw material, or a
machine -- rises or falls, the fact expresses itself in a
corresponding elevation or depreciation in its capital value. The
net return imputed is, of course, altered at the same time, but
only in so far as will bring it again into that relation with the
capital value which corresponds with the ordinary rate of
interest.
    In order that the general percentage of increment -- the rate
of interest -- may fall or rise, there must be changes of an
extensive kind in the return to the great mass of capitals --
brought about through changes in supply, in demand, in technique,
in a word, in any of the factors of imputation. A general rise in
the gross return to capital, brought about by a great and
universally effective invention, would cause a general rise in
the net return to capital, and its relation to capital value, --
that is to say, in the rate of interest. The capital value might
in this instance remain entirely unaltered. Only those capitals
which had no part in the effects of the invention, and were in
this respect individually separated from the general mass of
capital, must necessity be affected. Where the amount of their
services had remained unaltered in the midst of the general
increase, in estimating the value of those capitals a greater
discount from that amount would require to be made, corresponding
to the increased rate of interest. Suppose the rate of interest
to rise suddenly from 3% to 6%, the value of all capital whose
interest remains unaltered at 3% must be appraised at a
correspondingly lower rate.
    We have discussed the effect which the individual factors of
imputation produce upon the contributions of capital, in
sufficient detail to make the derivation of the rules which
govern the change in the rate of interest a matter of no
difficulty.
    One single remark may be added. It is quite a hackneyed
proposition that the increase of capital causes a decline in the
rate of interest. This proposition is true only with a certain
limitation; it holds only when, by increase of capital, is
understood increase in amount, without a simultaneous increase in
the variety of the forms of capital. Increased variety in capital
is synonymous with an advance in technique; it is one of those
facts of economic history to which special attention must be
drawn, when it is desired to show clearly the difference between
primitive and developed production. Thus to it is due what we
know to be the effect of every technical advance; namely, a rise
in the value of the services of capital, as regards individual
businesses, and, when comprehensive enough, a rise in the rate of
interest. Not until the qualitative advance has been
quantitatively used up, and the stocks of the new varieties of
capital been multiplied, without other new varieties coming to
the front -- that is, not until production expands and fills out
the newly-set limits, -- can the increase of wealth have power,
first, to depress the value of the services of capital
individually, and, in the long run, should its compass be
sufficiently extensive, -- to cause a fall in the rate of
interest.
    If we look back over the changes in the rate of interest on
production over the whole course of economic history, we shall
notice an unceasing upward and downward movement, according as
advances in production are made, or as the marginal values of the
newly-acquired wealth are again depressed by the increment of
capital which follows. But through these unceasing fluctuations
run great fundamental tendencies, which are, of course, subject
to disturbance from opposing tendencies of the rate of interest
on consumption loans. Economic history begins at a period when
there is almost no capital, -- the zero of property in capital as
well as the zero of return from capital. From that time onwards
property and return, measured absolutely, go on growing so long
as the economic world thrives, and has not yet reached the down
grade of the movement of value. And the relation between these
two -- i.e. the rate of interest -- rises similarly from the
beginning, and only begins to fall when the down grade in the
movement of value begins to come in sight.

Chapter 6

The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). V
-- The Valuation of Fixed Capital

    Up to this point we have disregarded the circumstance that
many capitals -- all those called "fixed capitals" -- do not
exhaust themselves in yielding one single return, but co-operate
in several processes of production, and yield several returns
before they are finally used up. We were justified in hitherto
neglecting this circumstance, as it is of no importance to the
principle of the valuation of capital which we had first to
establish. Now, however, that the principle has been established,
we must go on to this next question. We shall find that the
circumstance alluded to does not essentially alter matters,
although it certainly renders them much more complicated.
    In the case of fixed capital, instead of one single future
return there are several returns, and the present value of these
several returns must be determined by discounting. If a machine
remains capable of work over ten years, the services of all the
ten years which are to be imputed to it must be discounted and
added up, at their present value, in order to obtain the capital
value of the machine. It need scarcely be said that every later
service must be estimated at so much less in present value, as
the discount must be relative to the terminal point. Further
complications are caused by the fact that repairs, and
reconstructions, and extensive replacements, frequently take
place in fixed capital during the period in which it is wearing
out. The outlay which this occasions must be discounted -- taking
into account of course the period of time at which this outlay
may be anticipated. Still further complications, finally, arise
from the uncertainty -- which increases as the period of wear and
tear lengthens -- whether the returns expected will actually be
received at all. And this also necessitates peculiar deductions,
which will be most simply made where people can insure against
the danger.
    In the case of such fixed capitals as are consumed
exceedingly slowly, and, consequently, yield exceptionally many
returns, the process of capitalisation frequently takes the place
of discounting. Before speaking of this, however, it will be
necessary to touch at least upon another somewhat difficult
question.
    This is the method of calculating the individual percentages
of gross return assignable respectively to interest and to wear
and tear. If a machine remains serviceable for five years, and
yields every year ?000, this yearly income must be divided out
between interest and wear and tear (Amortisation) in accordance
with a certain law. In order to find this law, it is best to
represent the individual rates of return as annuities. The first
instalment must yield interest for the first year upon the total
capital value, all return beyond that is repayment of capital;
the second instalment has to yield interest on the capital value
remaining after deduction of this repayment, and the residue,
which must now be a larger one, serves toward further repayment;
and so on, until finally the entire capital is replaced, and
interest obtained upon all the portions of capital according to
the period of their employment. The reason for this kind of
calculation lies, in the last resort, in the law of the uniform
calculation of the interest rate.(1*)

NOTES:

1. Calculated on the figures give above, and assuming a 5% rate
of interest, the value of the machine, on putting into present
value the five expected annual returns of 1000, with interest and
compound interest, may be reckoned at 4329.48. The first return
of 1000 pays 216.47, as 5% interest on the capital, while the
residue of 783.53 goes to repayment of capital, thus leaving a
remaining capital sum of 3545.95. From the second return 117.30
falls to interest, and 822.70 to the sinking fund; from the
third, in the same manner, to interest 136.16, and, to
replacement, 863.84; from the fourth, 92.97 to interest, 907.03
to capital; and finally, from the fifth, 47.62 to interest, and
952.38 to repayment, whereby the entire capital is replaced.

Chapter 7

The Value of Capital and the Interest on Capital (continued). VI
-- Capitalization

    Interest is always an aliquot part of capital value, and
capital value is always a multiple of interest. Where interest is
5%, for example, the interest is 1/20 of the capital value, and
the capital value is equal to 20 times the interest. It is this
fact which renders it possible to determine the value of capital,
not by deducting interest from gross return, but by another
method which leads to precisely the same result -- namely, by
means of a corresponding multiplication of interest, or, to use
the ordinary term, by capitalisation. Whether discounting or
capitalisation is preferred will depend upon circumstances. With
circulating capital discounting is the usual method, as the gross
return in this case forms the nearest and clearest basis. With
fixed capital, if the wearing out is comparatively rapid, and the
gross returns are few in number, discounting will be the
preferable method in this case also; but if a long series of
gross returns is to be taken into account, capitalisation will be
preferred.
    Capitalisation is easiest where the gross return contains no
quota for wear and tear, and is therefore entirely net return.
This would be the case with a capital which never wore out, which
promised rent to all eternity, and a rent, moreover, absolutely
secure. To carry through the process of discounting here would be
laborious in the highest degree; the rent of each separate year
would have to be separately calculated, until that rent was
reached whose present value was zero; and not till then could the
calculation be finished. How much simpler in such a case to
multiply the year's rent in accordance with the rate of interest!
The result obtained in this fashion agrees with that given by the
former and more laborious method, not merely approximately, but
with mathematical exactitude, as any text-book of mathematics
will confirm. The mathematical formula for the discounting of an
eternal rent is simply the formula of capitalisation.
    The calculation is a little more complicated when the gross
returns contain quotas for wear and tear, and when repairs and
the like must be covered and insurance premiums or premiums
against risk retained out of these gross returns. In such cases
all necessary deductions must first be made from the gross return
before we get the net return which is to be capitalised, and this
is very often exceedingly difficult in the individual case. The
premiums just mentioned are frequently not deducted, but the
amount of risk finds instead its expression simply in the rate of
interest. The return, for example, of a business regarded as of
doubtful solidity will be capitalised at a higher rate of
interest, i.e. as a smaller multiple.(1*)

NOTES:

1. All the separate principles here deduced for the calculating
of capital value and interest are followed in practical life and
are practically familiar to us. The theory of them, too, is often
given. But they are always followed and taught under the
assumption that the fact of interest and a fixed ratio of
interest are given. Nothing is simpler, under such an assumption,
than to capitalise a rent, or to show the method of
capitalisation. But the duty of the theorist is to discover these
laws, and, at the same time, to explain why such assumptions may
be made. Whence comes interest? whence the rate of interest?
These are our fundamental questions. All the single laws which we
have laid down are confirmed theoretically only if we have
succeeded in explaining also the assumption on which they are
based, i.e. the existence of interest and the rate of interest.
    The analysis of the value of land which follows will once
more give the reader occasion to notice how difficult it is with
the matter in hand to escape arguing in a circle, and to prevent
the entrance of any assumption which is itself in need of
explanation.

Chapter 8

Interest on the Consumption Loan. House Rent

    The natural principles hitherto laid down for estimating
capital value and interest refer only to production. It must now
be asked whether there is also a natural interest which
corresponds to the interest given on a loan for consumption
purposes, or interest derived from letting of dwelling-houses and
the like.(1*)
    The motives of a debtor who borrows with the view of spending
the loan on himself are different from those of an undertaker who
borrows to increase his business capital. The undertaker hopes to
obtain both repayment of capital and interest out of the return
on the borrowed sum. The mere debtor cannot hope for this, but
must trust that it will be possible for him to repay his debt of
capital and interest out of some other income. He borrows because
he needs goods now, and has not got them, while he expects in the
future to have them and not to need them to the same degree -- at
least he deludes himself with some such hope. Thus in a certain
sense interest on production and interest on consumption have a
common source. Both of them relate to a difference in the
valuation of present and of future goods, only that the causes
which produce this difference are distinct. In the case of the
productive outlay of capital it is the productivity of capital
which causes the difference between present and future; in the
case of the consumption loan, it is accidental and personal
circumstances, -- accidental accumulation of present wants and
expenditure, accidental disturbance of income, and so forth. One
who finds himself in a situation of urgent necessity is acting
quite rationally when he promises -- at some future time when he
hopes to be more favourably situated -- to pay to the person who
assists him by an advance of money out of his present difficulty,
not only the amount advanced, but an extra, an interest. A sum of
£l05 at the end of a year may be worth less to him than ?00 is
at the present moment; he might even promise ?50, ?00, or more,
and yet not be acting irrationally. But if he is to find a person
willing to lend him the money, it is essential that every one
should not be in the same circumstances of present need and
future affluence as himself. It is essential that there should be
people who, at the moment, have means which they can do without.
And thus it follows that, in an entirely organic economy, such as
would exist in the communistic state, the necessary conditions
for consumption interest are wanting, inasmuch as all the
citizens together would form only one economic subject, and would
participate continually, either in the same condition of want, or
in the same improved condition of economic well-being.
    The interest obtained from the letting of dwelling-houses,
and such like objects of consumption wealth, amounts, on an
average, to a sum which allows the owner to enjoy -- during the
period for which the building lasts -- interest upon the capital
expended in building, and, besides, to provide what the Germans
conveniently call "amortisation" of the same; so that, when the
dwelling is worn out, he is in a position to replace it. In
short, there is assured him, on the average, a permanent net
return corresponding in amount to the general rate of interest
upon property of this kind. During all the long period of time
when contract interest on Loans was forbidden by law, and
violently combated by all theorists, no one thought of objecting
to the interest on consumption-wealth. This was always held
equitable; and an owner who made over his property to another in
perpetuity was regarded as having a right to claim in return a
permanent remuneration. If, however, we look carefully, it will
be seen that the theoretical arguments employed against interest
on loans apply equally to interest on house property, in so far
as it brings in more than enough to repay the costs of building.
If money be "unfruitful," so are buildings; and to this extent it
is impossible to see why they should bring to their owners a net
income lasting beyond the physical duration of the house. Were
the owner to retain the house for his own use he would, by the
time it tumbled to ruins, possess nothing more of it than,
possibly, the value of the materials; -- is it not rather a hard
condition that the person who hires the house must rebuild it for
him?
    To justify the usual amount of rent on house property, we
must go somewhat further back, viz. to the fact that the objects
of use which are let must be produced. But if they are to be
produced, there must be the prospect that their value will
include the full and permanent maintenance of the undertaker's
capital, along with the customary return to capital, whether this
value be realised through selling or through letting the
property. No houses would be built for letting if the prospects
of this kind of undertaking were poorer than those of any other;
the interest of hire or let must, therefore, stand at the usual
amount of interest on capital. It is an application of the law of
costs (see below, Book V), according to which the customary
interest on capital is reckoned among costs. As in all cases, so
in this, does the calculation of costs assure the fullest
economic distribution of the employments of goods. The more
exactly the net income received from the letting of
dwelling-houses corresponds with the rate of interest general
over the country, the more exactly will the building of houses,
and the satisfaction of the need which this meets, correspond
with the general condition of production and of the satisfaction
of wants. If people were to be contented, e.g., with an
exceptionally low return from houses, it would imply a
disproportionately ample satisfaction of the want for dwellings.
This would stand out from the general economic plane; and would
necessarily be balanced and compensated by limitations in some
other direction.
    Even in an entirely organic economy, in which the opposition
between owner and tenant was abolished, it would be as needful as
it now is to take care that building of houses corresponded with
the general position of production and of satisfaction. And to
this extent we might draw analogies between the interest of house
rent and a calculation, in terms of value, of the satisfaction
given by houses, which would result in a control of expenditure
quite as complete as that given by house rent.(2*)

NOTES:

1. A further form of interest will be discussed in Book V. chap.
ii.

2. That is to say: -- In the present state the due provision of
houses for the people is guaranteed by the consideration that
capitalists, investing their money in house property, will get
the ordinary return of interest on capital generally. Rent must
cover replacement as well as interest. In a communistic state,
where the government provided everything, the building of houses
would be controlled by considerations of wants and satisfactions
which placed the demand for houses very much in the same relative
position to other satisfactions as now. No socialist state, for
instance, could provide houses in such quantities that their
value was reduced to the mere expenses of building, without
disturbing the marginal plane, and diminishing the total sum of
satisfaction obtainable by the employment of the national
capital. -- W.S.

Chapter 9

The Value of Land

    The value of land is calculated -- according to the same
principles as the value of a permanent rent -- by capitalising
the rent of land. This is a proposition which is held nowadays as
self-evident. It was not always so, however, and, indeed could
not always be so. In order to capitalise, a given rate of
interest is necessary; and that an interest rate may be given, we
need capital. To capitalise rent means to multiply it according
to principles which are derived, as the name itself shows, from
the valuation of capital.
    Imagine an ideal condition of agriculture where no capital
whatever is employed. The land yields produce of all kinds and in
great quantity. In these circumstances the value of each product
can be estimated exactly; the value of each harvest can be
estimated exactly; rent can be fixed exactly; -- but there is no
means by which to determine with certainty how many rents would
be required to give the value of the land.
    Why is there no such means in the case of land as there is in
the case of capital? The answer is simple. Capital reproduces
itself in the gross return as a part of that gross return. Thus
there is a fixed relation between the two "known" quantities,
gross return and net return, and the "unknown" quantity, capital
value; and this relation gives the measure for capitalisation.
Land has not the same double position as productive factor and as
product. It produces without being reproduced; and thus, to
determine the value of land, it becomes necessary to bring to our
aid the standard for capitalisation which we find in capital.
    From this consideration it follows that, so long as capital
was scarce, it was impossible to obtain a fixed valuation of
land. Every owner of land might estimate its value differently,
inasmuch as he might take, as basis of calculation either a
greater or smaller number of yearly rentals, according to varying
external circumstances, and according as his judgment was
influenced by recklessness or by forethought. An egoist pure and
simple, who calculated only with regard to his own lifetime, and
to whom his land was of importance only because it secured him a
rent for life, would estimate its value according to the probable
duration of his life, and would thereby obtain a kind of fixed
valuation; at all events, his land would represent to him a
finite sum of value and not an infinite one. But one who thought
of his children, and of succeeding generations, and took their
interests into consideration in estimating the value of his land
would of necessity regard it as an infinite amount. As
inconsiderate egoism may be counted exceptional, the value of
land must, as a rule, have been estimated as infinite, or, at all
events, as an amount incapable of being measured.
    As a matter of fact, this probably was the case with
primitive economy. In the beginning, where land had any value at
all ascribed to it -- as, e.g., the pasture lands of nomadic
tribes when there was no superfluous amount of such lands, the
opinion must have arisen that here man had to do with an
indispensable condition of existence; a condition which required
to be kept up permanently; and a condition whose importance could
not in any way be compared with that of rapidly changing, coming
and going, movable goods. The possession of pasture land was a
matter of life and death, and the tribe, recognising that its
continued existence depended upon the possession, would risk its
uttermost to retain it. Even in present times a similar mode of
thought may be met with in distant mountainous regions, where the
peasant farms his solitary patch of land. His croft is
inalienable from him, and its value indeterminable as against
other goods. What should the peasant do if he ceased to be a
peasant? No sum of money that a buyer might offer could be any
temptation to him, unless just then an occasion presented itself
to exchange it for another and better piece of land -- an
unlikely possibility in the circumstances. The peasant's croft is
and remains for him a good by itself, the value of it impossible
of expression in goods of any other kind, -- in fact,
indeterminable.
    This conception alters only when capital has become more
plentiful, and when the landowner has become more familiar with
its use and its value. There are two circumstances which bring
this about. The one is that land and capital begin to be
exchanged for each other, according to the amount of the rents
they yield, and thus people use the value of capital to express
the value of land. The other, and more important, is that the
land becomes more intensively cultivated, and itself employs,
much capital. Consequently, in every act of cultivation, the
question has to be considered, how land and capital should be
employed relatively to each other, so as to give the best returns
of rent. The same return in crops may be produced by taking more
or less land into cultivation, or by employing more or fewer
doses of capital, and agriculturists have to decide on these
points. Thus land and capital become commensurable in their
products; and, when ever civilisation has got this length, it is
impossible longer to avoid valuing land according to the
fundamental laws of valuing capital. To do otherwise would be to
renounce the only possible measure for calculation and economic
decisions. Just as capitals can be rightly compared with each
other only when calculated at the same rate of interest, so can
land and capital be rightly compared only when the valuation of
land assumes the rate of interest on capital.
    In the communistic state, it is true, the connection between
land and capital, brought about by exchange of the one for the
other, disappears, but the connection arising from their common
co-operation in production remains. The capitalising of land
value, accordingly, would remain as now.

Chapter 10

The Value of Labour

    To his master the slave is a capital, and his value, like
that of an animal, a machine, or any piece of fixed capital, is
determined by summing up and discounting all the services which
may be expected from him, or, as we may say, by capitalising his
net return.
    The capital value of free labour, the value of the free
labourer, is no object for valuation, any more than his person is
an object of economical disposal, or a "good." On the other hand,
the individual acts of labour are always objects of economical
disposal, and so objects of value, even in the freest community,
-- even in a community where the labourer himself governs and
makes, the laws. No economy could be conducted without men
recognising not only which labour, in general, is the best and
which the worst, but which, in the circumstances, is the more and
which the less important, which must be used sparingly and which
may be used with most freedom.
    The method by which labour is valued is exceedingly simple.
The ordinary principles of imputation decide what share of the
return may be ascribed to each individual service, and the value
of this share obtains directly as the value of the service which
produces it. Thus every kind and quality of labour shows a
different result according to the available supply, the demand,
the support revived from complementary goods, and the technical
possibilities. At the top of the tree stand the "monopoly"
services, when the general economic conditions of the time aid
them with technical support and general demand at the bottom
stand the over-congested branches of labour, particularly
unskilled manual labour. Wherever labour power is available in
great quantity it is valued as a "cost-good," and suffers from
all the disadvantages of this valuation. The marginal employment
is always the decisive one, -- that employment of the labour in
question which brings the smallest result economically
permissible.
    The socialists would have us believe that the value of every
kind of labour should be estimated simply according to time; that
is to say, the duration of the service should alone decide its
value relative to other labour, -- which assumes, of course, that
slovenly labour is reduced to earnest labour, unskilled to
skilled labour. This is the extent to which the quality of the
labour would be taken into consideration, but no further. Those
differences of quality which reside in the task set before the
labourer are left quite out of consideration. Common manual
labour, higher artisan labour, superior mental labour, are all to
be regarded as equal. Does it require any special proof that this
is contrary to the natural laws of valuation, and that no economy
could last which treated its division of labour in this way?
    The socialists continually overlook the fact -- although,
indeed, they only follow in the footsteps of most of the
economists -- that value, in our present condition of society,
has two services to perform. The one is to act as title to
personal income. In the great round game of income-winning, every
one is to receive in the end as much as the value of his stake
amounts to; and in the game the stakes may be wealth as well as
personal labour. The man who has much wealth to stake receives,
as a rule, much income, even without personal labour, and the man
who has little wealth to stake, as a rule receives little, even
with the most strenuous expenditure of labour.
    The other service of value, -- and one usually quite
overlooked, -- concerns the economical balancing or weighing of
goods against goods, and of employment of goods against
employment, without regard to distribution among persons, and
simply with a view to reach the greatest possible economic
results. To this service of value belong e.g, those principles
which are absolutely indispensable to any economy; -- that every
production should be directed so as to obtain the greatest
possible return, that no more be spent upon any product than can
be made good by its value, that in consumption the good suited to
satisfy urgent wants, and therefore the more valuable, should not
be spent on a trifling satisfaction, that, generally speaking,
the limits of supply and demand, as given in marginal value,
should be observed, and so on.
    What would the socialists have? They wish a related economy,
in no way worse, and possibly better regulated than that of
to-day; but with this peculiarity that labour shall be the only
source of personal income. The value of land and capital -- or
the value of the rents of land and capital -- shall no longer be
imputed to any individual as his outlay or stake; shall no longer
serve any one individual as a title to personal income. Is there
in this claim -- the justice of which we shall not here discuss
-- any force which can abrogate the economical service of value
as well as the personal service? Because land and capital are no
longer to belong to individuals but to the state, must they
therefore be regarded by the state as valueless, and be employed
in production without regard to the principles of value? Because
labour is to be the only basis of personal income -- measured
possibly by the length of time which each man has worked -- is
labour alone to be considered in production, and is the only
measure of its value to be its duration? Because there is to be a
new order in the distribution of goods among persons, must there
be a complete disorganisation in the whole industrial conduct of
goods?
    Of course socialists are very far from desiring such a
result. They wish to have a related economy, but they expect at
the same time to secure that goods are used and employed
according to their usefulness. Does this mean that the usefulness
of goods is really the only thing to be considered -- not
quantity and its changes, not demand with its rise and fall, not
the mutual connection of means of production, with all the
vicissitudes of favourable and unfavourable coincidence? But if
usefulness, supply, demand, complementarity are combined, what is
this but to value goods according to the utility imputable to
them in the given case, instead of according to their general
usefulness -- in other words, to estimate them according to their
value?
    The natural principles of valuation are indispensable,
because they serve indispensable economic purposes. Consequently
where these principles are observed, they serve these purposes,
and are, in so far, good. In so far as exchange value corresponds
with natural value, it is right that it should regulate the
economic conduct and disposal of goods, and that in every
department, whether as regards land, capital, or even labour. And
although the labourer may suffer severely under this law of
value, although society generally may suffer with him, although
the recompense of the labourer may require to be adjusted, in his
own interest and that of society, by a different law; -- still
labour cannot be valued according to any other law where its
employment is concerned. When it comes to employ labour, the
communistic state must retain the same law in force, or its
economy will become chaos.
    Not only the question of payment, but, beyond that, the
question of labour in the future, must be kept distinct from its
employment. Wherever common labour power is disproportionally
abundant, it can, and must, be employed only in producing returns
of very trifling value. None the less will it be regarded as an
evil that there should be available labour power of such trifling
productive capacity, and all efforts towards increasing the
services of labour and thus securing it a higher value, are
worthy of praise; all the more so if the small capacity brings a
small payment, and thus results, over wide circles of workers, in
insufficient satisfactions of wants and wretched conditions.

Chapter 11

The Value of Production Goods, With Reference to the Competition
Between Present and Future Interests

    To distribute a supply of means of subsistence, or other
consumption goods, over a considerable period of time, and to
value it with regard to the competition between present and
future wants, is, at bottom, a very simple task. One would select
the highest satisfactions which can be reached on the whole, and
these would form the basis for the valuation of the goods, the
marginal satisfaction deciding the value of the unit. At what
point of time the marginal satisfaction will occur cannot be
stated generally. It may be at the beginning that the highest
satisfactions are possible, as in the case of stocks which are
large and liable to spoil, and cannot well be preserved for any
length of time. It may be that the greatest amount of
satisfaction can be attained only at the end of the period; as
when forethought demands that a certain restraint be observed at
the earlier dates in case of possible accidents.
    Not infrequently this task is complicated by the fact that
there is a question between the productive employment of goods,
and their direct employment in the satisfaction of wants. Coal,
for instance, exerts its power of heating equally well in the
dwelling and in the factory, and so with many other material
goods which may be employed either for consumption or as capital.
The same will be observed in the case of land; a field may either
be employed in producing a return, or be laid out as a park. And,
finally, it is the same with labour. It may either be employed as
personal service -- domestic service in a house for instance --
or used for productive ends. As all production provides for
consumption sooner or later, the choice between immediate
consumption and productive employment is always a choice between
present or proximate consumption and future or more distant
consumption. The principle which governs this choice is the one
just given; that employment which, in a consideration of the
whole ground, is found to be the marginal one, decides the value.
And here again it is impossible to state generally at what point
of time the marginal employment will occur. It may occur in the
present, the period of immediate consumption; it may occur in the
future, the period of productive employment. The marginal value
of coal might be decided equally well, either by its service in
heating the dwelling or by its service in the factory.
    This consideration may be carried further within the sphere
of production. Production may be made to yield its fruits to
consumption sooner or later, according to the manner in which it
is directed. It is possible either to limit production
principally to objects of direct consumption, -- by which means
the end that is nearest in point of desire is more speedily
reached, -- or to direct it on and on, devoting it to the making
of production goods themselves, and to ensuring the conditions of
great and lasting "rentability" -- by which present enjoyment is
postponed for the sake of a greater degree of enjoyment in the
future. Not only does the choice of objects of production come
into consideration, but many other circumstances also. Almost
every kind of production -- with the exception possibly of those
strictly dependent upon seasons of the year -- permits of a
shorter or longer process; almost every production -- with still
more trifling exceptions -- may be carried out "extensively" or
"intensively," with slighter means and more temporary results, or
with stronger means and more durable results. In all such cases
it has to be decided whether the present, the nearer enjoyment,
or the future, the more distant, be preferable. And finally there
is still another peculiar circumstance, which contributes to the
competition between present and future interests. The
accomplishment of almost every undertaking demands personal
exertion; it thus demands the overcoming of the resistance
offered by the natural desire for rest and comfort. In this
connection also the considerations of present and future welfare
come into collision.
    The principle which must guide one's choice in this respect
is in all cases the same, although the difficulty of applying it
increases with the complication of the case. That scheme for the
employment of goods which promises the greatest advance on the
whole, must be the one chosen, and valuation -- so far as is
practicable, marginal valuation -- must be adapted to this
scheme.
    In general, indeed, labour and capital are more concerned in
what has just been said than is land. The motives which make for
labour always, or almost always, encounter in the pleasure of the
moment a certain resistance which must be overcome. And capital,
as it must continually be reproduced, continually raises the
question whether the means necessary for its re-creation could
not be employed elsewhere to more advantage. In this have
originated two celebrated theories, intimately related to one
another, although they have emerged separately: the one relating
to the value of labour, the other to the value of capital. The
former derives the value of labour from the "sacrifices" of
labour; this theory we shall discuss later. The other derives the
value of capital, or, rather, interest, from the "sacrifice"
which, as it asserts, is made by the capitalist in devoting his
capital to production instead of directly consuming it. This is
the well-known Abstinence Theory, which regards interest as a
wage for the abstinence of the capitalist. A few words upon this
theory may not be out of place here. After what has just been
said there should be no difficulty in forming an opinion upon it.
    It is true that, in all cases of the formation of capital,
capital might have had another destination than the one actually
chosen, -- for production is a very Proteus in its capability of
taking various shapes; but it is not true -- as will now be
generally acknowledged -- that every capital permits also of
being immediately consumed. Since Lassalle's criticism it is
unnecessary to waste another word on this point. But even
supposing it were true, supposing that every concrete form of
capital might be immediately consumed, the abstinence theory
would none the less be false. In no way is it possible that a
consumption, from which it is economical to refrain, can serve as
a measure of value. What kind of sense would there be in this?
Goods are of value to us because of what we can obtain from them,
and those destinations of goods which are chosen as the
economically permissible ones, furnish the basis of value. The
consumable nature of capital goods can influence their value only
in so far as capital goods are actually devoted to consumption;
if capital be consumed the productive stock will be diminished;
if much capital be consumed it will be sensibly diminished, and
productive value will rise. But even this effect must not be
regarded as a one-sided one. The productive employment of capital
and the personal consumption of it mutually determine one
another. Moreover they determine one another only in
consideration of the amount of value employed at the time. On the
other hand, neither of them can be basis for the other. The
circumstance that capital is consumable can no more give value to
a foolish employment of it in production, than the circumstance
that capital is capable of productive employment can make it
consumable, if it be not so in its own nature. The value of an
employment must be founded on itself: productive value can be
derived only from production, and consumption value only from
consumption. The amounts of value gained in the various
employments of capital are, of course, compared with each other,
so far as is practicable, in the effort to attain to the greatest
possible result on the whole: and, moreover, even where they are
not compared, they are still put at an equal value with one
another in virtue of the particular form of valuation which the
marginal law bring with it. As a matter of fact abstinence from
consumption is nothing more than a symptom of productive value,
-- occasionally of so much productive value that the sacrifice of
abstinence is at least counterbalanced.
    The abstinence theory in its essence bears a striking
resemblance to that theory which derives the value of products
from their costs. As we shall see immediately, the law of costs
does indeed exist as a very good working law of valuation. But
costs do not form the foundation of value; they only equalise it:
and, moreover, the circumstance that costs are expended makes us
conclude for the existence of value. The cost theory, like the
abstinence theory -- except that it is confined to a narrower
sphere -- confuses a law of the more or less of value, or more
exactly, a law of the equalisation of values, with the
fundamental law of valuation. In the one theory as in the other,
a symptom, which allows us to conclude for the existence of
value, is taken to be its cause and explanation.

