

Modern Custom and Ancient Laws of Russia

by Maxime Kovalevsky

1891




Lecture III

The Past and Present of the Russian Village Community


    Few questions of history are debated in our days as that of
the origin of village communities. French, English, and German
scholars, to say nothing of Russians and Americans, have
published whole volumes in order to prove either the existence or
non-existence of village communities in that period of evolution
which is generally known as patriarchal.
    The acute German observer, Baron Haxthausen, who was the
first to describe to European readers the social and economic
character of the Russian mir, was probably quite unconscious of
the literary movement to which he was to give rise by his two or
three sentences about the antiquity of the Russian agrarian
community, and its likeness to the social and economic
institutions of the Southern and Western Slavs. A few years after
the publication of Baron Haxthausen's work, a Moscovite
professor, Mr Chicherin, in two articles which at once produced a
great sensation, strongly protested against the opinion that
Russian village communities were the direct descendants of those
undivided households which so commonly form part of the
historical past of most Aryan nations. The Slavophils and their
leader Chomiakov maintained that they were the spontaneous growth
of Russia. Chicherin believed they had a twofold origin -- that
they were partly the creation of a Government anxious to secure
an easy method of collecting one of the taxes which was very like
the old French capitation tax, and partly due to the landed
aristocracy, which could find no better means than an equal and
periodical redistribution of the land, for attaching to the soil
those classes of the people who were reduced to the condition of
serfdom. This extraordinary assertion immediately met with a
systematic denial on the part of Mr Beliaiev, the well-known
Professor of Legal History, who was one of the colleagues of Mr
Chicherin, and whose extensive researches in the legal history of
Russia gave his opinion great weight. This did not, however,
prevent M. Fustel de Coulanges from reproducing the theory just
as if it had not already been refuted. But the inventors of
theories, of whom Fustel de Coulanges was certainly one of the
greatest, too often follow the method described in the well-known
French saying: "Je prends mon bien ou je le trouve." Seeing that
a denial of the antiquity of the Russian village communities
supported his theory of the general prevalence of private
property even in the earliest times, he thought himself at
liberty to disregard all later investigations, and to endorse an
opinion which had already been refuted.
    The study of the origin and growth of Russian village
communities has never been discontinued in my country wince the
time when the work of Haxthausen first drew the attention of our
economists and historians to this peculiar institution. A crowd
of young students have rendered familiar, even to the general
public, the notion that they were the spontaneous result of our
social development; that the Government, by interfering in their
internal constitution, has only succeeded in obscuring their
national character; that mutual responsibility in matters of
taxation was foreign to their original organisation; and that
there is ample foundation for the statement that their members,
from being, as they were at first, free possessors of the soil,
became the serfs of the Czar, the nobles, or the clergy.
    The extraordinary increase of historical research in Russia,
and especially of investigations into the social and economical
development of the country, which took place during the reign of
Alexander II, certainly contributed largely to induce German
scholars, with the illustrious Maurer at their head, to review
the current opinions concerning the social condition of the
Germans in the Middle Ages. It led Maurer to elaborate his
magnificent theory of the Mark, Manor, and Village Constitution
(Mark, Hof und Dorf Verfassung).
    Sir Henry Maine made the system of village communities
familiar to English students, and had, moreover, the great merit
of showing that, far from being a peculiar feature of the social
organisation of the Germans and Slavs, they were to be found
amongst the majority of Aryan nations, in the plains of the
Punjab and the interior of the North-West Provinces of india, and
among the green pastures of Erin. The almost universal admiration
which his essay on Village Communities in the East and West has
elicited, rests on no other ground than that of its having first
brought to light the truth which is now all but established, that
village communities represent a distinct period in the social
development of mankind, a period which ought to be placed between
the patriarchal and the feudal periods, and that, therefore, all
endeavours to explain their existence among this or that people
by the peculiarities of national character ought to be henceforth
declared useless and worthless.
    This idea, confirmed, as it is, by a general survey of the
survivals left by the system of village communities among the
Celtic, German, and Latin nations, a survey with which M. de
Laveleye has inseparably connected his name, has literally
revolutionised the historical researches of more than one country
of Europe, and especially those of my own. The impression
produced by the two writers just mentioned is still so strong
that Russian scholars, instead of subscribing to the recent
ingenious hypothesis of Mr Seebohm as to the servile origin of
village communities in England, have themselves set to work to
examine the rich materials which the Bodleian Library and the
Record Office present as to the history of land-ownership in
England. In saying this I have particularly in view the deep and
accurate studies of my former colleague Professor Vinogradov on
the agrarian constitution of medieval England, of which a few
years ago I gave a short account in the Law Quarterly Review.
Others have made similar inquiries into the economic history of
medieval Germany, and their studies have induced some French
authors, and among them M. Dareste, warmly to oppose the original
but one-sided theory of Fustel de Coulanges.
    Before passing to the direct study of the development of the
Russian village community, I must recognise the fact that the
long and sometimes violent struggle of the early Slavophils on
behalf of the spontaneous origin of the mir, has been productive
of the best results to the study of agrarian communism in Russia.
    A comparison between the modern constitution of the mir and
that described in old charters proves the widely different
character of the two, while the differences between them support
the theory of a natural evolution of the community, an evolution
not yet completed in more than one part of the Empire. The
difference which we trace between the past and the present of the
Russian commune are the same which we see existing between the
various modern forms of it in our own day. The study, therefore,
of these forms and of their natural transformation may be of
great help towards understanding the true origin and growth of
the system. The opportunity -- I may even say the necessity -- of
such a study is the more apparent on account of the lack of
mediaeval documents concerning the early constitution of the mir.
Our sources of information are limited indeed; for several
centuries, down to the end of the fifteenth, they are almost
entirely wanting, and they only begin to be at all abundant
during the last three hundred years. It is only, therefore, by a
survey of the modern evolution of village ownership in some
remote parts of Russia that we can get an idea of the various
transformations which the commune has had to undergo before it
reached its present condition.
    The vastness of the area and the fact that certain parts of
Russia remained for centuries unpeopled, partly on account of
their physical condition, partly owing to their insecurity, due,
as it was, to the periodical invasions of the Tartars, explain,
to a great extent, why the character of the commune varies so
much throughout the land. Its growth has been stopped in one
place at an early stage, in another place at a later stage, of
its development. We can trace these stages in some cases by
charters and by legal and judicial documents, in others by the
transformation of the commune into higher and more elaborate
forms. It is only by the study of these documents and these forms
that the Russian historian can hope to be able to describe the
gradual development of the agrarian communism of his country. We
will now consider the chief results which the application of this
method has produced.
    In the last lecture it was shown that the earliest mode of
land tenure in Russia was the holding it in an undivided state by
the members of a house community. This kind of a family communism
is mentioned in the Pravda of Jaroslav at the end of the eleventh
century, and continued to exist in the north and south of the
country down to the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The
chief characteristic of this holding consisted in the fact that,
though the land remained undivided and lay open as it had done
for centuries before, every member of the household,
nevertheless, was the possessor of a share in the various fields
belonging to the family. These shares were not equal, but varied
according to rights of inheritance appertaining to each of the
holders. Should the brothers and nephews decide on living
separately, they would abandon the old system of using in common
the produce of the early harvest, and divide the area of the
arable land in unequa1 shares, proportioned to the rights of
inheritance possessed by each member of the household. The extent
of the shares was not fixed. The soil varied in fertility, and
all the shareholders alike appreciated the advantages of
vicinity; each partner, therefore, received the right to enjoy a
certain portion in each of the fields possessed by the village.
These portions were not strictly defined, but, as a rule,
represented the half, third, fourth, eighth, and so on, of the
field according to the heritage which was acknowledged to belong
to each partner.
    Let us suppose the case of one commune, the family consisting
of three brothers living and two nephews, the sons of a fourth
brother deceased. The share of each of the brothers would be
one-fourth part of each of the different fields in the village,
whilst that of the nephews would not exceed an eighth. Each
partner having a right to sell his ideal portion, or a part of
it, to a stranger, as well as to a relative, the village would
soon become occupied by neighbours owning the most unequal
portions in field. These neighbours would maintain the
obligations which common possession is apt to establish; the
meadows for the greater part of the time would be kept undivided,
subject here and there to a yearly distribution according to the
wants of each homestead; but these wants being as a rule the
same, the custom would prevail of dividing them into equal parts
for the purpose of mowing.
    The pasture and forest land would also remain subject to a
community of ownership, and would sometimes belong to several
neighbouring villages, which in that case would constitute a
larger area, similar to the German "mark," and known under the
name of "volost." Each of the inhabitants of the "volost" would
be allowed an unlimited use of the undivided area, it being too
extensive to be easily exhausted. It would, however, be an error
to suppose that this general and unlimited enjoyment of the
undivided mark was but the result of that freedom which all
possessed as to unoccupied ground (the res nullius), for a person
who was not an inhabitant of the village or villages constituting
the mark or "volost," would have no right to enjoy its pastures
and forest lands. That this was the case is proved by the fact
that no one might dig a piece of ground belonging to the forest
unless the digging were authorised by the whole community of
shareholders. Such a right of prohibition could not have been
enjoyed unless the community was the owner of the "mark."
    The natural evolution of agrarian communism did not go
further than this in the northern parts of Russia. It went
further, however, in the south -- in those vast and fertile
steppes which lie on the eastern and western banks of Dnieper,
and which for centuries constituted a part of Poland. The recent
researches of Professor Louchizky have brought to light the
following facts, which were quite unknown and some of which were
directly contradicted by former historians. Undivided households
and their immediate successors, villages, composed of sharers in
the same ground, were in the beginning well known on the eastern
bank of the Dnieper. The undivided "mark," on which every
homestead had the right to take fuel and to pasture its cattle,
is known in this region under the name of lands belonging to the
"gromada," or commune. They are sometimes called also common or
village lands. The colonists who, during the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, crossed the river in order to occuPy the
free steppes in the modern Government of Tchernigov, migrated in
companies, organised on the model of undivided or partly divided
households. These companies were called "skladchina," from the
verb "skladivat," which means to put something in common. The
area on which the colonisation took place was so boundless that
each homestead was allowed to sow yearly as much ground as it was
able to till. When the harvest was once reaped the land was
abandoned, and a new piece occupied for agricultural purposes.
You can easily see that this was a proceeding similar to that of
the ancient Germans, of which Tacitus says: -- "Arva per annos
mutant et superest ager."
    I need not tell you that as long as the population was small
enough to allow of a yearly change of soil for cultivation,
redistribution was never thought of; no mention is ever made of
the run-rig system which characterises the modern village
community. But as it is impossible that shares should be equal
without recourse to some such method, we must not look for
equality under the conditions just stated. Even in the eighteenth
century, when the growth of population had diminished the area of
arable land, periodical redistribution remained unknown. If some
amount of equality was, nevertheless, secured, it was due to the
control which the commune began to exert over its members.
Private appropriation of soil was no longer allowed, except on
the condition of its being made at certain fixed periods, and
under the supervision of the authorities. Twice a year, in autumn
and in spring, the whole commune, with its cattle and its
agricultural implements, went out into the open field. At the
command of the village-elder, the head of each homestead
proceeded to trace with his own plough the limits of the ground
he intended to sow, and no one was allowed to extend his
cultivation beyond the limits thus settled. By-and-by the right
of retaining these private parcels of ground was extended to a
period of three years, at the end of which they returned to the
commune, and a new appropriation of the arable area was ordered
to be made.
    Hitherto I have spoken of the mode in which land was enjoyed
so far as it applied to arable land alone. Let us now say a word
about the meadows, forest land, and pastures. The first were
owned on conditions similar to those first mentioned. At the end
of May a day was fixed when all the villagers were assembled for
the hay harvest. Each householder marked with a scythe the limits
of the meadow he intended to mow. It was the duty of the
village-elders to see that these limits were strictly observed.
Forests and pastures were so abundant that no measuring was
needed to regulate their use. Non-division and common enjoyment
remained the general rule, several villages very often possessing
equal rights to take fuel and to pasture cattle in the same
forests and wastes.
    Whilst this was the state of things on the banks of the
Dnieper, a similar evolution took place on those of the Don. An
area, even larger than that of the south-western steppes in the
middle of the sixteenth century, awaited the arrival of those
Great Russian colonists, who founded the so-called Territory of
the Don-Cossacks. For a while the ground was declared to be the
common property of the whole community, and each family was
allowed to sow and mow wherever it liked, but by-and-by large
villages called "stanitza" were formed, and the first division of
the ground took place. Each village received its own area of
arable and meadow ground; pasture and waste land remained the
common property of the whole people, or, as it was said, of the
whole "army."
    The unlimited right of private homesteads to appropriate as
much soil as each required was scrupulously maintained by these
stanitzas, a fact which in the end produced great inequality in
the distribution of the land. This inequality was established in
favour of a minority of families out of which the elders of the
people were regularly chosen; but as those who were possessed of
but small parcels of land formed the majority, various economic
arrangements were regularly made at the village folkmotes where
this majority was all powerful; redistributions of land in order
to equalise the shares were very often prescribed and the system
of run-rig tenure made its first appearance. This took place
almost in our own time, some few stanitzas continuing even now to
maintain their ancient privilege of private appropriation.
    I might continue my survey of the beginnings of the modern
system of village communities by a description of the economic
arrangements still in use among the Cossacks of the Terek or of
the Oural, but if I did so, I should only have to repeat the same
facts, and that in order to deduce the following conclusions.
That the modern system of periodical redistribution of land in
equal shares was quite unknown when colonisation first began, but
that this did not prevent a peculiar kind of agrarian communism,
the foundations of which are to be traced in the internal
constitution of the undivided household; and that this form of
social existence was known to Russia at the beginning of her
history, and was diffused all over her empire, as may be seen
from the frequent occurrence in medieval documents of terms like
"the hearth," "the fire" (pechische, ognische).
    All the districts we have passed in review had one thing in
common; serfdom was almost unknown to them. The peasants of
Archangel for instance were always named "svoiezemzi," which
means independent possessors of the soil. Social distinctions
remained almost unknown to the Little Russians down to the end of
the eighteenth century when Catherine the Second introduced
amongst them the notions of a feudal nobility and serfdom. The
Cossacks of the Don remained free up to the time of Nicholas. I
am, therefore, right in saying that agrarian communism is not the
direct result of serfdom, since it has been shown to exist in
regions where serfdom was unknown.
    A careful study of old Russian documents does not add much to
the strength of this argument. The illiterate peasants could not
consign to writing the economic arrangements they entered into,
and in this fact lies the true reason why, out of the various
categories into which the Russian peasantry was divided during
the middle ages, none is less familiar to us than the free
villager, the occupier of the so-called "black hundreds" (chernia
sotni). The commune was completely independent in matters of
internal concern, there was no need for the government or for
judicial charters to meddle in its system of land tenure. What
information we can gather from them of the external organisation
of the volost or commune proves however the prevalence of a
communistic and democratic mode of existence. The assembly of the
people, the folkmote, called in the South Western provinces of
Russia the "veche," more often "the copa," was formed of all the
house-elders of a volost. It possessed the right of making local
bye-laws; of choosing the elders of the commune or "starostas";
of distributing among its members the direct taxes which the
government imposed on agriculture and on the different industries
of the nation (sochi i promisli). Persons were also chosen by the
commune to assist the judges in the exercise of their duties,
playing n this occasion the part reserved in medieval Germany to
the so-called Schoffen and in old Sweden to the "nemd."*
    As to the relation in which the volost stood to the ground
that it occupied, this subject is partly illustrated by the
following facts.
    We possess a small number of private charters and judicial
records, belonging to the fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries,
from which we may see, that the true owner of the soil was partly
the village and partly the "volost," or association of villagers.
To give you an instance of what I am saying, I will cite the
precise text of some of these charters.
    In 1555 a lawsuit began between a squire (votchinnik) called
Nefediev and the peasants of eighteen villages all belonging to
the volost of Almesch. The question which the judges had to
decide, was whether some pastures belonged to the volost or to
the squire. Witnesses named by each party from among the oldest
inhabitants of the locality declared that the peasants were the
real possessors of the ground in dispute, and that their
ownership went back to a period beyond the memory of man, and the
judge decided that the claims of the squire were null and void.
    In the case just mentioned we find ourselves in presence of a
sort of undivided mark, composed, like that of Germany, of a
certain number of villages possessing lands in common. These
lands are pastures. Other charters of the same period show us
cases in which the undivided area of the mark or volost was
composed of forest ground. Expressions like the following are
frequent in the documents just mentioned: "The forest belongs to
the commune (selo) and the villages in common (vopsche), or
"this" piece of forest ground has been given to me by the volost
(the mark), the elder, and the peasants."
    No one had the right to clear the forest or reclaim the waste
land lying within the limits of a volost, unless authorised to do
so by the elders and the assembly of peasants. This fact appears
clearly in the following instance: in 1524, three persons found
some salt wells on the shores of Dvina in the midst of a dark
forest. They addressed a petition to the Government asking to be
recognized as the legal possessors of the place, and they
supported their demand by the following argument: "Not one of the
surrounding marks or volosts has any appurtenances in the place."
Had it been otherwise, had the wells been situated on the
appurtenances of a volost, no private person could have made the
demand just mentioned. The marks or volosts jealously watched
over the integrity of their boundaries, and that from the
earliest times. In the "Lives of the Saints," those early
monuments of our written literature, complaint is sometimes made
of peasants doing their best to get rid of a hermit, established
in a neighbouring forest, "because," says the hagiographer, "they
feared he would assign to some monastery a part of the ground
they owned."*
    The charters give, as I have already said, very little
information about the internal arrangements of the volost and
village; all we know is that the settlements were very far from
resembling those large assemblages of people which are known in
our days under the name of "slobodi." As a rule the "derevnia" or
village contained few hearths, and the villages were scattered
over the whole area of the volost. The wastes and forests were
used in common, while the meadows and arable fields became the
object of private appropriation. No equality of shares seem to
have existed, the charters constantly mentioning the "best men,"
"the men of wealth," (jitii liudi) side by side with the "smaller
men" (molodschii). Some few seem to have had even no part at all
in the possessions of the soil, being known under the name of
podsousedi or podsousedki, which means living under the authority
of a neighbour or villager (sosed). These persons were regularly
employed as agricultural labourers. Some few, the so-called
"bobili," were possessed of small parcels of land, resembling in
that the cottarii of Domesday Book. The agricultural area owned
by each homestead was known by the name of "jrebii," which means
a lot, and the sense which men of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries attached to this term is revealed to us by an old
Russian translation of some parts of the Byzantine codes, the
Prochiron and the Eclogue. This translation in certain points
appears to be a kind of adaptation of Greek legislation to the
conditions of the Russian people. One of the paragraphs of these
so-called "Books of the Law" (Zakonnii Knigi, chap. xii) contains
the following sentence: "If a division of land shall take place
by which some person shall injure the interest of others in their
plots (jrebii) the division must not be maintained."*
    The jrebii being a plot of land enjoyed by a single household
out of the agricultural area of the mark, a plot which need not
necessarily be equal to those of the neighbours, we are right in
saying that the village community of the free peasants of Muscovy
was like that of the Cossacks of the Dnieper. This likeness is to
a certain extent obscured by the financial arrangements which the
Muscovite volost entered into in order to secure the yearly
payment of the land tax, these arrangements, as well as the tax
itself, being quite unknown to Little Russian communes.
    The Muscovite administration formerly empowered the volosts
to distribute the taxes imposed on the villages, according to the
quantity of cultivated land together with the commons thereto
annexed, possessed by them. The sum to be paid by the inhabitants
of each subdivision of the mark was then divided among the
various households according to the extent of their possessions.
The unit of taxation was the land of a plough. I mean the amount
of land which one plough. working the whole day, could turn up.
This unit was known by the name of "socha." Some homesteads owned
two, three, or more of these, but there were others who held only
a portion of this unit, just as in mediaeval England there were
households owning entire virgates, or the half or third part of a
virgate, and in Germany there were holders of "mansi pleni et
mansi dimidii," "ganze und halbe Hufen." As serfdom was unknown
and no mutual responsibility in matters of taxation bound the
peasant to the soil he occupied, undivided households very often
quitted their dwellings in order to settle in some neighbouring
country, on lands still free of occupation, or on those liberally
accorded to new-comers by their private owners, on condition of a
small payment.
    The abandoned ground returned each time to the volost, which
always took measures to find some new occupier who might relieve
the mark from the increase of taxation produced by the departure
of the previous occupier. Instances of such new occupation are
regularly reported in the following terms: "All the peasants of
the volost have allowed such and such persons to settle on the
lots (jrebii) left free by the departure of such and such
persons. The mir (this word means the whole community of
shareholders) has conceded this lot to --" (here follows the
name). The shares of each particular household having no distinct
limits, we are induced to think that the possession of a lot, or
jrebii, conceded no other right than that of having a distinct
share in the open fields of the village. Each household possessed
larger or smaller strips of ground in the different fields
contained in the village area, and also had the right to mow a
distinct portion of the village meadow, while the enjoyment of
the waste and of the forest land was free to all the inhabitants
of the volost, and no rules determined precisely the use which
each householder was allowed to make of it.
    You may see from what I have said that the runrig system and
equality of shares were as little known to the village
communities of Old Russia, and specially of Muscovy, as to those
of medieval Germany or England. No better known was the
correspondence which, according to Mr Seebohm, existed in
medieval England between the quantity of ground owned by each
household and the part it took in the ordinary labour of
agriculture. Tillage performed by families possessing in common a
"carruca," or sort of plough worked with three or four pairs of
oxen, was quite unknown to my forefathers, who were in the habit
of cultivating the ground with small ploughs, drawn very often by
a single horse, a fact noticed in the epic poems, and
particularly in the ballad, the chief hero of which is a simple
peasant, Micoula Selianinovich. The same mode of tillage, I may
add, is still in use among the peasants of Great Russia, where
the ground is not nearly so heavy as is the black soil of our
Southern provinces. The only thing that depended upon tenure of
land was taxation, the householder paying a larger or smaller
proportion of the land tax, according to the number of plough
lands sown by his seed.
    This is almost all we know of the free Muscovite village
community. Our information is fuller as to the economic
arrangements of those dependent communes, which were established
on the possessions of the higher clergy and the monasteries.
According to Professor Gorchacov, to whom we are indebted for a
very circumstantial description of the inner life of these
bodies, each manor regularly contained, next to the demesne land,
a large area occupied by the dependent households. Each of these
households was obliged to perform agricultural labour on the area
belonging to the landlord, and in return possessed the right to a
share in the autumn and spring fields, owned in common by the
customary tenants of the manor. The existence of these two fields
may be traced, at least in the central Governments of Russia, as
far back as the beginning of the sixteenth century, as they are
mentioned in a charter issued in the year 1511. The peasants had,
before the end of that century, the right of free removal, the
land quitted by a peasant household returning to the community of
the villagers.* Besides the feudal lord, the state also had a
claim on the community in the shape of a land tax, which the
village assembly was itself authorised to collect. The area held
by the village was accordingly divided into ploughs (sochi), and
smaller divisions called viti, which corresponded to a distinct
part of the work of a plough. To make these financial
arrangements clearer to an English public, I will say that the
customary land of the village was divided into hides and
virgates. The quantity of land contained in each virgate varied
from one village to another, but the virgates of the same village
were equal; in that respect the manor of mediaeval England
presents the greatest similitude to that of mediaeval Russia.
Both have this also in common, that each household was taxed
according to the amount of arable land it owned. One household
paid for one "vit," or virgate, another for two, a third for half
a virgate, and so on. The vit or virgate, just as in England, was
not a number of fields surrounded by distinct boundaries, but a
union of ideal shares in the different fields of the village. In
the lands of the monastery of Constantine, for instance, the vit
was, at least during the first part of the sixteenth century,
equal to the right of occupying five desiatines in each of the
three fields of the manor, a desiatine being equal to two acres.
First introduced in order to secure an equal distribution of
state taxation, the system of hides and virgates became later on
the basis of the levy and distribution of feudal dues. Instances
frequently occur in sixteenth century charters of the labour
performed by each of the households being in direct ratio to the
number of virgates, or viti, in its possession. Under such
conditions, no equality could exist as to the amount of ground
possessed by each villager. This equality was not demanded by
anybody on account of the abundance of land and the facility of
removal. The peasant who thought himself aggrieved could seek
better terms on some neighbouring manor; removals were frequent,
and the commune was always busy seeking for persons who might
wish to become occupiers of the vacant ground of an abandoned
virgate.
    I shall proceed no further in the study of the social
arrangements of the Russian manor because they appear to be, so
far as the ownership of land is concerned, very like those of a
free village. This is not surprising to one who knows the small
difference which exists between the arrangements of a German
manor, or Hof, and those of a free commune, or Dorf-gemeinde. The
proprietor was too well pleased to see his yearly revenue
guaranteed by the unpaid service of the villeins, to meddle with
their internal arrangements. The villeins were accordingly
allowed to choose their own executive officers, to have their
elders, their "good men," or judicial assistants, and to
apportion taxes and arrange the land ownership at their regular
meetings, or folkmotes. Such being the case, I see no reason why
the agrarian communism practised by the Russian peasantry should
be much affected by their loose dependence upon the landlord, at
least, before the time when serfdom was completely established
and the peasant was prevented from removing from the manor.
    The general characteristic of the old Russian community may
be given in few words: it was a kind of ownership, based on the
idea that the true proprietor of the land was none other than the
commune. The rights of the commune to the soil occupied by the
individual households appears in the indivisibility of the waste
and forest lands, and in the fact that vacant shares are
regularly disposed of by the commune, and that nobody is allowed
to occupy a piece of ground lying within the limits of the
village common, unless he is authorised by the local authorities.
Arable land and meadows are, as a rule, in the hands of private
households, which pay taxes and perform manorial labour in direct
proportion to the amount of land they own. This ownership does
not suppose the existence of certain limits which nobody is
allowed to infringe. It implies only the right to have a definite
share in the three fields, which constitute the agricultural area
of the village. The shares are not equal, but differ in direct
proportion to the payments which the household is called upon to
make, partly to the State, and partly to the lord of the manor.
Periodical redistributions are unknown, and no mention is made of
the run-rig system of some modern English and Irish manors.
    Thus constituted, the old Russian village community appears
to be very like that of medieval England with its system of open
fields, its hides and virgates. It may be also compared to the
German mark, so far as the mark is composed of a set of villages
subdivided into units partly financial, partly territorial,
called Hufen, and securing to their private holders, like the
English virgates, the right to have a distinct share in the
arable fields and in the meadows of the village.
    Now that we are aware of the peculiar features of the
medieval village community, let us ascertain the reasons which
have produced a complete revolution in its interior organisation
by the introduction of the principle of equal division of the
soil among its individual members, and the system of periodical
allotments of ground in order to secure this equality.
    Two facts seem to have contributed to this result; the first
was the increase of population, which, as we have already shown
in the instance of Little Russian communes, sooner or later
induces the majority of persons holding small shares to force the
rest to proceed to a redistribution of the soil. The other fact
is the replacing of the land-tax by a sort of capitation tax, and
the introduction of the principle of mutual responsibility, in
matters of taxation. The first of these causes, increase of
population, remained inoperative as long as the peasant retained
the liberty of removing freely from one place to another. Much
ground was lying waste. Landowners had no other thought than how
to induce new colonists to settle on it; with this end in view
they regularly freed them from all taxes for a period of three
years. Those of the villagers, who thought themselves sacrificed
to the interests of their neighbours could, therefore, easily
find the land they wanted and that under very favourable
conditions. They had only to leave the village they inhabited and
seek for new homes, either on the still unoccupied steppes or on
the manors possessed by the crown, the church, or the landed
aristocracy.
     Such was no longer the case when serfdom became a general
rule, and the right of free migration was refused to the peasant.
This happened during the period which extends from the end of the
sixteenth to that of the seventeenth century. Two decades later
followed the great change in matters of taxation when Peter the
Great abolished the land-tax, and introduced the capitation-tax.
This happened in the year 1719. Mutual responsibility of persons
belonging to the same village was introduced, and both landlords
and peasants were allowed to take preventive measures against
those who might seek to escape the obligation of paying the
personal tax by withdrawing from their habitations.
    When this revolution was accomplished and each household
began to be taxed, not according to the quantity of land it
owned, but according to the number of persons attributed to it in
the taxation returns, the grossest injustice would necessarily
arise if the soil remained in the hands of its then holders.
Complaints were therefore made, and petitions addressed, in which
the old division of the village area was declared to be
obnoxious, and an equality of shares was demanded as a necessary
condition for the regular fulfilment by each village of its
financial obligations towards the State. An instance of such a
request is that presented by the peasants of the village of
Petrovsk in the year 1725, in which they ask to have an equal
share of land allotted to each member of the commune, all other
kinds of allotment being contrary to justice. Similar demands
must have been made repeatedly before the members of the
legislative commission, convened by Catherine the Second,
received orders to protest against the requirements of those who
wanted all the land of a village to be distributed in equal
shares according to the number of souls, notwithstanding that
these lands had been fertilised by the work and private industry
of the first settlers.*
    For the reasons just mentioned, a redistribution of the land
was made at least every time the Government revised its taxation
returns; such revision occurring every nineteenth year. It was
felt necessary to establish a direct relation between the number
of persons living in a household, and the amount of land
possessed by the household, and the fact, that the actual number
of such persons did not correspond to those enumerated in the
taxation returns, even after the lapse of a few years, led some
communes to have recourse to more frequent divisions. It is in
this way that we may explain how it was brought about, that
redistributions came to be made every sixth or even every third
year. We hear of no yearly distribution because the three field
system, still prevailing in Russia, required at least a three
years' rotation of the crops. It was not always the country
people who took the initiative in an equal re-allotment of the
soil according to the number of persons taxed. Mr Zabelin has
brought forward instances, in which such allotments were made on
the initiative of the lord of the manor, and Mr Schimanov has
produced a curious case, in which such re-allotment was made by
the direct order of a provincial Governor, who thought that
justice required that the number of shares, owned by each
household, should correspond to the number of souls composing it.
This happened not longer ago than the second half of the
seventeenth century in the Government of Kharkov, where
inequality of shares had been up to that time the general rule.
It is only by a general agreement between the people and the
authorities that we can explain the rapid expansion of the
present system. We do not find any trace of such redistributions
before the end of the seventeenth century, when the borough of
Schouia began to make new allotments of ground every ten years.*
    Having now finished with the past history of the Russian
village commune, we shall proceed to the study of its modern
arrangements. These have formed the subject of very curious
investigations, which have been carried on during the last few
years by a number of young Russian economists, employed by the
elective councils or "zemstva" of our provinces. Their work will
probably be as valuable to coming generations, as that performed
in England a century ago by Messrs Sinclair and Marshall, or as
that, which in our own day is still going on in India under the
enlightened supervision of the Indian Settlement Commissioners. I
shall make free use of the rich material, which these skilful and
untiring workers have accumulated, in order to present to you a
picture of the prevailing system, the mir or village community of
to-day.
    According to the law of emancipation promulgated the 19th
February 1861, the peasantry continue to possess an organisation
quite distinct from that of the other classes of society. The
ancient "volost" (or mark) is preserved or rather revived, and
the villages are, as they were centuries ago, the administrative
units of which it is formed. The volost and the village have
alike their elected authorities, the right of election being
based on a kind of universal suffrage, exercised by all the
grown-up men of the community. But, differing in this from the
French "commune," and the sections composing it, the Russian
volost and village accord no right of suffrage to persons
belonging to any other social position than that of peasant
(krestianine, a word, the first meaning of which was Christian).
A merchant or a nobleman may reside for years in a village; he
will not thereby acquire any right to meddle with its internal
administration. To explain the reason of such an anomaly, we must
keep in view the circumstances under which the law of 1861 was
promulgated. its chief purpose was to liberate the serfs from
their dependence on the landed aristocracy. The squire, the
"pomeschick," was the enemy against whom they had to fight, and
it was feared that he could easily regain the influence, which
had lasted for centuries, if he and the persons in his service
were allowed to have a vote in communal concerns. It was
therefore to prevent a practical restoration of feudal power,
that the upper classes were debarred from all interference in
village matters. But the legislators forgot the dangers, which
arise from the artificial isolation of an ill-educated class,
both for itself and for the other orders of society. I know no
country, in which the enlightened classes have so little
opportunity of exercising that moral influence, without which no
social progress can be really achieved. Not only the squire, be
he a nobleman or a merchant, but also the parish priest (the
pope), are excluded by law from the right to vote in the village
assembly. Questions concerning public instruction and public
health are daily discussed and settled by illiterate men, very
often to the injury of the community, without any reference to
the wishes and intentions of the more enlightened inhabitants,
whose interference in such cases would be considered a direct
infringement of the law. This is certainly a great wrong; a wrong
which is clearly seen, both by society and by Government. The
absenteeism of the higher classes and their dislike of that
country life which is so familiar in England, certainly finds its
chief root in what I may call the "privilegium odiosum" which is
attached to the status. On the other hand, the ordinary peasant,
left without that natural control and guidance which the
enlightened classes are called upon to exercise towards the more
ignorant, is naturally led to look for protection and help to
those of his own rank who have succeeded in securing for
themselves a certain amount of material wealth. This class of
rich peasants, known under the name of "koulaks," which means a
man knowing how to keep money in his own hands, is as a rule no
better educated and far more selfish and immoral than the rest of
the country people. The disintegrating influence, which such a
class exercises, has been rightly recognised in the nickname with
which the peasantry have dubbed its members, I mean that of
"miroied." or "eaters of the mir" it is to such speculators and
monopolists that the people are abandoned; it may be in the
secret hope of rendering impossible any good understanding
between them and the higher classes of the nation. For no doubt,
such an understanding might become a serious obstacle in the way
of the all-powerful bureaucracy, which rules over the masses with
that insolence and harshness which are usually only met with in
the relations of conquerors to a conquered nation. Instead of
giving the higher classes their share in the affairs of the
village, the Government has lately increased the number of
administrative oppressors, by instituting a new office, that of
"Commander of the district." This office is to be exclusively
filled by members of the hereditary nobility. With no other
control over them, than that of the Governor of the province,
these newly-created officers are called upon to exercise a
boundless authority, both executive and judicial, over the
villages in their district. There is no judicial appeal against
their doings, for they are at once police officers making their
own by-laws, and magistrates authorised to decide questions of
the infringement of these same by-laws; they are even the
executioners of their own sentences, for the right of flogging on
the spot, where the misdemeanour has been committed, is openly
recognised as belonging to them.
    It is not difficult to foresee the effect which the
introduction of these new officers will have on the life of the
people. Having been hitherto taught to look on the neighbouring
squire as a stranger, they will now come to consider him as their
natural enemy.
    But let us go back to the study of the administrative
organisation of the Russian mir.
    Every village is authorised to have its popular assembly.
This folkmote is the regular heir of the "vechas" and "koupas"
still preserved, as we have seen, in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, among the South-Western communes of
Russia, and, what is not less curious, also by the manorial
system during the same centuries. When I say that all the adult
members of the village are called upon to vote at these popular
assemblies, I mean that this is the case in the majority of
Russian villages, in which the inhabitants are likewise partners
in the common lands of the village. It is not the case in the
yearly increasing number of villages, in which the new-comers are
only permitted to reside in the commune, but are prevented from
sharing in the benefit which the commune derives from its
property in land. In Germany and Switzerland, where centuries ago
new-comers, known under the name of "Beisaszen" or
"Hintersaszen," "domicilies," "manants," etc., were allowed to
settle side by side with the proprietors of the common land (the
gemeingut or allmend), two kinds of popular assemblies are known.
The one is composed of all the adult inhabitants without
distinction; the other of those who have a share in the common
land. The first assembly makes by-laws, chooses officers, and
passes measures which concern the common good. The second
administers the lands of the village, appoints those entrusted
with the care of them, and distributes to the several partners
their shares in the commons. The laws of some Swiss cantons,
therefore, establish a difference between the "politische
Gemeinde," or commune, composed of all the male inhabitants, and
the "burgerliche Gemeinde," to which all the sharers in the
common land, male and female alike, belong. Now this difference
is unknown in Russia, where political rights are exclusively
exercised by those inhabitants who are at the same time sharers
in the common land.
    The officer to whom the assembly entrusts the administration
of the village is called the village elder. We find the same
officer in the old Russian communes, both in the so-called "black
hundreds" in other words, in the villages inhabited by
free-commoners -- and also on the lands of manorial lords.
Monastic charters, among other documents, very frequently mention
the election of these officers, who are sometimes called,
especially in the South-Western communes, "bourgmistr" -- a name
evidently derived from the German burgermeister, and showing, to
a certain extent, the influence exercised by German municipal law
on the local organisation of Lithuania and Little Russia.
    It is the village elder, the starosta, who represents the
commune in its relations with the district and provincial
authorities. It is he who collects the taxes, exercises some
supervision over the way in which the commune keeps in repair the
roads and pubic buildings; sees that the law concerning
obligatory fire insurance is obeyed, and carries into effect the
various administrative enactments which the police authorities
and the local assemblies of the zemstvo are very liberal in
creating. But the most important functions of the commune, that
of apportioning personal taxation and making periodical
assessments of common land, are performed by the popular assembly
or mir. Two-thirds of the whole number of voters are empowered to
decide whether the proper time has come or not for a new general
allotment. The same majority is also required whenever the
division of the common land into private property has to be
decided on.
    Neither the assembly nor the village elder has any judicial
authority; but the village elder exercises, to a certain extent,
the functions of a public notary, for he gives legal validity to
private documents and deeds by affixing to them the village seal.
    A regular tribunal, a kind of court leet, is formed by the
elective judges of the volost. This institution is an innovation
introduced by the emancipation law, at least so far as it
assigns, not to the village, but to the larger territorial
district, the volost, the sole right of giving judicial decisions
in civil suits and in misdemeanours among persons belonging to
the peasant class. The peculiar feature of this tribunal is, that
it is not bound to follow the prescriptions of law, but those of
custom.
    Russia, so far as I know, is the only European country, in
which a sort of "personalitas legum" is still acknowledged, the
peasants submitting to one complex code of legal rules, and the
higher classes to another. What is no less characteristic is the
fact that the customary law of the Russian peasant is alone the
genuine Russian law -- the law that is found in our ancient codes
(such as the Pravda of Jaroslav, in the judicial charters of
Novgorod and Pscov, in the statute of Lithuania, and in the codes
of Ivan the Third and of Ivan the Terrible); whist the volumes X
and XV (so-called) of the general collection of laws (so the
civil and criminal codes are designated in Russia) are a compound
partly of Russian, partly of French, partly of canon, Byzantine
or even so-called natural law.
    The only way to get rid of this dualism in matters of
legislation would be to codify the customary law of Russia,
introducing into it the changes required by the social
development that has been already achieved by the higher classes.
But such does not seem to be the opinion of the bureaucrats, to
whom has been intrusted the difficult task of preparing the text
of a new civil and criminal code. The books and pamphlets
published by these modern Solons express an opposite view and
would seem to justify the supposition that the double law will be
scrupulously preserved, probably with the object of perpetuating
the misunderstanding which already exists between the lower and
higher classes of Russian society.
    The volost has no assembly of its own, but it has its chief
in the person of an elected elder "starschina," to whom the
village elders are subject in all matters concerning the
collection of taxes and the carrying into effect of laws and
by-laws.
    The little I have here said about the organisation of the
village community will answer the end I have in view of placing
clearly before you the economic arrangements made by the village
in reference to the common lands. The relation in which the
village stands to them is not that of proprietor. They belong
according to law to the State alone. In those villages which are
occupied by the so-called "State-peasants," that is the heirs of
the serfs lately belonging to the "public domains," no means have
been adopted to allow of the peasant becoming even in future the
proprietor of the soil. Such, however, is not the case in those
communes, which have been established on lands lately belonging
to the nobility. As soon as the peasants on each estate have paid
back the money advanced by the State to facilitate the
acquisition of the land which the proprietor was forced to give
up to them, they become the legal proprietors of the soil they
now occupy. This payment may be made by the whole commune or by
the separate households which belong to it. Five millions of
roubles had been already devoted to this purpose up to the year
1881; later statistics are still wanting. Each time that the
payment is made by a separate household, common property is of
course superseded by private property and this enactment is
rightly considered by Russian publicists as prejudicial to the
further maintenance of agrarian communism. *
    The commune exercises its proprietary rights in different
ways. It keeps the waste-land and forests undivided, and makes
periodical allotments of arable and meadow land. it was most
prejudicial to the welfare of the peasants that the obligatory
expropriation of 1861 did not extend to a part at least of the
waste-land of the manor, held previously to that date in common
by the manorial lord and his serfs. We must acknowledge that in
this respect the government of the old French monarchy, that of
Louis XIII and of Louis XIV, showed a far greater knowledge of
the economic wants of the agricultural classes. The so-called
"triages" secured to the peasants the right of exclusive
enjoyment to at least a third of the manorial wastes and woods.
Nothing which corresponds to those triages has been established
in Russia. The result of this can be seen in the need which the
peasant is under of diminishing year by year the number of his
cattle, a condition of things which has already re-acted on the
state of agriculture. In those cases where the village has had no
access to the waste land, it has been obliged to carve out of its
arable ground a special field to serve as a common pasture. But
this can only be done where the allotments made out of the
manorial land are of large extent. In the greater number of
villages they have not amounted to more than three dessiatines a
head, and the commoners have been forced to content themselves
either with sending their cattle on to the "Lammas" lands, that
is, the arable land after harvest, or with renting some pasture
ground from a neighbouring squire.
    As for the forests, allotments out of. them were rarely made,
at least in our Southern provinces where woods are scarce, and
the peasant is quite dependent for his fuel on the squire, who
takes advantage of this fact, and secures the regular performance
of agricultural labour on his own domains in return for
permission to use the dead wood which would otherwise lie unused.
In the northern provinces allotments were frequently made of
forests, and were sometimes treated as "assart lands." I make use
of a term which is probably quite familiar to you, as it is
frequently to be met with in English documents even of the first
part of the present century. But for those who are not aware of
its meaning I will add the following explanation. When population
became dense, the village allowed new homesteads to be
established in the middle of the forest the trees were burned
down, the roots seldom being removed, and the plough began to
work in a region which had hitherto been accessible only to the
axe. The area thus cleared for a time paid nothing to the State;
but after a few years, three as a rule, it was annexed to the
number of common lands which were burdened by personal taxes. The
owners of these cleared lands received no allotments out of the
common fields, but they regularly paid to the Government as much
as the commoners of the same village.
    We must now turn our attention to the way in which the arable
land and the meadows are used. Equality being the chief aim of
the members of the village community, its arable fields are as a
rule very numerous. The commoners take into account both the
differences in the fertility of the soil and the comparative
advantages of its situation. Land which is either mountainous or
distant from the village is not likely to produce the same
revenue, or to be so easily cultivated as an equal area to it;
the black soil is far more fruitful than the sandy or the clayey
soil. The community, therefore, has a great number of "shots" or
"furlongs," * and in each of these shots every householder
receives a number of strips equal to the number of the taxed
persons in his household. You can easily imagine how scattered
and intermixed are the possessions of each homestead. In cases
where there is no great difference in the fertility of the soil,
and the shots are consequently not very numerous, the community
sometimes adopts a different method. The whole number of
commoners is divided into "tythings," or decenas, and the fields
are divided into as many parts as there are tythings. Each
tything, or decena, then makes the division for itself. Lots are
drawn to decide the order in which the strips must be distributed
among the tythings and subdivided among the persons composing
them.* Owing to the almost universal preva1ence of the
three-field system, the number of shots never falls below three.
    The re-allotment of shares is of two kinds, partial and
general. The first supposes the increase or diminution of the
number of strips assigned to a household, consequent on an
augmentation or decrease of the number of persons composing it.
The second is equivalent to a complete change in the distribution
of. arable land among the commoners. It takes place at fixed
periods, the shortest of which is three years, that being the
time needed for a complete rotation of crops under the existing
three fields' system; and the longest nineteen or more years --
the number of years that separate the old census of a population
from a new one. The number of shares allotted to each household
either corresponds to the number of male persons for whom the
household pays the personal tax, or to that of the souls actually
living. Instances occur in which the villagers assign half shares
to the women, or reserve certain shares unoccupied for the
generation to come. As for the meadows, they are frequently mown
in common, the hay being divided in equal parts among all the
members of the commune. Very often, too, a yearly division takes
place before harvest; account is taken of the greater or smaller
distance of each meadow from the village, and of the quality of
its grass, and then each commoner receives a strip in all and
every one of the meadows. But I need not insist on the various
aspects under which the system of re-allotments may present
itself. It is not my purpose to give you a complete description
of the various forms which the village community may take, but a
general picture of all its characteristic features.
    Amongst these I must place the control exercised by the
village authorities over the performance at the proper time of
each part of agricultural labour. The strips of the several
households being scattered over the whole village area, and
intermixed with those of their neighbours, the same system of
agriculture must of necessity be followed by all. The system in
use, as I have already told you, is that of the three fields, the
winter, the summer, and the fallow; the fields becoming common
pasture after the gathering in of the harvest. All agricultural
labour must therefore begin and end at fixed periods, and the
different households which constitute the village must do their
ploughing, sowing, harrowing, mowing and reaping, precisely at
the same time. The authorities of the village are empowered to
insist upon this; the "Flurzwang," to use a well known German
expression, is a necessary condition of this kind of agrarian
communism, which is embodied in the system of the mir.
    The performance at its proper time of each part of
agricultural labour could not be attained if the commoners did
not help one another in its accomplishment. This is the real
origin of the obligation which compels every peasant to help his
neighbours in mowing and reaping. This sort of communal help,
regularly performed at harvest time, is known in Russia under the
name of "village assistance." It was under like conditions that
the medieval lovebones, or love boons (angariae autumni), took
their rise in England.
    The feeling of mutual dependence, which has its origin in the
common ownership and use of land, is the source from which
springs another curious institution. Certain agricultural lands
remain undivided and are cultivated by the combined work of the
whole village; their yearly produce being regularly brought to
the common store and equally distributed among all in case of
dearth.
    In Russian villages there are no special "poor" or "school
lands" (Armen-und Schulguter), similar to those of Switzerland or
Germany, although the question has been recently raised as to the
desirability of assigning certain shares of the common lands to
the schoolmaster, he being authorised to cultivate them with the
help of his pupils. This plan for turning the schoolmaster into
an agricultural labourer belongs to the number of those measures,
by which the reactionary party hope to prevent the badly paid
village schoolmasters from becoming what they call "revolutionary
dreamers." I am happy to say that it has not yet met with the
support of the Government.
    I now come to the capital question of the advantages and
disadvantages, which the system of village communities presents,
and which will of course exercise a decisive influence as to its
future. There is no question so much discussed, and I may say, so
often misunderstood by my countrymen, as that of the superiority
or inferiority of the existing system in comparison with that of
small holdings.
    Both socialists and reactionaries have taken hold of the
question, and both parties try to work it out in favour of their
own systems. The value which they attach to the system of the mir
differs considerably. What the socialists admire in it are the
fruitful germs which they suppose it to contain of a future
reorganisation of society on their own model. As to the
Slavophils, they think it perfect in its present form, and never
tire of repeating a saying which, with doubtful authenticity, is
attributed to the great Cavour: "Russia will revolutionise the
world with her system of the mir."
    To an impartial observer the village communal system appears
to be a compound of small advantages and great disadvantages; the
advantages are rather of a moral, and the disadvantages of an
economic character. It encourages, no doubt, to a much greater
degree than the system of private holdings, the feeling of mutual
interdependence and the inclination to mutual help, without which
no society can exist. But it is a manifest error to speak of this
system as a serious barrier to pauperism. For, although the
commoner is prevented by law from alienating his share, he may,
and often does, dispose of it in favour of some rich neighbour,
who in time of want has offered to pay the amount of the
commoner's taxes on condition of having the use of his land. If
the Slavophils were right in their opinion, that, thanks to the
system of the mir, pauperism was impossible in Russia, we should
certainly not hear daily of the so-called "Koulaks" eating up the
mir, or, what comes to the same thing, sacrificing the interests
of the community to their own.
    The economic disadvantages which the system presents are so
evident that I need scarcely insist upon them. Instead of giving
my own opinion on this subject, I prefer to quote the words of a
Russian economist, who is far from belonging to the much decried
Manchester School. "Agrarian communism, as it is applied in
Russia," says Professor Ivanukov, "is a hindrance to the
investment of capital in agriculture, and to the introduction of
a more thorough, a better and more remunerative system of
cultivation; for the strips belonging to this or that homestead
will in case of each new division pass into strange hands, so
that the peasant does not find it to his interest to lay out
money which could only be recovered during a long term of
possession." It is true that local inquirers have been able to
produce several instances in which peasant commoners have
introduced a somewhat thorough system of grass sowing;* but we
must not forget that this has been done during a period when the
readjustment of lots was rare.
    We must not forget, too, one great disadvantage of the mir
system, which consists in the fact that wherever it exists, the
pieces of land belonging to the same holder are "scattered about
on all sides of the township, one in this furlong and another in
that, intermixed, and it might almost be said," writes Mr
Seebohm, "entangled together as though some one blindfold had
thrown them about on all sides of him." *
    Several Russian economists have shown that this defect is not
peculiar to the mir, but is to be found in the system of small
holdings,* as if these small holdings had not inherited it from
their direct predecessor, the village community. What is,
however, of far more importance than the opinion of this or that
student of the mir is the fact that it is gradually and
spontaneously breaking to pieces. There is no doubt that a
general redistribution of shares has not taken place, at least in
the more fertile area of the black soil, since the year of the
peasants' emancipation. It is difficult to explain this solely by
the dislike of the provincial and district administrators to the
system; the unwillingness of the powerful minority of rich
peasants to proceed to a new division is recognised on all sides,
and quite suffices to explain the difficulties encountered in the
way of a fresh readjustment. For we must remember that the law
requires that two-thirds of the voters shall agree on any
decision on this subject, and the Koulaks, although in a
minority, are sure to have influence enough among the poorer
peasants, who are their debtors, to obtain their own way in a
folkmote.
    The fact that a movement in favour of a re-division of the
common lands has arisen in the northern and central provinces,
where the soil is poor, and the in come which the peasant
receives from his share does not cover the amount of the taxes he
has to pay, can certainly not be adduced in favour of the idea of
a further spontaneous development of Russian agrarian communism.
    The majority of the peasants insist on such a readjustment,
so that they may have fewer taxes to pay, and not because they
long to see the great principle of equality become the ruling
power of the world. If we wish to point to a really spontaneous
movement in the sphere of land-tenure, it must certainly be to
that which has induced thousands of peasants to pay back the
money which was advanced to them by the Government in the year of
their emancipation to enable them to become the free proprietors
of the soil. I have already mentioned the fact that five million
roubles have been repaid to the Crown; it is interesting to note
the rate at which this repayment has been made. From 1861 to
1868, according to Mr Keuszler, the amount of money paid by
persons wishing to exchange their common rights for private
property, hardly formed the seven-hundredth part of the whole
sum. From 1868 to 1872 it had amounted to 10 per cent; from 1873
to 1877 to 33 1/2 per cent; the rest of the sum, or 55 per cent,
having been paid back during the years 1877 to 1881.*
    If this steady increase is not considered a conclusive proof,
I must decline to bring forward any other, not even the
disappearance of village communities in the neighbourhood of the
larger towns, such as St. Petersburg, Moscow, and even Voroneg,
owing to the fact that in their neighbourhood high farming pays
best, and that this high farming is impossible without a change
in the system of land property.
    How long village communities will exist is not a question
easy to answer. The Government may certainly prevent for a time
their dissolution by some artificial measures, like those taken
in relation to the undivided household. A proposal has even been
made to declare that the common-land shall not become private
property even after the repayment of the whole sum which its
holder owes to the Government. Such a measure might, indeed, long
arrest the spontaneous movement which produces the dissolution of
this archaic form of agrarian communism.
    If left to itself, it will certainly be maintained in those
remote parts of Russia where the population is still so small as
to retard agricultural progress; but it is likely soon to
disappear in the manufacturing districts, where the peasant
passes more time in the factory than in the fields and where,
when he leaves his old home, he has to find, and that ofttimes
under very unsatisfactory conditions, some partner to perform his
share of field labour. It is also more than probable that the
South of Russia, the true granary of the Empire, will soon become
a country of private ownership in land. The system of the mir, as
I have already said, is in more than one part of this district a
comparatively modern innovation. The Little Russian is too fond
of independence and self-control to acquiesce in a system which
confines his industry in every direction.
    The village community, that venerable survival of an epoch
closely akin to the patriarchal, will disappear in Russia, as it
already has disappeared in other countries in Europe -- in
England, Germany, and Switzerland. It will give way to private
land, unless, and this is not very likely property in under
present conditions, it be completely transformed by the extension
of communistic principles to capital. Those who, like myself, do
not believe in the possibility of leaps and bounds in matters of
social progress, will probably consider that such a state of
things belongs to the number of those dreams, the practical
realisation of which is to be looked for only in a remote future.
