




PART V



IN THE DIPLOMATIC SERVICE





CHAPTER XXVI



AS ATTACH<E'> AT ST. PETERSBURG--1854-1855



While yet an undergraduate at Yale, my favorite

studies in history and some little attention to

international law led me to take special interest in the

diplomatic relations between modern states; but it never

occurred to me that I might have anything to do directly

with them.



Having returned to New Haven after my graduation,

intending to give myself especially to modern languages

as a preparation for travel and historical study abroad,

I saw one day, from my window in North College, my

friend Gilman, then of the class above mine, since

president of Johns Hopkins University and of the Carnegie

Institution, rushing along in great haste, and, on going out

to greet him, learned that he had been invited by Governor

Seymour of Connecticut, the newly appointed minister

to Russia, to go with him as an attach<e'>, and that, at his

suggestion, a similar invitation would be extended to me. 



While in doubt on the matter, I took the train for New

York to consult my father, and, entering a car, by a happy

chance found the only vacant place at the side of the

governor.  I had never seen him, except on the platform at my

graduation, three months before; but on my introducing

myself, he spoke kindly of my argument on that occasion,

which, as he was ``pro-slavery'' and I ``anti-slavery,'' I

had supposed he would detest; then talked pleasantly on

various subjects, and, on our separating at New York,

invited me so cordially to go to Russia with him that I then

and there decided to do so, and, on meeting my father,

announced my decision.



On the 10th of December, 1853, I sailed for England, with

Gilman, and in London awaited Governor Seymour, who,

at the last moment, had decided not to leave Washington

until the Senate had confirmed his nomination; but this

delay proved to be fortunate, for thereby opportunity was

afforded me to see some interesting men, and especially

Mr. Buchanan, who had previously been minister to Russia,

was afterward President of the United States, and

was at that time minister at the court of St. James.  He

was one of the two or three best talkers I have ever known,

and my first knowledge of his qualities in this respect was

gained at a great dinner given in his honor by Mr. George

Peabody, the banker.  A day or two before, our minister

in Spain, Mr. Soul<e'>, and his son had each fought a duel,

one with the French ambassador, the Marquis de Turgot,

and the other with the Duke of Alba, on account of a

supposed want of courtesy to Mrs. Soul<e'>; and the

conversation being directed somewhat by this event, I recall

Mr. Buchanan's reminiscences of duels which he had

known during his long public life as among the most

interesting I have ever heard on any subject.



Shortly after the arrival of Governor Seymour, we went

on to Paris, and there, placing myself in the family of a

French professor, I remained, while the rest of the party

went on to St. Petersburg; my idea being to hear lectures

on history and kindred subjects, thus to fit myself by

fluency in French for service in the attach<e'>ship, and, 

by other knowledge, for later duties.



After staying in France for nearly a year, having

received an earnest request from Governor Seymour to

come on to Russia before the beginning of the winter, I

left Paris about the middle of October and went by way of

Berlin.  In those days there was no railroad beyond the

eastern frontier of Prussia, and, as the Crimean War was

going on, there was a blockade in force which made it

impossible to enter Russia by sea; consequently I had

seven days and seven nights of steady traveling in a post-

coach after entering the Russian Empire.



Arriving at the Russian capital on the last day of

October, 1854, I was most heartily welcomed by the minister,

who insisted that I should enjoy all the privileges of

residence with him.  Among the things to which I now

look back as of the greatest value to me, is this stay of

nearly a year under his roof.  The attach<e'>ship, as it existed

in those days, was in many ways a good thing and in

no way evil; but it was afterward abolished by Congress

on the ground that certain persons had abused its privileges. 

I am not alone in believing that it could again be

made of real service to the country: one of the best

secretaries of state our country has ever had, Mr. Hamilton

Fish, once expressed to me his deep regret at its suppression.



Under the system which thus prevailed at that time

young men of sufficient means, generally from the leading

universities, were secured to aid the minister, without any

cost to the government, their only remuneration being an

opportunity to see the life and study the institutions of

the country to which the minister was accredited.



The duty of an attach<e'> was to assist the minister in

securing information, in conducting correspondence, and

in carrying on the legation generally; he was virtually an

additional secretary of legation, and it was a part of my

duty to act as interpreter.  As such I was constantly called

to accompany the minister in his conferences with his

colleagues as well as with the ministers of the Russian

government, and also to be present at court and at ceremonial

interviews: this was of course very interesting to me.  In

the intervals of various duties my time was given largely

to studying such works upon Russia and especially upon

Russian history as were accessible, and the recent history

was all the more interesting from the fact that some of

the men who had taken a leading part in it were still upon

the stage.  One occasion especially comes back to me

when, finding myself at an official function near an old

general who was allowed to sit while all the others stood,

I learned that he was one of the few still surviving who

had taken a leading part in the operations against Napoleon,

in 1812, at Moscow.



It was the period of the Crimean War, and at our legation

there were excellent opportunities for observing not

only society at large, but the struggle then going on

between Russia on one side, and Great Britain, France,

Italy, and Turkey on the other.



The main duties of the American representative were to

keep his own government well informed, to guard the

interests of his countrymen, and not only to maintain, but

to develop, the friendly relations that had existed for

many years between Russia and the United States.  A

succession of able American ministers had contributed to

establish these relations: among them two who afterward

became President of the United States--John Quincy

Adams and James Buchanan, George Mifflin Dallas, who

afterward became Vice-President; John Randolph of Roanoke;

and a number of others hardly less important in

the history of our country.  Fortunately, the two nations

were naturally inclined to peaceful relations; neither had

any interest antagonistic to the other, and under these

circumstances the course of the minister was plain: it was

to keep his government out of all entanglements, and at

the same time to draw the two countries more closely

together.  This our minister at that time was very successful

in doing: his relations with the leading Russians,

from the Emperor down, were all that could be desired,

and to the work of men like him is largely due the fact

that afterward, in our great emergency during the Civil

War, Russia showed an inclination to us that probably had

something to do with holding back the powers of western

Europe from recognizing the Southern Confederacy.



To the feeling thus created is also due, in some measure,

the transfer of Alaska, which has proved fortunate, in

spite of our halting and unsatisfactory administration of

that region thus far.



The Czar at that period, Nicholas I, was a most

imposing personage, and was generally considered the most

perfect specimen of a human being, physically speaking,

in all Europe.  At court, in the vast rooms filled with

representatives from all parts of the world, and at the

great reviews of his troops, he loomed up majestically,

and among the things most strongly impressed upon

my memory is his appearance as I saw him, just before

his death, driving in his sledge and giving the military

salute.



Nor was he less majestic in death.  In the spring of 1855

he yielded very suddenly to an attack of pneumonia,

doubtless rendered fatal by the depression due to the ill

success of the war into which he had rashly plunged;

and a day or two afterward it was made my duty to attend,

with our minister, at the Winter Palace, the first

presentation of the diplomatic corps to the new Emperor,

Alexander II.  The scene was impressive.  The foreign

ministers having been arranged in a semicircle, with their

secretaries and attach<e'>s beside them, the great doors were

flung open, and the young Emperor, conducted by his

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Count Nesselrode, entered

the room.  Tears were streaming down his cheeks, and he

gave his address with deep feeling.  He declared that if

the Holy Alliance made in 1815 had been broken, it was

not the fault of Russia; that though he longed for peace,

if terms should be insisted upon by the Western powers, at

the approaching Paris conference, incompatible with Russian

honor, he would put himself at the head of his faithful

country,--would retreat into Siberia,--would die rather

than yield.



Then occurred an incident especially striking.  From

Austria, which only seven years before had been saved by

Russia from destruction in the Austro-Hungarian revolution,

Russia had expected, in ordinary gratitude, at least

some show of neutrality.  But it had become evident that

gratitude had not prevented Austria from secretly joining

the hostile nations; therefore it was that, in the course of

the address, the Emperor, turning to the Austrian

representative, Count Esterhazy, addressed him with the

greatest severity, hinted at the ingratitude of his government,

and insisted on Russia's right to a different return. 

During all this part of the address the Emperor Alexander

fastened his eyes upon those of the Austrian minister and

spoke in a manner much like that which the head of a

school would use toward a school-boy caught in misdoing. 

At the close of this speech came the most perfect example

of deportment I had ever seen: the Austrian minister,

having looked the Czar full in the face, from first to last,

without the slightest trace of feeling, bowed solemnly,

respectfully, with the utmost deliberation, and then stood

impassive, as if words had not been spoken destined to

change the traditional relations between the two great

neighboring powers, and to produce a bitterness which,

having lasted through the latter half of the nineteenth

century, bids fair to continue far into the twentieth.



Knowing the importance of this speech as an indication

to our government of what was likely to be the course of

the Emperor, I determined to retain it in my mind; and,

although my verbal memory has never been retentive, I

was able, on returning to our legation, to write the whole

of it, word for word.  In the form thus given, it was

transmitted to our State Department, where, a few years

since, when looking over sundry papers, I found it.



Immediately after this presentation the diplomatic

corps proceeded to the room in which the body of Nicholas

lay in state.  Heaped up about the coffin were the jeweled

crosses and orders which had been sent him by the various

monarchs of the world, and, in the midst of them, the

crowns and scepters of all the countries he had ruled,

among them those of Siberia, Astrakhan, Kazan, Poland,

the Crimea, and, above all, the great crown and scepter of

the empire.  At his feet two monks were repeating prayers

for the dead; his face and form were still as noble and

unconquerable as ever.



His funeral dwells in my memory as the most imposing

pageant I had ever seen.  When his body was carried from

the palace to the Fortress Church, it was borne between

double lines of troops standing closely together on each

side of the avenues for a distance of five miles; marshals

of the empire carried the lesser crowns and imperial

insignia before his body; and finally were borne the great

imperial crown, orb, and scepter, the masses of jewels in

them, and especially the Orloff diamond swinging in the

top of the scepter, flashing forth vividly on that bright

winter morning, and casting their rays far along the

avenues.  Behind the body walked the Emperor Alexander

and the male members of the imperial family.



Later came the burial in the Fortress Church of St.

Peter and St. Paul, on the island of the Neva, nearly

opposite the Winter Palace.  That, too, was most imposing. 

Choirs had been assembled from the four great cathedrals

of the empire, and their music was beyond dreams.  At

the proper point in the service, the Emperor and his

brothers, having taken the body of their father from its

coffin and wrapped it in a shroud of gold cloth, carried it

to the grave near that of Peter the Great, at the right of

the high altar; and, as it was laid to rest, and beautiful

music rose above us, the guns of the fortress on all sides

of the church sounded the battle-roll until the whole

edifice seemed to rock upon its foundations.  Never had I

imagined a scene so impressive.



Among the persons with whom it was my duty to deal,

in behalf of our representative, was the Prime Minister of

Russia,--the Minister of Foreign Affairs,--Count Nesselrode. 

He was at that period the most noted diplomatist

in the world; for, having been associated with Talleyrand,

Metternich, and their compeers at the Congress of Vienna,

he was now the last of the great diplomatists of the

Napoleonic period.  He received me most kindly and said, ``So

you are beginning a diplomatic career?''  My answer was

that I could not begin it more fitly than by making the

acquaintance of the Nestor of diplomacy, or words to that

effect, and these words seemed to please him.  Whenever

he met me afterward his manner was cordial, and he

seemed always ready to do all in his power to favor the

best relations between the two countries.



The American colony in Russia at that period was

small, and visitors were few; but some of these enlivened

us.  Of the more interesting were Colonel Samuel Colt of

Hartford, inventor of the revolver which bears his name,

and his companion, Mr. Dickerson, eminent as an expert

in mechanical matters and an authority on the law of

patents.  They had come into the empire in the hope of

making a contract to supply the Russians with improved

arms such as the allies were beginning to use against them

in the Crimea; but the heavy conservatism of Russian

officials thwarted all their efforts.  To all representations

as to the importance of improved arms the answer was,

``Our soldiers are too ignorant to use anything but the

old `brown Bess.' ''  The result was that the Russian

soldiers were sacrificed by thousands; their inferiority

in arms being one main cause of their final defeat.



That something better than this might have been

expected was made evident to us all one day when I

conducted these gentlemen through the Imperial Museum of

the Hermitage, adjoining the Winter Palace.  After looking

through the art collections we went into the room

where were preserved the relics of Peter the Great, and

especially the machines of various sorts made for him by

the mechanics whom he called to his aid from Holland and

other Western countries.  These machines were not then

shut up in cases, as they now are, but were placed about

the room and easy of access.  Presently I heard Mr. Dickerson

in a loud voice call out:  ``Good God!  Sam, come

here!  Only look at this!''  On our going to him, he

pointed out to us a lathe for turning irregular forms and

another for copying reliefs, with specimens of work still

in them.  ``Look at that,'' he said.  ``Here is Blanchard's

turning-lathe, which only recently has been reinvented,

which our government uses in turning musket-stocks, and

which is worth a fortune.  Look at those reliefs in this

other machine; here is the very lathe for copying sculpture

that has just been reinvented, and is now attracting so

much attention at Paris.''



These machines had stood there in the gallery, open to

everybody, ever since the death of Peter, two hundred

years before, and no human being had apparently ever

taken the trouble to find the value of them.



But there came Americans of a very different sort, and

no inconsiderable part of our minister's duties was to keep

his hot-headed fellow-citizens from embroiling our country

with the militant powers.



A very considerable party in the United States leaned

toward Russia and sought to aid her secretly, if not

openly.  This feeling was strongest in our Southern States

and among the sympathizers with slavery in our Northern

States, a main agent of it in St. Petersburg being Dr.

Cottman of New Orleans, and its main causes being the

old dislike of Great Britain, and the idea among pro-slavery

fanatics that there was a tie between their part of

our country and Russia arising from the fact that while

the American Republic was blessed with slavery, the

Russian Empire was enjoying the advantages of the serf

system.  This feeling might have been very different had

these sympathizers with Russia been aware that at this

very moment Alexander II was planning to abolish the

serf system throughout his whole empire; but as it was,

their admiration for Russia knew no bounds, and they

even persuaded leading Russians that it would not be a

difficult matter to commit America to the cause of Russia,

even to aiding her with arms, men, and privateers.



This made the duty of the American minister at times

very delicate; for, while showing friendliness to Russia,

he had to thwart the efforts of her over-zealous American

advocates.  Moreover, constant thought had to be exercised

for the protection of American citizens then within

the empire.  Certain Russian agents had induced a number

of young American physicians and surgeons who had

been studying in Paris to enter the Russian army, and

these, having been given pay and rapid advancement, in

the hope that this would strengthen American feeling

favorable to the Russian cause, were naturally hated by

the Russian surgeons; hence many of these young

compatriots of ours were badly treated,--some so severely

that they died,--and it became part of our minister's duty

to extricate the survivors from their unfortunate position. 

More than once, on returning with him from an interview

with the Minister of War, I saw tears in Governor

Seymour's eyes as he dwelt upon the death of some of these

young fellows whom he had learned to love during their

stay in St. Petersburg.



The war brought out many American adventurers, some

of them curiosities of civilization, and this was especially

the case with several who had plans for securing victory

to Russia over the Western powers.  All sorts of nostrums

were brought in by all sorts of charlatans, and the efforts

of the minister and his subordinates to keep these gentlemen

within the limits of propriety in their dealings with

one another and with the Russian authorities were at

times very arduous.  On one occasion, the main functionaries

of the Russian army having been assembled with

great difficulty to see the test of a new American invention

in artillery, it was found that the inventor's rival had

stolen some essential part of the gun, and the whole thing

was a vexatious failure.



One man who came out with superb plans brought a

militia colonel's commission from the governor of a Western

State and the full uniform of a major-general.  At

first he hesitated to clothe himself in all his glory, and

therefore went through a process of evolution, beginning

first with part of his uniform and then adding more as

his courage rose.  During this process he became the

standing joke of St. Petersburg; but later, when he had

emerged in full and final splendor, he became a man of

mark indeed, so much so that serious difficulties arose. 

Throughout the city are various corps de garde, and the

sentinel on duty before each of these, while allowed merely

to present arms to an officer of lower rank, must, whenever

he catches sight of a general officer, call out the entire

guard to present arms with the beating of drums.  Here

our American was a source of much difficulty, for whenever

any sentinel caught sight of his gorgeous epaulets in

the distance the guard was instantly called out, arms

presented, and drums beaten, much to the delight of our

friend, but even more to the disgust of the generals of the

Russian army and to the troops, who thus rendered absurd

homage and found themselves taking part in something

like a bit of comic opera.



Another example was also interesting.  A New York

ward leader--big, rough, and rosy--had come out as an

agent for an American breech-loading musket company,

and had smuggled specimens of arms over the frontier. 

Arriving in St. Petersburg, he was presented to the

Emperor, and after receiving handsome testimonials, was put

in charge of two aides-de-camp, who took him and his

wife about, in court carriages, to see the sights of the

Russian capital.  At the close of his stay, wishing to make

some return for this courtesy, he gave these two officers

a dinner at his hotel.  Our minister declined his invitation,

but allowed the secretary and me to accept it, and

we very gladly availed ourselves of this permission. 

Arriving at his rooms, we were soon seated at a table

splendidly furnished.  At the head of it was the wife of our

entertainer, and at her right one of the Russian officials,

in gorgeous uniform; at the other end of our table was

our host, and at his right the other Russian official, splendidly

attired; beside the first official sat our secretary, and

beside the other was the place assigned to me.  The dinner

was successful: all spoke English, and all were happy;

but toward the end of it our host, having perhaps taken

more wine than was his wont, grew communicative, and, as

ill luck would have it, the subject of the conversation

became personal courage, whereupon he told a story.  Recalling

his experience as a deputy sheriff of New York, he

said:



``When those river pirates who murdered a sailor in

New York harbor had to be hanged, the sheriff of the

county hadn't the courage to do it and ordered me to

hang them.  I rather hated the business, but I made everything

ready, and when the time came I took an extra glass

of brandy, cut the rope, and off they swung.''



The two Russians started back in consternation.  Not

all their politeness could conceal it: horror of horrors,

they were dining with a hangman!  Besides their sense

of degradation in this companionship, superstitions had

been bred in them which doubled their distress.  A dead

silence fell over all.  I was the first to break it by

remarking to my Russian neighbor:



``You may perhaps not know, sir, that in the State of

New York the taking of life by due process of law is

considered so solemn a matter that we intrust it to the

chief executive officers of our counties,--to our sheriffs,--

and not to hangmen or executioners.''



He looked at me very solemnly as I announced this

truth, and then, after a solemn pause, gasped out in a

dubious, awe-struck voice, ``Merci bien, monsieur.''  But

this did not restore gaiety to the dinner.  Henceforth it

was cold indeed, and at the earliest moment possible the

Russian officials bowed themselves out, and no doubt, for

a long time afterward, ascribed any ill luck which befell

them to this scene of ill omen.



Another case in which this irrepressible compatriot

figured was hardly less peculiar.  Having decided to

return to America, and the blockade being still in force, he

secured a place in the post-coach for the seven days and

seven nights' journey to the frontier.  The opportunities

to secure such passages were few and far between, since

this was virtually the only public conveyance out of the

empire.  As he was obliged to have his passport vis<e'>d

at the Russian Foreign Office in order that he might leave

the country, it had been sent by the legation to the Russian

authorities a fortnight before his departure, but

under various pretexts it was retained, and at last did not

arrive in time.  When the hour of departure came he was

at the post-house waiting for his pass, and as he had been

assured that it would duly reach him, he exerted himself

in every way to delay the coach.  He bribed one subordinate

after another; but at last the delay was so long and

the other passengers so impatient that one of the higher

officials appeared upon the scene and ordered the coach to

start.  At this our American was wild with rage and

began a speech in German and English--so that all the

officials might understand it--on Russian officials and on

the empire in general.  A large audience having gathered

around him, he was ordered to remove his hat.  At this

he held it on all the more firmly, declared himself an

American, and defied the whole power of the empire to

remove it.  He then went on to denounce everything in

Russia, from the Emperor down.  He declared that the

officials were a pack of scoundrels; that the only reason

why he did not obtain his passport was that he had not

bribed them as highly as they expected; that the empire

ought to be abolished; that he hoped the Western powers

in the war then going on would finish it--indeed, that he

thought they would.



There was probably some truth in his remark as to the

inadequate bribing of officials; but the amazing thing was

that his audience were so paralyzed by his utterances and

so overawed by his attitude that they made no effort to

arrest him.  Then came a new scene.  While they were

standing before him thus confounded, he suddenly turned

to the basket of provisions which he had laid in for his

seven days' journey, and began pelting his audience,

including the official above named, with its contents,

hurling sandwiches, oranges, and finally even roast chickens,

pigeons, and partridges, at their devoted heads.  At

last, pressing his hat firmly over his brows, he strode

forth to the legation unmolested.  There it took some

labor to cool his wrath; but his passport having finally

been obtained, we secured for him permission to use post-

horses, and so he departed from the empire.



To steer a proper course in the midst of such fellow-

citizens was often difficult, and I recall multitudes of other

examples hardly less troublesome; indeed, the career of

this same deputy sheriff at St. Petersburg was full of

other passages requiring careful diplomatic intervention

to prevent his arrest.



Luckily for these gentlemen, the Russian government

felt, just at that time, special need of maintaining friendly

relations with the powers not at war with her, and the

public functionaries of all sorts were evidently ordered

to treat Americans with extreme courtesy and forbearance.



One experience of this was somewhat curious.  Our first

secretary of legation and I, having gone on Easter eve to

the midnight mass at the Kazan cathedral, we were shown

at once into a place of honor in front of the great silver

iconostase and stationed immediately before one of the

doors opening through it into the inner sanctuary.  At

first the service went on in darkness, only mitigated by

a few tapers at the high altar; but as the clock struck the

hour of midnight there came suddenly the roaring of the

fortress guns, the booming of great bells above and

around us, and a light, which appeared at the opposite

end of the cathedral, seemed to shoot in all directions,

leaving trains of fire, until all was ablaze, every person

present holding a lighted taper.  Then came the mass,

celebrated by a bishop and his acolytes gorgeously

attired, with the swinging of censers, not only toward the

ecclesiastics, but toward the persons of importance present,

among whom we were evidently included.  Suddenly

there came a dead stop, stillness, and an evident

atmosphere of embarrassment.  Then the ceremony began again,

and again the censers were swung toward us, and again

a dead stop.  Everything seemed paralyzed.  Presently

there came softly to my side a gentleman who said in a

low tone, ``You are of the American legation?''  I

answered in the affirmative.  He said, ``This is a very

interesting ceremony.''  To this I also assented.  He then said,

``Is this the first time you have seen it?''  ``Yes,'' I

answered; ``we have never been in Russia at Easter before.'' 

He then took very formal leave, and again the ceremony

was revived, again the clouds of incense rose, and again

came the dead stop.  Presently the same gentleman came

up again, gently repeated very much the same questions

as before, and receiving the same answers, finally said,

with some embarrassment:  ``Might I ask you to kindly

move aside a little?  A procession has been waiting for

some time back of this door, and we are very anxious to

have it come out into the church.''  At this Secretary

Erving and I started aside instantly, much chagrined to

think that we had caused such a stoppage in such a ceremony;

the doors swung open, and out came a brilliant

procession of ecclesiastics with crosses, censers, lights, and

banners.



Not all of our troubles were due to our compatriots. 

Household matters sometimes gave serious annoyance. 

The minister had embraced a chance very rare in Russia,

--one which, in fact, almost never occurs,--and had

secured a large house fully furnished, with the servants,

who, from the big chasseur who stood at the back of the

minister's sledge to the boy who blew the organ on which

I practised, were serfs, and all, without exception, docile,

gentle, and kindly.  But there was one standing enemy

--vodka.  The feeling of the Russian peasant toward the

rough corn-brandy of his own country is characteristic. 

The Russian language is full of diminutives expressive

of affection.  The peasant addresses his superior as

Batushka, the affectionate diminutive of the word which

means father; he addresses the mistress of the house as

Matushka, which is the affectionate diminutive of the

Russian word for mother.  To his favorite drink, brandy, he

has given the name which is the affectionate diminutive

of the word voda, water--namely, vodka, which really

means ``dear little water.''  Vodka was indeed our most

insidious foe, and gave many evidences of its power; but

one of them made an unwonted stir among us.



One day the minister, returning in his carriage from

making sundry official visits, summoned the housekeeper,

a Baltic-province woman who had been admirably brought

up in an English family, and said to her:  `` Annette I insist

that you discharge Ivan, the coachman, at once; I can't

stand him any longer.  This afternoon he raced, with me in

the carriage, up and down the Nevsky, from end to end, with

the carriages of grand dukes and ministers, and, do my

best, I could not stop him.  He simply looked back at me,

grinned like an idiot, and drove on with all his might. 

It is the third time he has done this.  I have pardoned

him twice on his solemn pledge that he would do better;

but now he must go.''  Annette assented, and in the evening

after dinner came in to tell the minister that Ivan was

going, but wished to beg his pardon and say farewell.



The minister went out rather reluctantly, the rest of us

following; but he had hardly reached the anteroom when

Ivan, a great burly creature with a long flowing beard and

caftan, rushed forward, groveled before him, embraced

his ankles, laid his head upon his feet, and there remained

mumbling and moaning.  The minister was greatly

embarrassed and nervously ejaculated:  ``Take him away! 

Take him away!''  But all to no purpose.  Ivan could

not be induced to relax his hold.  At last the minister

relented and told Annette to inform Ivan that he would

receive just one more trial, and that if he failed again he

would be sent away to his owner without having any

opportunity to apologize or to say good-bye.



Very interesting to me were the houses of some of the

British residents, and especially that of Mr. Baird, the

head of the iron-works which bore his name, and which,

at that time, were considered among the wonders of Russia. 

He was an interesting character.  Noticing, among

the three very large and handsome vases in his dining-

room, the middle one made up of the bodies of three

large eagles in oxidized silver with crowns of gold,

I was told its history.  When the Grand Duke Alexander

--who afterward became the second emperor of that

name--announced his intention of joining the St. Petersburg

Yacht Club, a plan was immediately formed to

provide a magnificent trophy and allow him to win it,

and to this plan all the members of the club agreed except

Baird.  He at once said:  ``No; if the grand duke's yacht

can take it, let him have it; if not, let the best yacht win. 

If I can take it, I shall.''  It was hoped that he would think

better of it, but when the day arrived, the other yachts

having gradually fallen back, Mr. Baird continued the

race with the grand duke and won.  As a result he was

for some years in disfavor with the high officials

surrounding the Emperor--a disfavor that no doubt cost

him vast sums; but he always asserted that he was glad

he had insisted on his right.



On one occasion I was witness to a sad faux pas at his

dinner-table.  It was in the early days of the Crimean

War, and an American gentleman who was present was

so careless as to refer to Queen Victoria's proclamation

against all who aided the enemy, which was clearly leveled

at Mr. Baird and his iron-works.  There was a scene at

once.  The ladies almost went into hysterics in deprecation

of the position in which the proclamation had placed

them.  But Mr. Baird himself was quite equal to the

occasion: in a very up-and-down way he said that he of

course regretted being regarded as a traitor to his country,

but that in the time of the alliance against the first

Napoleon his father had been induced by the Russian

government to establish works, and this not merely with the

consent, but with the warm approval, of the British

government; in consequence the establishment had taken

contracts with the Russian government and now they must be

executed; so far as he was concerned his conscience was

entirely clear; his duty was plain, and he was going to

do it.



On another occasion at his table there was a very good

repartee.  The subject of spiritualism having been brought

up, some one told a story of a person who, having gone

into an unfrequented garret of an old family residence,

found that all the old clothing which had been stored there

during many generations had descended from the shelves

and hooks and had assumed kneeling postures about the

floor.  All of us heard the story with much solemnity,

when good old Dr. Law, chaplain of the British church,

broke the silence with the words, ``That must have been

a family of very PIOUS HABITS.''  This of course broke the

spell.



I should be sorry to have it thought that all my stay

in the Russian capital was given up to official routine and

social futilities.  Fortunately for me, the social demands

were not very heavy.  The war in the Crimea, steadily

going against Russia, threw a cloud over the court and

city and reduced the number of entertainments to a

minimum.  This secured me, during the long winter evenings,

much time for reading, and in addition to all the valuable

treatises I could find on Russia, I went with care through

an extensive course in modern history.



As to Russian matters, it was my good fortune to become

intimately acquainted with Atkinson, the British

traveler in Siberia.  He had brought back many portfolios

of sketches, and his charming wife had treasured up a

great fund of anecdotes of people and adventure, so that

I seemed for a time to know Siberia as if I had lived there. 

Then it was that I learned of the beauties and capabilities

of its southern provinces.  The Atkinsons had also

brought back their only child, a son born on the Siberian

steppe, a wonderfully bright youngster, whom they destined

for the British navy.  He bore a name which I fear

may at times have proved a burden to him, for his father

and mother were so delighted with the place in which he

was born that they called him, after it, ``Alatow-Tam

Chiboulak.''[10]





[10] Since writing the above, I have had the pleasure of

receiving a letter from this gentleman, who has for some time

held the responsible and interesting position of superintendent

of public instruction in the Hawaiian Islands, his son, a

graduate of the University of Michigan, having been Secretary

of the Territory.







The general Russian life, as I thus saw it, while intensely

interesting in many respects, was certainly not cheerful. 

Despite the frivolity dominant among the upper class and

the fetishism controlling the lower classes, there was,

especially in that period of calamity, a deep undertone of

melancholy.  Melancholy, indeed, is a marked characteristic

of Russia, and, above all, of the peasantry.  They

seem sad even in their sports; their songs, almost without

exception, are in the minor key; the whole atmosphere is

apparently charged with vague dread of some calamity. 

Despite the suppression of most of the foreign journals,

and the blotting out of page after page of the newspapers

allowed to enter the empire, despite all that the secret

police could do in repressing unfavorable comment, it

became generally known that all was going wrong in the

Crimea.  News came of reverse after reverse: of the

defeats of the Alma and Inkerman, and, as a climax, the loss

of Sebastopol and the destruction of the Russian fleet.  In

the midst of it all, as is ever the case in Russian wars,

came utter collapse in the commissariat department;

everywhere one heard hints and finally detailed stories

of scoundrelism in high places: of money which ought to

have been appropriated to army supplies, but which had

been expended at the gambling-tables of Homburg or in

the Breda quarter at Paris.



Then it was that there was borne in upon me the conviction

that Russia, powerful as she seems when viewed from

the outside, is anything but strong when viewed from the

inside.  To say nothing of the thousand evident weaknesses

resulting from autocracy,--the theory that one man, and

he, generally, not one of the most highly endowed, can do

the thinking for a hundred millions of people,--there was

nowhere the slightest sign of any uprising of a great nation,

as, for instance, of the French against Europe in

1792, of the Germans against France in 1813 and in 1870,

of Italy against Austria in 1859 and afterward, and of the

Americans in the Civil War of 1861.  There were certainly

many noble characters in Russia, and these must

have felt deeply the condition of things; but there being

no great middle class, and the lower class having been

long kept in besotted ignorance, there seemed to be no

force on which patriotism could take hold.







CHAPTER XXVII



AS ATTACH<E'> AND BEARER OF DESPATCHES

IN WAR-TIME--1855



The spring of 1855 was made interesting by the arrival

of the blockading fleet before the mouth of the

Neva, and shortly afterward I went down to look at it. 

It was a most imposing sight: long lines of mighty three-

deckers of the old pattern, British and French,--one

hundred in all,--stretched across the Gulf of Finland in front

of the fortresses of Cronstadt.  Behind the fortresses lay

the Russian fleet, helpless and abject; and yet, as events

showed during our own Civil War half a dozen years

later, a very slight degree of inventive ability would have

enabled the Russians to annihilate the hostile fleet, and to

gain the most prodigious naval victory of modern times. 

Had they simply taken one or two of their own great

ships to the Baird iron-works hard by, and plated them

with railway iron, of which there was plenty, they could

have paralleled the destruction of our old wooden frigates

at Norfolk by the Merrimac, but on a vastly greater

scale.  Yet this simple expedient occurred to no one; and

the allied fleet, under Sir Richard Dundas, bade defiance

to the Russian power during the whole summer.



The Russians looked more philosophically upon the

blockade than upon their reverses in the Crimea, but they

acted much like the small boy who takes revenge on the

big boy by making faces at him.  Some of their caricatures

on their enemies were very clever.  Fortunately for

such artistic efforts, the British had given them a fine

opportunity during the previous year, when Sir Charles

Napier, the commander of the Baltic fleet, having made

a boastful speech at a public dinner in London, and

invited his hearers to dine with him at St. Petersburg, had

returned to England, after a summer before Cronstadt,

without even a glimpse of the Russian capital.



I am the possessor of a very large collection of

historical caricatures of all nations, and among them all

there is hardly one more spirited and comical than that

which represents Sir Charles at the masthead of one of

his frigates, seeking, through a spy-glass, to get a sight at

the domes and spires of St. Petersburg: not even the best

efforts of Gillray or ``H. B.,'' or Gavarni or Daumier, or

the brightest things in ``Punch'' or ``Kladderadatsch''

surpass it.



Some other Russian efforts at keeping up public

spirit were less legitimate.  Popular pictures of a rude

sort were circulated in vast numbers among the peasants,

representing British and French soldiers desecrating

churches, plundering monasteries, and murdering priests.



Near the close of my stay I made a visit, in company

with Mr. Erving, first secretary of the legation, to

Moscow,--the journey, which now requires but twelve hours,

then consuming twenty-four; and a trying journey it was,

since there was no provision for sleeping.



The old Russian capital, and, above all, the Kremlin,

interested me greatly; but, of all the vast collections in

the Kremlin, two things especially arrested my attention. 

The first was a statue,--the only statue in all those vast

halls,--and there seemed a wondrous poetic justice in the

fact that it represented the first Napoleon.  The other

thing was an evidence of the feeling of the Emperor

Nicholas toward Poland.  In one of the large rooms was

a full-length portrait of Nicholas's elder brother and

immediate predecessor, Alexander I; flung on the floor at

his feet was the constitution of Poland, which he had

given, and which Nicholas, after fearful bloodshed, had

taken away; and lying near was the Polish scepter broken

in the middle.



A visit to the Sparrow Hills, from which Napoleon

first saw Moscow and the Kremlin, was also interesting;

but the city itself, though picturesque, disappointed me. 

Everywhere were filth, squalor, beggary, and fetishism. 

Evidences of official stupidity were many.  In one of the

Kremlin towers a catastrophe had occurred on the occasion

of the Emperor's funeral, a day or two before our

arrival: some thirty men had been ringing one of the

enormous bells, when it broke loose from its rotten

fastenings and crashed down into the midst of the ringers,

killing several.  Sad reminders of this slaughter were

shown us; it was clearly the result of gross neglect.



Another revelation of Russian officialism was there

vouchsafed us.  Wishing to send a very simple message

to our minister at St. Petersburg, we went to the

telegraph office and handed it to the clerk in charge. 

Putting on an air of great importance, he began a long

inquisitorial process, insisting on knowing our full names,

whence we had come, where we were going, how long we

were staying, why we were sending the message, etc., etc.;

and when he had evidently asked all the questions he

could think of, he gravely informed us that our message

could not be sent until the head of the office had given his

approval.  On our asking where the head of the office

was, he pointed out a stout gentleman in military uniform

seated near the stove in the further corner of the room,

reading a newspaper; and, on our requesting him to notify

this superior being, he answered that he could not thus

interrupt him; that we could see that he was busy.  At

this Erving lost his temper, caught up the paper, tore it

in pieces, threw them into the face of the underling with

a loud exclamation more vigorous than pious, and we

marched out defiantly.  Looking back when driving off

in our droshky, we saw that he had aroused the entire

establishment: at the door stood the whole personnel of the

office,--the military commander at the head,--all gazing

at us in a sort of stupefaction.  We expected to hear from

them afterward, but on reflection they evidently thought

it best not to stir the matter.



In reviewing this first of my sojourns in Russia, my

thoughts naturally dwell upon the two sovereigns Nicholas

I and Alexander II.  The first of these was a great

man scared out of greatness by the ever recurring specter

of the French Revolution.  There had been much to make

him a stern reactionary.  He could not but remember that

two Czars--his father and grandfather--had both been

murdered in obedience to family necessities.  At his

proclamation as emperor he had been welcomed by a revolt

which had forced him



   ``To wade through slaughter to a throne--''



a revolt which had deluged the great parade-ground of

St. Petersburg with the blood of his best soldiers, which

had sent many coffles of the nobility to Siberia, and which

had obliged him to see the bodies of several men who

might have made his reign illustrious dangling from the

fortress walls opposite the Winter Palace.  He had been

obliged to grapple with a fearful insurrection in Poland,

caused partly by the brutality of his satraps, but mainly

by religious hatreds; to suppress it with enormous carnage;

and to substitute, for the moderate constitutional

liberty which his brother had granted, a cruel despotism. 

He had thus become the fanatical apostle of reaction

throughout Europe, and as such was everywhere the

implacable enemy of any evolution of constitutional liberty. 

The despots of Europe adored him.  As symbols of his

ideals, he had given to the King of Prussia and to the

Neapolitan Bourbon copies of two of the statues which

adorned his Nevsky bridge--statues representing restive

horses restrained by strong men; and the Berlin populace,

with an unerring instinct, had given to one of these the

name ``Progress checked,'' and to the other the name

``Retrogression encouraged.''  To this day one sees every-

where in the palaces of Continental rulers, whether great

or petty, his columns of Siberian porphyry, jasper bowls,

or malachite vases--signs of his approval of reaction.



But, in justice to him, it should be said that there was

one crime he did not commit--a crime, indeed, which he

did not DARE commit: he did not violate his oath to

maintain the liberties of Finland.  THAT was reserved for the

second Nicholas, now on the Russian throne.



Whether at the great assemblages of the Winter Palace,

or at the reviews, or simply driving in his sledge or walking

in the street, he overawed all men by his presence.  Whenever

I saw him, and never more cogently than during that

last drive of his just before his death, there was forced

to my lips the thought:  ``You are the most majestic being

ever created.''  Colossal in stature; with a face such as

one finds on a Greek coin, but overcast with a shadow of

Muscovite melancholy; with a bearing dignified, but with

a manner not unkind, he bore himself like a god.  And

yet no man could be more simple or affable, whether in

his palace or in the street.  Those were the days when a

Russian Czar could drive or walk alone in every part of

every city in his empire.  He frequently took exercise in

walking along the Neva quay, and enjoyed talking with

any friends he met--especially with members of the

diplomatic corps.  The published letters of an American

minister--Mr. Dallas--give accounts of many discussions

thus held with him.



There seemed a most characteristic mingling of his better

and worse qualities in the two promises which, according

to tradition, he exacted on his death-bed from his son

--namely, that he would free the serfs, and that he would

never give a constitution to Poland.



The accession of this son, Alexander II, brought a

change at once: we all felt it.  While he had the big Romanoff

frame and beauty and dignity, he had less of the

majesty and none of the implacable sternness of his father. 

At the reception of the diplomatic corps on his accession

he showed this abundantly; for, despite the strong 

declarations in his speech, his tears betrayed him.  Reforms

began at once--halting, indeed, but all tending in the right

direction.  How they were developed, and how so largely

brought to naught, the world knows by heart.  Of all the

ghastly miscalculations ever made, of all the crimes which

have cost the earth most dear, his murder was the worst. 

The murders of William of Orange, of Lincoln, of Garfield,

of Carnot, of Humbert I, did not stop the course of

a beneficent evolution; but the murder of Alexander II

threw Russia back into the hands of a reaction worse than

any ever before known, which has now lasted nearly a

generation, and which bids fair to continue for many

more, unless the Russian reverses in the present war

force on a better order of things.  For me, looking

back upon those days, it is hard to imagine even the

craziest of nihilists or anarchists wild enough to commit

such a crime against so attractive a man fully embarked

on so blessed a career.  He, too, in the days of my stay,

was wont to mingle freely with his people; he even went

to their places of public amusement, and he was

frequently to be seen walking among them on the quays and

elsewhere.  In my reminiscences of the Hague Conference,

I give from the lips of Prince Munster an account of a

conversation under such circumstances: the Czar walking

on the quay or resting on a seat by the roadside, while

planning to right a wrong done by a petty Russian official

to a German student.  Therein appears not only a deep

sense of justice and humanity, but that melancholy, so

truly Russian, which was deepest in him and in his uncle,

the first Alexander.  There dwell also in my memory

certain photographs of him in his last days, shown me

not long before his death, during my first official stay at

Berlin.  His face was beautiful as of old, but the melancholy

had deepened, and the eyes made a fearful revelation;

for they were the eyes of a man who for years had

known himself to be hunted.  As I looked at them there

came back to me the remembrance of the great, beautiful

frightened eyes of a deer, hunted down and finally at my

mercy, in the midst of a lake in the Adirondacks--eyes

which haunted me long afterward.  And there comes back

the scene at the funeral ceremony in his honor at Berlin,

coincident with that at St. Petersburg--his uncle, the

Emperor William I, and all about him, in tears, and a

depth of real feeling shown such as no monarch of a

coarser fiber could have inspired.  When one reflects that

he had given his countrymen, among a great mass of

minor reforms, trial by jury; the emancipation of twenty

millions of serfs, with provision for homesteads; and had

at that moment--as his adviser, Loris Melikoff, confessed

when dying--a constitution ready for his people, one feels

inclined to curse those who take the methods of revolution

rather than those of evolution.



My departure from Russia embraces one or two incidents

which may throw some light upon the Russian

civilization of that period.  On account of the blockade, I

was obliged to take the post from St. Petersburg to Warsaw,

giving to the journey seven days and seven nights of

steady travel; and, as the pressure for places on the post

was very great, I was obliged to secure mine several weeks

beforehand, and then thought myself especially lucky in

obtaining a sort of sentry-box on the roof of the second

coach usually occupied by the guard.  This good luck was

due to the fact that, there being on that day two coaches,

one guard served for both; and the place on the second

was thus left vacant for me.



Day and night, then, during that whole week, we

rumbled on through the interminable forests of Poland, and

the distressingly dirty hamlets and towns scattered along

the road.  My first night out was trying, for it was very

cold; but, having secured from a dealer in the first

town where we stopped in the morning a large sheet of

felt, I wrapped my legs in it, and thenceforward was

comfortable.  My companions in the two post-coaches

were very lively, being mainly French actors and actresses

who had just finished their winter campaign in Russia;

and, when we changed horses at the post-houses, the scenes

were of a sort which an American orator once characterized

as ``halcyon and vociferous.''



Bearing a despatch-bag to our legation at Paris, I

carried the pass, not only of an attach<e'>, but of a bearer of

despatches, and on my departure our minister said to me:



``The Russian officials at the frontier have given much

trouble to Americans of late; and I hope that if they

trouble you, you will simply stop and inform me.  You

are traveling for pleasure and information, and a few days

more or less will make little difference.''  On arriving at

the frontier, I gave up my papers to the passport officials,

and was then approached by the officers of the custom-

house.  One of these, a tall personage in showy uniform,

was very solemn, and presently asked:  ``Are you

carrying out any specie?'' I answered:  ``None to speak

of; only about twenty or thirty German dollars.''  Said he: 

``That you must give up to me; the law of the empire does

not permit you to take out coin.''  ``No,'' I said; ``you

are mistaken.  I have already had the money changed,

and it is in German coin, not Russian.''  ``That makes no

difference,'' said he; ``you must give it up or stay here.'' 

My answer was that I would not give it up, and on this he

commanded his subordinates to take my baggage off the

coach.  My traveling companions now besought me to

make a quiet compromise with him, to give him half the

money, telling me that I might be detained there for weeks

or months, or even be maltreated; but I steadily refused,

and my baggage was removed.  All were ready to start

when the head of the police bureau came upon the scene

to return our papers.  His first proceeding was to call

out my name in a most obsequious tone, and, bowing

reverently, to tender me my passport.  I glanced at the

custom-house official, and saw that he turned pale.  The honor

done my little brief authority by the passport official

revealed to him his mistake, and he immediately ordered

his subordinates to replace my baggage on the coach; but

this I instantly forbade.  He then came up to me and

insisted that a misunderstanding had occurred.  ``No,'' I

said; ``there is no misunderstanding; you have only

treated me as you have treated other Americans.  The

American minister has ordered me to wait here and inform

him, and all that I have now to ask you is that you give

me the name of a hotel.''  At this be begged me to listen

to him, and presently was pleading most piteously; indeed,

he would have readily knelt and kissed my feet to secure

my forgiveness.  He became utterly abject.  All were

waiting, the coach stood open, the eyes of the whole party

were fastened upon us.  My comrades besought me to

let the rascal go; and at last, after a most earnest warning

to him, I gave my gracious permission to have the baggage

placed on the coach.  He was certainly at that moment

one of the happiest men I have ever seen; and, as we

drove off from the station, he lingered long, hat in hand,

profuse with bows and good wishes.



One other occurrence during those seven days and

nights of coaching may throw some light upon the feeling

which has recently produced, in that same region, the

Kishineff massacres.



One pleasant Saturday evening, at a Polish village, our

coach passed into the little green inclosure in front of

the post-house, and there stopped for a change of horses. 

While waiting, I noticed, from my sentry-box on the top

of the coach, several well-dressed people--by the cut of

their beards and hair, Jews--standing at some distance

outside the inclosure, and looking at us.  Presently two

of them--clearly, by their bearing and dress, men of

mark--entered the inclosure, came near the coach, and

stood quietly and respectfully.  In a few moments my

attention was attracted by a movement on the other side

of the coach: our coachman, a young serf, was skulking

rapidly toward the stables, and presently emerged with

his long horsewhip, skulked swiftly back again until he

came suddenly on these two grave and reverend men,

--each of them doubtless wealthy enough to have bought

a dozen like him,--began lashing them, and finally drove

them out of the inclosure like dogs, the assembled crowd

jeering and hooting after them.



Few evenings linger more pleasantly in my memory

than that on which I arrived in Breslau.  I was once more

outside of the Russian Empire; and, as I settled for the

evening before a kindly fire upon a cheerful hearth, there

rose under my windows, from a rollicking band of university

students, the ``Gaudeamus igitur.''  I seemed to have

arrived in another world--a world which held home and

friends.  Then, as never before, I realized the feeling

which the Marquis de Custine had revealed, to the amusement

of Europe and the disgust of the Emperor Nicholas,

nearly twenty years before.  The brilliant marquis, on his

way to St. Petersburg, had stopped at Stettin; and, on

his leaving the inn to take ship for Cronstadt next day, the

innkeeper said to him:  ``Well, you are going into a very

bad country.''  ``How so?'' said De Custine; ``when

did you travel there?''  ``Never,'' answered the inn-

keeper; ``but I have kept this inn for many years.  All

the leading Russians, going and coming by sea, have

stopped with me; and I have always noticed that those

coming from Russia are very glad, and those returning

very sad.''



Throughout the remainder of my journey across the

Continent, considerable attention was shown me at various

stopping-places, since travelers from within the Russian

lines at that time were rare indeed; but there was

nothing worthy of note until my arrival at Strasburg. 

There, in the railway station, I was presented by a young

Austrian nobleman to an American lady who was going

on to Paris accompanied by her son; and, as she was very

agreeable, I was glad when we all found ourselves together

in the same railway compartment.



Some time after leaving Strasburg she said to me:  ``I

don't think you caught my name at the station.''  To

this I frankly replied that I had not.  She then repeated it;

and I found her to be a distinguished leader in New York

and Parisian society, the wife of an American widely

known.  As we rolled on toward Paris, I became vaguely

aware that there was some trouble in our compartment;

but, being occupied with a book, I paid little attention to

the matter.  There were seven of us.  Facing each other at

one door were the American lady, whom I will call ``Mrs.

X.,'' and myself; at her left was her maid, then a vacant

seat, and then at the other door a German lady, richly

attired, evidently of high degree, and probably about fifty

years of age.  Facing this German lady sat an elegantly

dressed young man of about thirty, also of aristocratic

manners, and a German.  Between this gentleman and myself

sat the son of Mrs. X. and the Austrian gentleman

who had presented me to her.



Presently Mrs. X. bent over toward me and asked, in

an undertone, ``What do you think is the relationship

between those two people at the other door?''  I answered

that quite likely they were brother and sister.  ``No,'' said

she; ``they are man and wife.''  I answered, ``That can

hardly be; there is a difference of at least twenty years

in the young man's favor.''  ``Depend upon it,'' she

said, ``they are man and wife; it is a mariage de convenance;

she is dressed to look as young as possible.''  At

this I expressed new doubts, and the discussion dropped.



Presently the young German gentleman said something

to the lady opposite him which indicated that he

had lived in Berlin; whereupon Mrs. X. asked him,

diagonally across the car, if he had been at the Berlin

University.  At this he turned in some surprise and answered,

civilly but coldly, ``Yes, madam.''  Then he turned away

to converse with the lady who accompanied him.  Mrs. X.,

nothing daunted, persisted, and asked, ``Have you been

RECENTLY at the university?''  Before he could reply the

lady opposite him turned to Mrs. X. and said most

haughtily, ``Mon Dieu, madam, you must see that the gentleman

does not desire any conversation with you.  ``At this

Mrs. X.  became very humble, and rejoined most

penitently, ``Madam, I beg your pardon; if I had known that

the gentleman's mother did not wish him to talk with a

stranger, I would not have spoken to him.''  At this the

German lady started as if stung, turned very red, and

replied, ``Pardon, madam, I am not the mother of the

gentleman.''  At this the humble manner of Mrs. X. was

flung off in an instant, and turning fiercely upon the

German lady, she said, ``Madam, since you are not

the mother of the gentleman, and, of course, cannot be

his wife, by what right do you interfere to prevent his

answering me?''  The lady thus addressed started again

as if stabbed, turned pale, and gasped out, ``Pardon,

madam; I AM the wife of the gentleman.''  Instantly Mrs.

X. became again penitently apologetic, and answered,

``Madam, I beg a thousand pardons; I will not speak

again to the gentleman''; and then, turning to me, said

very solemnly, but loudly, so that all might hear,

``Heavens! can it be possible!''



By this time we were all in distress, the German lady

almost in a state of collapse, and her husband hardly less

so.  At various times during the remainder of the journey

I heard them affecting to laugh the matter off, but it was

clear that the thrust from my fair compatriot had cut deep

and would last long.



Arriving at our destination, I obtained the key to the

mystery.  On taking leave of Mrs. X., I said, ``That was

rather severe treatment which you administered to the

German lady.''  ``Yes,'' she answered; ``it will teach her

never again to go out of her way to insult an American

woman.''  She then told me that the lady had been

evidently vexed because Mrs. X. had brought her maid into

the compartment; and that this aristocratic dame had

shown her feeling by applying her handkerchief to her

nose, by sniffing, and by various other signs of disgust. 

``And then,'' said Mrs. X., ``I determined to teach her a

lesson.''



I never saw Mrs. X. again.  After a brilliant social

career of a few years she died; but her son, who was then a

boy of twelve years, in a short jacket, has since become

very prominent in Europe and America, and, in a way, influential.



In Paris I delivered my despatches to our minister, Mr.

Mason; was introduced to Baron Seebach, the Saxon min-

ister, Nesselrode's son-in-law, who was a leading personage

at the conference of the great powers then in

session; and saw various interesting men, among them

sundry young officers of the United States army, who

were on their way to the Crimea in order to observe the

warlike operations going on there, and one of them,

McClellan, also on his way to the head of our own army

in the Civil War which began a few years later.



It was the time of the first great French Exposition--

that of 1855.  The Emperor Napoleon III had opened it

with much pomp; and, though the whole affair was petty

compared with what we have known since, it attracted

visitors from the whole world, and among them came

Horace Greeley.



As he shuffled along the boulevards and streets of Paris,

in his mooning way, he attracted much wondering

attention, but was himself very unhappy because his

ignorance of the French language prevented his talking with

the people about him.



He had just gone through a singular experience, having,

the day before my arrival, been released from Clichy

prison, where he had been confined for debt.  Nothing

could be more comical than the whole business from first

to last.  A year or two previously there had taken place

in New York, on what has been since known as Reservoir

Square, an international exposition which, for its day,

was very creditable; but, this exposition having ended

in bankruptcy, a new board of commissioners had been

chosen, who, it was hoped, would secure public confidence,

and among these was Mr. Greeley.



Yet even under this new board the exposition had not

been a success; and it had been finally wound up in a very

unsatisfactory way, many people complaining that their

exhibits had not been returned to them--among these a

French sculptor of more ambition than repute, who had

sent a plaster cast of some sort of allegorical figure to

which he attributed an enormous value.  Having sought

in vain for redress in America, he returned to Europe and

there awaited the coming of some one of the directors;

and the first of these whom he caught was no less a person

than Greeley himself, who, soon after arriving in Paris,

was arrested for the debt and taken to Clichy prison.



Much feeling was shown by the American community. 

Every one knew that Mr. Greeley's connection with the

New York exposition was merely of a good-natured,

nominal sort.  It therefore became the fashion among

traveling Americans to visit him while thus in durance vile;

and among those who thus called upon him were two

former Presidents of the United States, both of whom

he had most bitterly opposed--Mr. Van Buren and Mr. Fillmore.



The American legation having made very earnest

representations, the prisoner was soon released; and the most

tangible result of the whole business was a letter, very

pithy and characteristic, which Greeley wrote to the ``New

York Tribune,'' giving this strange experience, and closing

with the words:  ``So ended my last chance to learn

French.''



A day or two after his release I met him at the student

restaurant of Madame Busque.  A large company of

Americans were present; and shortly after taking his seat

at table he tried to ask for some green string-beans,

which were then in season.  Addressing one of the serving-

maids, he said, ``Flawronce, donney moy--donney moy--

donney moy--''; and then, unable to remember the word,

he impatiently screamed out in a high treble, thrusting out

his plate at the same time, ``BEANS!''  The crowd of us

burst into laughter; whereupon Donn Piatt, then secretary

of the legation at Paris and afterward editor of the

``Capital'' at Washington, said:  ``Why, Greeley, you

don't improve a bit; you knew beans yesterday.''



This restaurant of Madame Busque's had been, for

some years, a place of resort for American students and

their traveling friends.  The few dishes served, though

simple, were good; all was plain; there were no table-

cloths; but the place was made attractive by the portraits

of various American artists and students who had frequented

the place in days gone by, and who had left these

adornments to the good old madame.



It was a simple cr<e'>merie in the Rue de la Michodi<e!>re,

a little way out of the Boulevard des Italiens; and its

success was due to the fact that Madame Busque, the kindest

old lady alive, had learned how to make sundry American

dishes, and had placed a sign in the window as follows: 

``Aux Am<e'>ricains.  Sp<e'>cialit<e'> de Pumpkin Pie et

de Buckwheat Cakes.''  Never was there a more jolly

restaurant.  One met there, not only students and artists,

but some of the most eminent men in American public

life.  The specialties as given on the sign-board were well

prepared; and many were the lamentations when the dear

old madame died, and the restaurant, being transferred

to another part of Paris, became pretentious and fell into

oblivion.



Another occurrence at the exposition dwells vividly in

my memory.  One day, in going through the annex in which

there was a show of domestic animals, I stopped for a moment

to look at a wonderful goat which was there tethered. 

He was very large, with a majestic head, spreading horns,

and long, white, curly beard.  Presently a party of French

gentlemen and ladies, evidently of the higher class, came

along and joined the crowd gazing at the animal.  In a

few moments one of the ladies, anxious to hurry on, said

to the large and dignified elderly gentleman at the head of

the party, ``Mais viens donc ''; to which he answered,

``Non, laisse moi le regarder; celui-l<a!> ressemble tant au

bon Dieu.''



This remark, which in Great Britain or the United States

would have aroused horror as blasphemy, was simply

answered by a peal of laughter, and the party passed on;

yet I could not but reflect on the fact that this attitude

toward the Supreme Being was possible after a fifteen

hundred years' monopoly of teaching by the church which

insists that to it alone should be intrusted the religious

instruction of the French people.



After staying a few weeks at the French capital, I left

for a short tour in Switzerland.  The only occurrence on

this journey possibly worthy of note was at the hospice

of the Great St. Bernard.  On a day early in September I

had walked over the T<e^>te Noire with two long-legged

Englishmen, and had so tired myself that the next morning

I was too late to catch the diligence from Martigny;

so that, on awaking toward noon, there was nothing left

for me but to walk, and I started on that rather toilsome

journey alone.  After plodding upward some miles along

the road toward the hospice, I was very weary indeed, but

felt that it would be dangerous to rest, since the banks of

snow on both sides of the road would be sure to give me

a deadly chill; and I therefore kept steadily on.  Presently

I overtook a small party, apparently English, also

going up the pass; and, at some distance in advance of

them, alone, a large woman with a very striking and even

masculine face.  I had certainly seen the face before, but

where I could not imagine.  Arriving finally at the hospice,

very tired, we were, after some waiting, invited out

to a good dinner by the two fathers deputed for the

purpose; and there, among the guests, I again saw the

lady, and was again puzzled to know where I had

previously seen her.  As the dinner went on the two monks

gave accounts of life at the hospice, rescues from

avalanches, and the like, and various questions were asked;

but the unknown lady sat perfectly still, uttering not a

word, until suddenly, just at the close of the dinner, she

put a question across the table to one of the fathers.  It

came almost like a peal of thunder-deep, strong, rolling

through the room, startling all of us, and fairly taking the

breath away from the good monk to whom it was addressed;

but he presently rallied, and in a rather faltering

tone made answer.  That was all.  But on this I at once

recognized her: it was Fanny Kemble Butler, whom, years

before, I had heard interpreting Shakspere.



Whether this episode had anything to do with it or not,

I soon found myself in rather a bad way.  The fatigues of

the two previous days had been too much for me.  I felt

very wretched, and presently one of the brothers came up

to me and asked whether I was ill.  I answered that I

was tired; whereupon he said kindly, ``Come with me.'' 

I went.  He took me to a neat, tidy little cell; put me into

bed as carefully as my grandmother had ever done; tucked

me in; brought me some weak, hot tea; and left me

with various kind injunctions.  Very early in the morning

I was aroused by the singing of the monks in the chapel,

but dozed on until eight or nine o'clock, when, feeling

entirely rested, I rose and, after breakfast, left the

monastery, with a party of newly made American friends, in as

good condition as ever, and with a very grateful feeling

toward my entertainers.  Against monks generally I must

confess to a prejudice; but the memory of these brothers

of St. Bernard I still cherish with a real affection.



Stopping at various interesting historic places, and

especially at Eisenach, whence I made the first of my many

visits to the Wartburg, I reached Berlin just before the

beginning of the university term, and there settled as a

student.  So, as I then supposed, ended my diplomatic

career forever.







CHAPTER XXVIII



AS COMMISSIONER TO SANTO DOMINGO--1871



Returning from Russia and Germany, I devoted

myself during thirteen years, first, to my professorial

duties at the University of Michigan; next, to political

duties in the State Senate at Albany; and, finally, to

organizing and administering Cornell University.  But in the

early winter of 1870-71 came an event which drew me out

of my university life for a time, and engaged me again in

diplomatic work.  While pursuing the even tenor of my

way, there came a telegraphic despatch from Mr. William

Orton, president of the Western Union Telegraph Company,

a devoted supporter of the administration, asking me

whether I had formed any definite opinion against the

annexation of the island of Santo Domingo to the United

States.  This question surprised me.  A proposal regarding

such an annexation had been for some time talked about. 

The newly elected President, General Grant, having been

besought by the authorities of that republic to propose

measures looking to annexation, had made a brief

examination; and Congress had passed a law authorizing the

appointment of three commissioners to visit the island, to

examine and report upon its desirability, from various

points of view, and to ascertain, as far as possible, the

feeling of its inhabitants; but I had given no attention

to the matter, and therefore answered Mr. Orton that I

had no opinion, one way or the other, regarding it.  A

day or two afterward came information that the President

had named the commission, and in the following order:  

Ex-Senator Benjamin F. Wade of Ohio, Andrew D.

White of New York, and Samuel G. Howe of Massachusetts. 

On receiving notice of my appointment, I went to

Washington, was at once admitted to an interview with the

President, and rarely have I been more happily disappointed. 

Instead of the taciturn man who, as his enemies

insisted, said nothing because he knew nothing, had

never cared for anything save military matters, and was

entirely absorbed in personal interests, I found a quiet,

dignified public officer, who presented the history of

the Santo Domingo question, and his view regarding it, in

a manner large, thoughtful, and statesmanlike.  There

was no special pleading; no attempt at converting me:

his whole effort seemed given to stating candidly the

history of the case thus far.



There was much need of such statement.  Mr. Charles

Sumner, the eminent senator from Massachusetts, had

completely broken with the President on this and other

questions; had attacked the policy of the administration

violently; had hinted at the supremacy of unworthy

motives; and had imputed rascality to men with whom the

President had close relations.  He appeared, also, as he

claimed, in the interest of the republic of Haiti, which

regarded with disfavor any acquisition by the United

States of territory on the island of which that quasi-

republic formed a part; and all his rhetoric and oratory

were brought to bear against the President's ideas.  I had

long been an admirer of Mr. Sumner, with the feeling

which a young man would naturally cherish toward an

older man of such high character who had given him

early recognition; and I now approached him with especial

gratitude and respect.  But I soon saw that his view of the

President was prejudiced, and his estimate of himself

abnormal.  Though a senator of such high standing and so

long in public affairs, he took himself almost too

seriously; and there had come a break between him, as

chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs, and

President Grant's Secretary of State, Mr. Fish, who had

proved himself, as State senator, as Governor of New

York, as United States senator, and now as Secretary of

State, a man of the highest character and capacity.



The friends of the administration claimed that it had

become impossible for it to have any relations with Senator

Sumner; that he delayed, and indeed suppressed, treaties

of the greatest importance; that his egotism had become

so colossal that he practically assumed to himself

the entire conduct of foreign affairs; and the whole matter

reached a climax when, in a large social gathering, Mr.

Fish meeting Senator Sumner and extending his hand to

him, the latter deliberately rejected the courtesy and coldly

turned away.



Greatly admiring all these men, and deeply regretting

their divisions, which seemed sure to prove most injurious

to the Republican party and to the country, I wrote to

Mr. Gerrit Smith, urging him to come at once to Washington

and, as the lifelong friend of Senator Sumner and the

devoted supporter of General Grant, to use his great powers

in bringing them together.  He came and did his best;

but a few days afterward he said to me:  ``It is impossible;

it is a breach which can never be healed.''



Mr. Sumner's speeches I had always greatly admired,

and his plea for international peace, delivered before I

was fairly out of my boyhood, had made a deep

impression upon me.  Still greater was the effect of his

speeches against the extension of slavery.  It is true

that these speeches had little direct influence upon the

Senate; but they certainly had an immense effect upon

the country, and this effect was increased by the assault

upon him by Preston Brooks of South Carolina, which

nearly cost him his life, and from which he suffered

physically as long as he lived.  His influence was exercised

not only in the Senate, but in his own house.  In his

library he discussed, in a very interesting way, the main

questions of the time; and at his dinner-table one met

interesting men from all parts of the world.  At one of his

dinners I had an opportunity to observe one of the 

difficulties from which our country suffers most--namely, that

easy-going facility in slander which is certain to be

developed in the absence of any effective legal responsibility

for one's utterances.  At the time referred to there was

present an Englishman eminent in parliamentary and

business circles.  I sat next him, and near us sat a

gentleman who had held a subordinate position in the United

States navy, but who was out of employment, and apparently

for some reason which made him sore.  On being

asked by the Englishman why the famous American Collins

Line of transatlantic steamers had not succeeded, this

American burst into a tirade, declaring that it was all due

to the fact that the Collins company had been obliged to

waste its entire capital in bribing members of Congress

to obtain subsidies; that it had sunk all its funds in doing

this, and so had become bankrupt.  This I could not bear,

and indignantly interposed, stating the simple facts--

namely, that the ships of the company were built in the

most expensive manner, without any sufficient data as to

their chances of success; that the competition of the

Cunard company had been destructive to them; that, to cap

the climax, two out of their fleet of five had been, at an early

period in the history of the company, lost at sea; and I

expressed my complete disbelief in any cause of failure

like that which had been named.  As a matter of fact, the

Collins company, in their pride at the beauty of their

first ship, had sent it up the Potomac to Washington and

given a collation upon it to members of Congress; but

beyond this there was not the slightest evidence of anything

of the sort which the slanderer of his country had

brought forward.



As regards the Santo Domingo question, I must confess

that Mr. Sumner's speeches did not give me much light;

they seemed to me simply academic orations tinged by anger.



Far different was it with the speeches made on the same

side by Senator Carl Schurz.  In them was a restrained

strength of argument and a philosophic dealing with the

question which appealed both to reason and to patriotism. 

His argument as to the danger of extending the

domain of American institutions and the privileges of

American citizenship over regions like the West Indies

carried great weight with me; it was the calm, thoughtful

utterance of a man accustomed to look at large public

questions in the light of human history, and, while reasoning

upon them philosophically and eloquently, to observe

strict rules of logic.



I also had talks with various leading men at Washington

on the general subject.  Very interesting was an evening

passed with Admiral Porter of the navy, who had already

visited Santo Domingo, and who gave me valuable points

as to choosing routes and securing information.  Another

person with whom I had some conversation was Benjamin

Franklin Butler, previously a general in the Civil War,

and afterward governor of Massachusetts--a man of

amazing abilities, but with a certain recklessness in the use

of them which had brought him into nearly universal

discredit.  His ideas regarding the annexation of Santo

Domingo seemed to resolve themselves, after all, into a

feeling of utter indifference,--his main effort being to

secure positions for one or two of his friends as attach<e'>s

of the commission.



At various times I talked with the President on this and

other subjects, and was more and more impressed, not only

by his patriotism, but by his ability; and as I took leave

of him, he gave me one charge for which I shall always

revere his memory.



He said:  `` Your duties are, of course, imposed upon you

by Congress; I have no right as PRESIDENT to give you

instructions, but as a MAN I have a right in this matter.  You

have doubtless noticed hints in Congress, and charges in

various newspapers, that I am financially interested in the

acquisition of Santo Domingo.  Now, as a man, as your

fellow-citizen, I demand that on your arrival in the island,

you examine thoroughly into all American interests

there; that you study land titles and contracts with the

utmost care; and that if you find anything whatever which

connects me or any of my family with any of them, you

expose me to the American people.''  The President uttered

these words in a tone of deep earnestness.  I left him,

feeling that he was an honest man; and I may add that the

closest examination of men and documents relating to

titles and concessions in the island failed to reveal any

personal interest of his whatsoever.



Arriving next day in New York, I met the other commissioners,

with the secretaries, interpreters, attach<e'>s, and

various members of the press who were authorized to

accompany the expedition.  Most interesting of all to me

were the scientific experts.  It is a curious example of the

happy-go-lucky ways which prevail so frequently at Washington,

that although the resolutions of Congress required

the commissioners to examine into the mining and agricultural

capacities of the island, its meteorological characteristics,

its harbors and the possibilities of fortifying them,

its land tenures, and a multitude of other subjects

demanding the aid of experts, no provision was made for any

such aid, and the three commissioners and their secretaries,

not one of whom could be considered as entitled to hold

a decisive opinion on any of these subjects, were the only

persons expected to conduct the inquiry.  Seeing this, I

represented the matter to the President, and received his

permission to telegraph to presidents of several of our

leading universities asking them to secure for us active

young scientific men who would be willing to serve on the

expedition without salary.  The effort was successful. 

Having secured at the Smithsonian Institution two or

three good specialists in sundry fields, I obtained from

Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Cornell, and other universities

the right sort of men for various other lines of investigation,

and on the 17th of January, 1871, we all embarked

on the steam-frigate Tennessee, under the command of

Commodore Temple.



It fell to my lot to take a leading part in sending forth

our scientific experts into all parts of the republic.  

Fourteen different expeditions were thus organized and

despatched, and these made careful examinations and reports

which were wrought into the final report of the

commission.  It is doubtful whether any country was ever so

thoroughly examined in so short a time.  One party visited

various harbors with reference to their value for naval or

military purposes; another took as its subject the necessary

fortifications; another, agriculture; another, the coal

supply; another, the precious metals; another, the prevailing

epidemics and diseases of the country; while the commission

itself adjourned from place to place, taking testimony

on land tenures and on the general conditions and

disposition of the people.



I became much attached to my colleagues.  The first of

these, Senator Wade of Ohio, was bluff, direct, shrewd,

and well preserved, though over seventy years of age. 

He was a rough diamond, kindly in his judgments unless

his feeling of justice was injured; then he was implacable. 

Many sayings of his were current, among them a dry answer

to a senator from Texas who, having dwelt in high-

flown discourse on the superlative characteristics of the

State he represented, wound up all by saying, ``All that

Texas needs to make it a paradise is water and good society,''

to which Wade instantly replied, ``That 's all they

need in hell.''  The nimbleness and shrewdness of some

public men he failed to appreciate.  On his saying

something to me rather unfavorable to a noted statesman of

New England, I answered him, ``But, senator, he made an

admirable Speaker of the House of Representatives.''  To

which he answered, ``So would a squirrel if he could talk.''



Dr. Howe was a very different sort of man--a man of

the highest cultivation and of wide experience, who had

devoted his whole life to philanthropic efforts.  He had been

imprisoned in Spandau for attempting to aid the Poles;

had narrowly escaped with his life while struggling in

Greece against Turkey; and had braved death again and

again while aiding the free-State men against the pro-

slavery myrmidons of Kansas.  He told me that of all

these three experiences, he considered the last as by far

the most dangerous.  He had a high sense of personal

honor, and was devoted to what he considered the interests

of humanity.



Our main residence was at the city of Santo Domingo,

and our relations with the leading officials of the republic

were exceedingly pleasant.  The president, Baez, was a

man of force and ability, and, though a light mulatto, he

had none of the characteristics generally attributed in the

United States to men of mixed blood.  He had rather the

appearance of a swarthy Spaniard, and in all his conduct

he showed quiet self-reliance, independence, and the tone of

a high-spirited gentleman.  His family was noted in the history

of the island, and held large estates, near the capital

city, in the province of Azua.  He had gone through various

vicissitudes, at times conquering insurgents and at times

being driven out by them.  During a portion of his life he

had lived in Spain, and had there been made a marshal of

that kingdom.  There was a quiet elegance in his manners

and conversation which would have done credit to any

statesman in any country, and he had gathered about him

as his cabinet two or three really superior men who

appeared devoted to his fortunes.  I have never doubted that

his overtures to General Grant were patriotic.  As long as

he could remember, he had known nothing in his country

but a succession of sterile revolutions which had destroyed

all its prosperity and nearly all its population.  He took

very much to heart a passage in one of Mr. Sumner's

orations against the annexation project, in which the senator

had spoken of him as a man who wished to sell his country. 

Referring to this, President Baez said to me:  ``How could

I sell my country?  My property is here; my family is

here; my friends are here; all my interests are here:

how could I sell my country and run away and enjoy the

proceeds as Mr. Sumner thinks I wish to do?  Mr. Sumner

gives himself out to be the friend of the colored race; but

I also am a colored man,'' and with that Baez ran his hand

through his crisp hair and said, ``This leaves no doubt on

that point.''



We discussed at various times the condition of his

country and the relations which he desired to establish with

the United States, and I became more and more convinced

that his dominant motives were those of a patriot.  As a

matter of fact, the country under the prevailing system

was a ruin.  West of it was the republic of Haiti, more

than twice as populous, which from time to time

encroached upon its weaker sister.  In Santo Domingo itself

under one revolutionist after another, war had raged over

the entire territory of the republic year after year for

generations.  Traveling through the republic, it is a simple

fact that I never, in its entire domain, saw a bridge, a

plow, a spade, a shovel, or a hoe; the only implement we

saw was the machete--a heavy, rude instrument which

served as a sword in war and a spade in peace.  Everywhere

among the mountains I found magnificent squared

logs of the beautiful mahogany of the country left just

where the teams which had been drawing them had been

seized by revolutionists.



In one of the large interior towns there had been,

indeed, one evidence of civilization to which the people of

that region had pointed with pride--a steam-engine for

sawing timber; but sometime before my arrival one of

the innumerable petty revolutions had left it a mere mass

of rusty scraps.



Under the natural law of increase the population of the

republic should have been numbered in millions; but close

examination, in all parts of its territory, showed us that

there were not two hundred thousand inhabitants left, and

that of these about one half were mulattos, the other half

being about equally divided between blacks and whites.



Since my visit business men from the United States

have developed the country to some extent; but revolutions

have continued, each chieftain getting into place by

orating loudly about liberty, and then holding power by

murdering not only his enemies, but those whom he

thought likely to become his enemies.



The late president, Heureaux, was one of the most mon-

strous of these creatures who have found their breeding-

bed in Central American politics.  He seems to have

murdered, as far as possible, not only all who opposed him,

but all who, he thought, MIGHT oppose him, and even

members of their families.



It was not at all surprising that Baez, clear-sighted and

experienced as he was, saw an advantage to his country

in annexation to the United States.  He probably expected

that it would be, at first, a Territory of which he, as

the foremost man in the island, would become governor,

and that later it would come into the Union as a State

which he would be quite likely to represent in the United

States Senate.  At a later period, when I saw him in New

York, on his way to visit the President at Washington,

my favorable opinion of him was confirmed.  He was

quiet, dignified, manly, showing himself, in his conversation

and conduct, a self-respecting man of the world, accustomed

to manage large affairs and to deal with strong

men.



The same desire to annex the island to the United States

was evident among the clergy.  This at first surprised me,

for some of them were exceedingly fanatical, and one

of them, who was especially civil to us, had endeavored, a

few months before our arrival, to prevent the proper

burial of a charming American lady, the wife of the

American geologist of the government, under the old

Spanish view that, not being a Catholic, she should be

buried outside the cemetery upon the commons, like a dog. 

But the desire for peace and for a reasonable development

of the country, even under a government considered

heretical, was everywhere evident.



It became my duty to discuss the question of church

property with the papal nuncio and vicar apostolic.  He

was an archbishop who had been sent over to take temporary

charge of ecclesiastical matters; of course a most

earnest Roman Catholic, but thoroughly devoted to the

annexation of the island to the United States, and the

reason for his opinion was soon evident.  Throughout the

entire island one constantly sees great buildings and other

church property which have been confiscated and sold for

secular purposes.  In the city itself the opera-house was

a former church, which in its day had been very imposing,

and everywhere one saw monastery estates in private

hands.  The authorities in Santo Domingo had simply

pursued the policy so well known in various Latin countries,

and especially in France, Italy, and Spain, of allowing

the religious orders to absorb large masses of property,

and then squeezing it out of them into the coffers

of the state.



In view of this, I said to the papal nuncio that it was

very important for the United States, in considering the

question of annexing the island, to know what the church

claimed; that if the church demanded the restoration of

all that had been taken from her, this would certainly

greatly diminish the value of the island in the eyes of our

public men.  To this he answered that in case of annexation

the church would claim nothing whatever beyond

what it was absolutely and actually occupying and using

for its own purposes, and he offered to give me guarantees

to that effect which should be full and explicit.



It was perfectly clear that the church authorities

preferred to be under a government which, even though they

regarded it as Protestant, could secure them their property,

rather than to be subject to a Roman Catholic republic

in which they were liable to constantly recurring

spoliation.  This I found to be the spirit of the clergy of

every grade in all parts of the island: they had discovered

that under the Constitution of the United States confiscation

without compensation is impossible.



It also fell to my lot, as the youngest man in the

commission, to conduct an expedition across the mountains

from the city of Santo Domingo on the south coast to

Puerto Plata on the north.



During this journey, on which I was about ten days in

the saddle, it was my duty to confer with the principal

functionaries, and this gave me novel experiences.  When-

ever our cavalcade approached a town, we halted, a

messenger was sent forward, and soon the alcalde, the priests,

and other men of light and leading, with a long train of

functionaries, came dashing out on horseback to greet us;

introductions then took place, and, finally, there was a

wild gallop into the town to the house of the alcalde,

where speeches were made and compliments exchanged in

the high Spanish manner.



At the outset there was a mishap.  As we were organizing

our expedition, the gentlemen charged with purchasing

supplies assured me that if we wished to secure proper

consideration of the annexation question by the principal

men of the various towns, we must exercise a large if

simple hospitality, and that social gatherings without rum

punch would be offensive rather than propitiatory.  The

order to lay in a sufficient spirituous supply was reluctantly

given, and in due time we started, one of our train

of pack-horses having on each side of the saddle large

demijohns of the fluid which was to be so potent for

diplomatic purposes.  At the close of the first day's travel,

just as our hammocks had been swung, I heard a scream

and saw the people of our own and neighboring huts

snatching cups and glasses and running pell-mell toward

the point where our animals were tethered.  On examination

I found that the horse intrusted with the precious

burden, having been relieved of part of his load, had felt

warranted in disporting himself, and had finally rolled

over, crushing all the demijohns.  It seemed a serious

matter, but I cannot say that it afflicted me much; we

propitiated the local functionaries by other forms of

hospitality, and I never found that the absence of rum punch

seriously injured our diplomacy.



Civil war had been recently raging throughout the republic,

and in one of the interior towns I was one day notified

that a well-known guerrilla general, who had shown

great bravery in behalf of the Baez government, wished

a public interview.  The meeting took place in the large

room of the house which had been assigned me.  The

mountain chieftain entered, bearing a rifle, and, the first

salutations having been exchanged, he struck an oratorical

attitude, and after expressing, in a loud harangue, his

high consideration for the United States, for its representative,

and for all present, he solemnly tendered the rifle

to me, saying that he had taken it in battle from Luperon,

the arch-enemy of his country, and could think of no other

bestowal so worthy of it.  This gift somewhat disconcerted

me.  In the bitterness of party feeling at home regarding

the Santo Domingo question, how would it look

for one of the commissioners to accept such a present? 

President Grant had been held up to obloquy throughout

the whole length and breadth of the land for accepting a

dog; what, then, would happen to a diplomatic representative

who should accept a rifle?  Connected with the expedition

were some twenty or thirty representatives of the

press, and I could easily see how my acceptance of such

a gift would alarm the sensitive consciences of many of

them and be enlarged and embroidered until the United

States would resound with indignant outcry against a

commission which accepted presents and was probably won

over by contracts for artillery.  My first attempt was to

evade the difficulty.  Rifle in hand, I acknowledged my

appreciation of the gift, but declared to the general that my

keeping such a trophy would certainly be a wrong to his

family; that I would therefore accept it and transmit it

to his son, to be handed down from generation to generation

of his descendants as an heirloom and a monument

of bravery and patriotism.  I was just congratulating

myself on this bit of extemporized diplomacy, when a cloud

began to gather on the general's face, and presently he

broke forth, saying that he regretted to find his present

not good enough to be accepted; that it was the best he

had; that if he had possessed anything better he would

have brought it.  At this, two or three gentlemen in our

party pressed around me, and, in undertones, advised me

by all means to accept it.  There was no alternative; I

accepted the rifle in as sonorous words as I could muster

--``IN BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES'';

had it placed immediately in a large box with the words

``War Department'' upon it, in very staring letters; and

so the matter ended.  Fortunately the commission, though

attacked for a multitude of sins, escaped censure in this

matter.



One part of our duty was somewhat peculiar.  The

United States, a few years before, had been on the point

of concluding negotiations with Denmark for the purchase

of St. Thomas, when a volcanic disturbance threw an

American frigate in the harbor of that island upon the

shore, utterly wrecking both the vessel and the treaty. 

This experience it was which led to the insertion of a

clause in the Congressional instructions to the commission

requiring them to make examinations regarding the frequency

and severity of earthquakes.  This duty we discharged

faithfully, and on one occasion with a result

interesting both to students of history and of psychology. 

Arriving at the old town of Cotuy, among the mountains,

and returning the vicar's call, after my public reception, I

asked him the stereotyped question regarding earthquakes,

and was answered that about the year 1840 there had

been one of a very terrible sort; that it had shaken and

broken his great stone church very badly; that he had

repaired the whole structure, except the gaping crevice

above the front entrance; ``and,'' said the good old padre,

``THAT I left as a warning to my people, thinking that it

might have a good influence upon them.''  On visiting the

church, we found the crevice as the padre had described it;

but his reasoning was especially interesting, because it

corroborated the contention of Buckle, who, but a few

years before, in his ``History of Civilization in England,''

had stated that earthquakes and volcanoes had aided the

clergy of southern countries in maintaining superstition,

and who had afterward defended this view with great

wealth of learning when it was attacked by a writer in the

``Edinburgh Review.''  Certainly this Santo Domingo

example was on the side of the historian.



Another day brought us to Vega, noted as the point

where Columbus reared his standard above the wonderful

interior valley of the island; and there we were welcomed,

as usual, by the officials, and, among them, by a tall, ascetic-

looking priest who spoke French.  Returning his call next

day, I was shown into his presence in a room utterly bare

of all ornament save a large and beautiful photograph of

the Cathedral of Tours.  It had happened to me, just after

my college days, to travel on foot through a large part of

northern, western, and middle France, especially interesting

myself in cathedral architecture; and as my eye caught

this photograph I said, ``Father, what a beautiful picture

you have of the Church of St. Gatien!''  The countenance

of the priest, who had at first received me very ceremoniously

and coldly, was instantly changed; he looked at me

for a moment, and then threw his arms about me.  It was

pathetic: of all who had ever entered his door I was

probably the only one who had recognized the picture of

the cathedral where he had been ordained; and, above all,

by a curious inspiration which I cannot to this hour

account for, I had recognized it by the name of the saint to

whom it is dedicated.  Why I did not speak of it simply

as the Cathedral of Tours I know not; how I came to

remember that it was dedicated to St. Gatien I know not--

but this fact evidently loosened the cords of the father's

heart, and during my stay at Vega he was devoted to me;

giving me information of the greatest value regarding

the people, their habits, their diseases, and the like, much

of which, up to that moment, the commission and its

subordinates had vainly endeavored to secure.



And here I recall one thing which struck me as

significant.  This ascetic French priest was very severe in

condemnation of the old Spanish priesthood of the island. 

When I asked him regarding the morals of the people he

answered, ``How can you expect good morals in them

when their pastors set such bad examples?''  It was

evident that the church authorities at Rome were of his

opinion; for in nearly every town I found not only a

jolly, kindly, easy-going old Spanish padre, surrounded

by ``nephews'' and ``nieces,'' but a more austere ecclesiastic

recently arrived from France or Italy.



In the impressions made upon me by this long and

tedious journey across the island, pleasure and pain were

constantly mingled.  On one hand was the wonderful

beauty of the scenery, the luxuriance of the vegetation,

and the bracing warmth of the climate, while the United

States were going through a winter more than usually

bitter.



But, on the other hand, the whole condition of the

country seemed to indicate that the early Spanish rulers had

left a curse upon it from which it had never recovered. 

Its inhabitants, in revolution after revolution, had

destroyed all industry and industrial appliances, and had

virtually eaten up each other; generation after generation

had thus been almost entirely destroyed.



Finally, after nearly a fortnight of clambering over

mountains, pushing through tropical thickets, fording

streams, and negotiating in palm huts, we approached the

sea; and suddenly, on the north side of the island, at the

top of the mountain back of Puerto Plata, we looked far

down upon its beautiful harbor, in the midst of which,

like a fly upon a mirror, lay our trim little frigate

Nantasket.



The vice-president of the republic, surrounded by the

representatives of the city, having welcomed us with the

usual speeches, we pushed forward to the vice-presidential

villa, where I was to be lodged.



Having no other dress with me than my traveler's outfit,

of which the main features were a flaming red flannel

shirt, a poncho, and a sombrero, and having been invited

to dine that evening at the house of my host, with the

various consuls and other leaders of the place, I ordered

two of my men to hurry down the mountain, and out to

the frigate, to bring in my leather trunk containing a

costume more worthy of the expected ceremony; and

hardly were we comfortably established under the roof of

the vice-president, when two sailors came in, bringing the

precious burden.



Now came a catastrophe.  Turning the key, I noticed

that the brass fittings of the lock were covered with verdigris,

and, as the trunk opened, I shrank back in horror.  It

was filled, apparently, with a mass of mossy white-and-

green mold from which cockroaches of enormous size

darted in all directions.



Hastily pulling down the cover, I called a council of

war; the main personages in it being my private secretary,

Professor Crane, since acting president of Cornell

University, and sundry of the more important men in the

expedition.  To these I explained the situation.  It seemed

bad enough to lose all means of presenting a suitable

appearance at the approaching festivity, but this was

nothing compared with the idea that I had requited the

hospitality of my host by spreading through his house this

hideous entomological collection.



But as I exposed this latter feature of the situation, I

noticed a smile coming over the faces of my Dominican

attendants, and presently one of them remarked that the

cockroaches I had brought would find plenty of companions;

that the house was doubtless already full of them. 

This was a great relief to my conscience.  The trunk was

removed, and presently the clothing, in which I was to

be arrayed for the evening, was brought in.  It seemed in

a fearful condition, but, curiously enough, while boots,

shoes, and, above all, a package of white gloves carefully

reserved for grand ceremonies, had been nearly devoured,

the garments of various sorts had escaped fairly

well.



The next thing in order being the preparation of my

apparel for use, the men proceeded first to deluge it with

carbolic acid; and then, after drying it on the balconies

in front of the vice-president's house, to mitigate the

invincible carbolic odor by copious drenchings of Florida

water.  All day long they were thus at work making

ready for the evening ceremony.  In due time it arrived; 

and, finally, after a sumptuous entertainment, I

stood before the assembled consuls and other magnates. 

Probably no one of them remembers a word of my

discourse; but doubtless every survivor will agree that no

speaker, before or since, ever made to him an appeal of

such pungency.  I pervaded the whole atmosphere of the

place; indeed, the town itself seemed to me, as long as I

remained in it, to reek of that strange mixture of carbolic

acid and Florida water; and as soon as possible after

reaching the ship, the contents of the trunk were thrown

overboard, and life became less a burden.



Having been duly escorted to the Nantasket, and

received heartily by Commander McCook, I was assigned

his own cabin, but soon thought it expedient to get out of

it and sleep on deck.  The fact was that the companions

of my cockroaches had possession of the ship, and, to all

appearance, their headquarters were in the captain's

room.  I therefore ordered my bed on deck; and, though

it was February, passed two delightful nights in that

balmy atmosphere of the tropical seas while we skirted

the north side of the island until, at Port-au-Prince, I

rejoined the other commissioners, who had come in the

Tennessee along the southern coast.



At the Haitian capital our commission had interviews

with the president, his cabinet, and others, and afterward

we had time to look about us.  Few things could be more

dispiriting.  The city had been burned again and again, and

there had arisen a tangle of streets displaying every sort

of cheap absurdity in architecture.  The effects of the

recent revolution--the latest in a long series of civic

convulsions, cruel and sterile--were evident on all sides.  On

the slope above the city had stood the former residence of

the French governor: it had been a beautiful palace, and,

being so far from the sea, had, until the recent revolution,

escaped unharmed; but during that last effort a squad

of miscreants, howling the praises of liberty, having got

possession of a small armed vessel in the harbor and found

upon it a rifled cannon of long range, had exercised their

monkeyish passion for destruction by wantonly firing

upon this beautiful structure.  It now lay in ruins.  In its

main staircase an iron ring was pointed out to us, and we

were given the following chronicle.



During the recent revolution the fugitive President

Salnave had been captured, a leathern thong had been

rudely drawn through a gash in his hand, and, attached

by this to a cavalryman, he had been dragged up the hill

to the palace, through the crowd which had but recently

hurrahed for him, but which now jeered and pelted him. 

Arriving upon the scene of his former glory, he was

attached by the thong to this iron ring and shot.



Opposite the palace was the ruin of a mausoleum, and

in the street were scattered fragments of marble

sarcophagi beautifully sculptured: these had contained the

bodies of former rulers, but the revolutionists of Haiti,

imitating those of 1793 in France, as apes imitate men,

had torn the corpses out of them and had then scattered

these, with the fragments of their monuments, through the

streets.



In the markets of the city we had ample experience

of the advantage arising from unlimited paper money. 

Successive governments had kept themselves afloat by new

issues of currency, until its purchasing power was reduced

almost to nothing.  Preposterous sums were demanded for

the simplest articles: hundreds of dollars for a basket of

fruit, and thousands of dollars for a straw hat.



With us as one of our secretaries was Frederick

Douglass, the gifted son of an eminent Virginian and a slave

woman,--one of the two or three most talented men of color I

have ever known.  Up to this time he had cherished many

hopes that his race, if set free, would improve; but it was

evident that this experience in Santo Domingo discouraged

and depressed him.  He said to one of us, ``If this is

the outcome of self-government by my race, Heaven help us!''



Another curious example bearing on the same subject

was furnished us in Jamaica, whither we went after leav-

ing Haiti.  Our wish was to consult, on our way home, the

former president of the Haitian republic, Geffrard,--

who was then living in exile near Kingston.  We found

him in a beautiful apartment, elegantly furnished; and in

every way he seemed superior to the officials whom we

had met at Port-au-Prince.  He was a light mulatto,

intelligent, quiet, dignified, and able to state his views

without undue emphasis.  His wife was very agreeable, and

his daughter, though clearly of a melancholic temperament,

one of the most beautiful young women I have ever

seen.  The reason for her melancholy was evident to any

one who knew her father's history.  He had gone through

many political storms before he had fled from Haiti, and

in one of these his enemies had fired through the windows

of his house and killed his other daughter.



He calmly discussed with us the condition of the island,

and evidently believed that the only way to save it from

utter barbarism was to put it under the control of some

civilized power.



Interesting as were his opinions, he and his family, as

we saw them in their daily life, were still more so.  It

was a revelation to us all of what the colored race might

become in a land where it is under no social ban.  For

generations he and his had been the equals of the best

people they had met in France and in Haiti; they had

been guests at the dinners of ministers and at the soir<e'>es

of savants in the French capital; there was nothing about

them of that deprecatory sort which one sees so constantly

in men and women with African blood in their veins in

lands where their race has recently been held in servitude.



And here I may again cite the case of President Baez--

a man to whom it probably never occurred that he was not

the equal socially of the best men he met, and who in any

European country would be at once regarded as a man

of mark, and welcomed at any gathering of notables.



Among our excursions, while in Jamaica, was one to

Spanish Town, the residence of the British governor. 

In the drawing-room of His Excellency's wife there was

shown us one rather curious detail.  Not long before our

visit, the legislature had been abolished and the island

had been made a crown colony ruled by a royal governor

and council; therefore it was that, there being no further

use for it, the gorgeous chair of ``Mr. Speaker,'' a huge

construction apparently of carved oak, had been transferred

to her ladyship's drawing-room, and we were informed

that in this she received her guests.



From Kingston we came to Key West, and from that

point to Charleston, where, as our frigate was too large to

cross the bar, we were taken off, and thence reached

Washington by rail.



One detail regarding those latter days of our

commission is perhaps worthy of record as throwing light on a

seamy side of American life.  From first to last we had

shown every possible civility to the representatives of the

press who had accompanied us on the frigate, constantly

taking them with us in Santo Domingo and elsewhere,

and giving them every facility for collecting information. 

But from time to time things occurred which threw a new

and somewhat unpleasant light on the way misinformation

is liberally purveyed to the American public.  One day

one of these gentlemen, the representative of a leading

New York daily, talking with me of the sort of news his

paper required, said, ``The managers of our paper don't

care for serious information, such as particulars regarding

the country we visit, its inhabitants, etc., etc.; what they

want, above all, is something of a personal nature, such as

a quarrel or squabble, and when one occurs they expect us

to make the most of it.''



I thought no more of this until I arrived at Port-au-

Prince, where I found that this gentleman had suddenly

taken the mail-steamer for New York on the plea of urgent

business.  The real cause of his departure was soon

apparent.  His letters to the paper he served now began

to come back to us, and it was found that he had exercised

his imagination vigorously.  He had presented a

mass of sensational inventions, but his genius had been

especially exercised in trumping up quarrels which had

never taken place; his masterpiece being an account of a

bitter struggle between Senator Wade and myself.  As

a matter of fact, there had never been between us the

slightest ill-feeling; the old senator had been like a father

to me from first to last.



The same sort of thing was done by sundry other press

prostitutes, both during our stay in the West Indies and

at Washington; but I am happy to say that several of the

correspondents were men who took their duties seriously,

and really rendered a service to the American public by

giving information worth having.



Our journey from Charleston to Washington had one

episode perhaps worthy of recording, as showing a peculiarity

of local feeling at that time.  Through all the long

day we had little or nothing to eat, and looked forward

ravenously to the dinner on board the Potomac steamer. 

But on reaching it and entering the dining-room, we found

that our secretary, Mr. Frederick Douglass, was absolutely

refused admittance.  He, a man who had dined

with the foremost statesmen and scholars of our Northern

States and of Europe,--a man who by his dignity, ability,

and elegant manners was fit to honor any company,--was,

on account of his light tinge of African blood, not thought

fit to sit at meat with the motley crowd on a Potomac

steamer.  This being the case, Dr. Howe and myself

declined to dine, and so reached Washington, about

midnight, almost starving, thus experiencing, at a low price,

the pangs and glories of martyrdom.



One discovery made by the commission on its return

ought to be mentioned here, for the truth of history.  Mr.

Sumner, in his speeches before the Senate, had made a

strong point by contrasting the conduct of the United

States with that of Spain toward Santo Domingo.  He

had insisted that the conduct of Spain had been far more

honorable than that of the United States; that Spain had

brought no pressure to bear upon the Dominican republic;

that when Santo Domingo had accepted Spanish rule,

some years before, it had done so of its own free will; and

that ``not a single Spanish vessel was then in its waters,

nor a single Spanish sailor upon its soil.''  On the other

hand, he insisted that the conduct of the United States had

been the very opposite of this; that it had brought pressure

to bear upon the little island republic; and that when

the decision was made in favor of our country, there were

American ships off the coast and American soldiers upon

the island.  To prove this statement, he read from a speech

of the Spanish prime minister published in the official

paper of the Spanish government at Madrid.  To our

great surprise, we found, on arriving at the island, that

this statement was not correct; that when the action in

favor of annexation to Spain took place, Spanish ships

were upon the coast and Spanish soldiers upon the

island; and that there had been far more appearance

of pressure at that time than afterward, when the little

republic sought admission to the American Union.  One

of our first efforts, therefore, on returning, was to

find a copy of this official paper, for the purpose of

discovering how it was that the leader of the Spanish

ministry had uttered so grave an untruth.  The Spanish

newspaper was missing from the library of Congress;

but at last Dr. Howe, the third commissioner, a life-

long and deeply attached friend of Mr. Sumner, found it

in the library of the senator.  The passage which Mr.

Sumner had quoted was carefully marked; it was simply

to the effect that when the FIRST proceedings looking toward

annexation to Spain were initiated, there were no Spanish

ships in those waters, nor Spanish soldiers on shore.  This

was, however, equally true of the United States; for when

proceedings were begun in Santo Domingo looking to

annexation, there was not an American ship off the coast, nor

an American soldier on the island.



But the painful thing in the matter was that, had Mr

Sumner read the sentence immediately following that

which he quoted, it would have shown simply and distinctly

that his contention was unfounded; that, at the time

when the annexation proceedings WERE formally initiated

and accomplished, there were Spanish ships off those

shores and Spanish soldiers on the island.



I recall vividly the deep regret expressed at the time by

Dr. Howe that his friend Senator Sumner had been so

bitter in his opposition to the administration that he had

quoted the first part of the Spanish minister's speech and

suppressed the second part.  It was clear that if Mr. Sumner

had read the whole passage to the Senate it would have

shown that the conduct of the United States had not been

less magnanimous than that of Spain in the matter, and

that no argument whatever against the administration

could be founded upon its action in sending ships and

troops to the island.



In drawing up our report after our arrival, an amicable

difference of opinion showed itself.  Senator Wade, being

a ``manifest-destiny'' man, wished it expressly to recommend

annexation; Dr. Howe, in his anxiety to raise the

status of the colored race, took a similar view; but I

pointed out to them the fact that Congress had asked, not

for a recommendation, but for facts; that to give them

advice under such circumstances was to expose ourselves to a

snub, and could bring no good to any cause which any of

us might wish to serve; and I stated that if the general

report contained recommendations, I must be allowed to

present one simply containing facts.



The result was that we united in the document presented,

which is a simple statement of facts, and which, as

I believe, remains to this day the best general account of

the resources of Santo Domingo.



The result of our report was what I had expected.  The

Spanish part of that island is of great value from an

agricultural and probably from a mining point of view.  Its

valleys being swept by the trade-winds, its mountain slopes

offer to a white population summer retreats like those

afforded by similar situations to the British occupants of

India.  In winter it might also serve as a valuable

sanatorium.  I remember well the answer made to me by a man

from Maine, who had brought his family to the neighborhood

of Samana Bay in order to escape the rigors of the

New England winter.  On my asking him about the diseases

prevalent in his neighborhood, he said that his entire

household had gone through a light acclimating fever, but

he added:  ``We have all got through it without harm; and

on looking the whole matter over, I am persuaded that, if

you were to divide the people of any New England State

into two halves, leaving one half at home and sending the

other half here, there would in ten years be fewer deaths in

the half sent here, from all the diseases of this country,

than in the half left in New England, from consumption 

alone.''



A special element in the question of annexation was the

value of the harbor of Samana in controlling one of the

great passages from Europe to the Isthmus.  It is large

enough to hold any fleet, is protected by a mountain-range

from the northern winds, is easily fortified, and is the

natural outlet of the largest and most fertile valley in the

islands.  More than this, if the experiment of annexing an

outlying possession was to be tried, that was, perhaps, the

best of opportunities, since the resident population to be

assimilated was exceedingly small.



But the people of the United States, greatly as they

honored General Grant, and much as they respected his

recommendations, could not take his view.  They evidently

felt that, with the new duties imposed upon them

by the vast number of men recently set free and admitted

to suffrage in the South, they had quite enough to do

without assuming the responsibility of governing and

developing this new region peopled by blacks and mulattos;

and as a result of this very natural feeling the whole

proposal was dropped, and will doubtless remain in abeyance

until the experiments in dealing with Porto Rico

and the Philippines shall have shown the people of the

United States whether there is any place for such

dependencies under our system.







CHAPTER XXIX



AS COMMISSIONER TO THE PARIS EXPOSITION OF 1878



My next experience was of a quasi-diplomatic sort, in

connection with the Paris Exposition of 1878, and

it needs some preface.



During the Centennial Exposition of 1876 at Philadelphia,

I had been appointed upon the educational jury, and,

as the main part of the work came during the university

long vacation, had devoted myself to it, and had thus been

brought into relations with some very interesting men.



Of these may be named, at the outset, the Emperor Dom

Pedro of Brazil.  I first saw him in a somewhat curious

way.  He had landed at New York in the morning, and

early in the afternoon he appeared with the Empress and

their gentlemen and ladies in waiting at Booth's Theater. 

The attraction was Shakspere's ``Henry V,'' and no sooner

was he seated in his box than he had his Shakspere open

before him.  Being in an orchestra stall, I naturally

observed him from time to time, and at one passage light

was thrown upon his idea of his duties as a monarch.  The

play was given finely, by the best American company of

recent years, and he was deeply absorbed in it.  But

presently there came the words of King Henry--the noted

passage:



   ``And what have kings, that privates have not too,

     Save ceremony, save general ceremony?

     And what art thou, thou idol ceremony?''



Whereupon the Emperor and Empress, evidently moved

by the same impression, turned their heads from the stage,

looked significantly at each other, and his majesty very

earnestly nodded to his wife several times, as if

thoroughly assenting.



The feeling thus betrayed was undoubtedly sincere.  His

real love was for science, literature, and art; but above

all for science.  Some years before, at the founding of

Cornell University, Agassiz had shown me private letters

from him revealing his knowledge of natural history, and

the same thirst for knowledge which he showed then was

evident now.  From dawn till dusk he was hard at work,

visiting places of interest and asking questions which,

as various eminent authorities both in the United States

and France have since assured me, showed that he kept

himself well abreast of the most recent scientific

investigations.



On the following morning he invited me to call upon

him, and on my doing so, he saluted me with a multitude

of questions regarding our schools, colleges, and universities,

which I answered as best I could, though many of

them really merited more time than could be given during

a morning interview.  His manner was both impressive

and winning.  He had clearly thought much on educational

problems, and no man engaged in educational work could

fail to be stimulated by his questions and comments.  In

his manner there was nothing domineering or assuming. 

I saw him at various times afterward, and remember

especially his kindly and perfectly democratic manner at

a supper given by the late Mr. Drexel of Philadelphia,

when he came among us, moving from group to group,

recognizing here one old friend and there another, and

discussing with each some matter of value.



Republican as I am, it is clear to me that his

constitutional sovereignty was a government far more free,

liberal, and, indeed, republican, than the rule of the

demagogue despots who afterward drove him from his throne

ever has been or ever will be.



Another very interesting person was a Spanish officer,

Don Juan Marin, who has since held high commands both

in his own country and in the West Indies.  We were upon

the same jury, and I came to admire him much.  One day,

as we sat in our committee-room discussing various subjects

brought before us, there appeared in the street leading

to the main entrance of the grounds a large body

of soldiers with loud drumming and fifing.  On his asking

what troops these were, I answered that they were

the most noted of our American militia regiments--the

New York Seventh; and on his expressing a wish to see

them, we both walked out for that purpose.  Presently

the gates were thrown open, and in marched the regiment,

trim and brisk, bearing aloft the flag of the United

States and the standard of the State of New York.



At the moment when the standard and flag were abreast

of us, Colonel Marin, who was in civil dress, drew himself

up, removed his hat, and bowed low with simple dignity. 

The great crowd, including myself, were impressed by this

action.  It had never occurred to any one of the rest of us

to show such a tribute to the flag under which so many

good and true men had fought and died for us; and, as one

of the crowd very justly remarked afterward, ``The Spaniard

cheapened the whole lot of us.''  With a single exception,

it was the finest exhibition of manners I have ever

seen.[11]





[11] See the chapter on my attach<e'>ship in Russia.





Still another delegate was Professor Levasseur, of the

College of France and the French Institute.  His quickness

in ascertaining what was of value in a politico-economical

view, and his discussions of geographical matters,

interested and instructed all who had to do with him.



With him was R<e'>n<e'> Millet, an example of the most

attractive qualities of a serious Frenchman--qualities

which have since been recognized in his appointments as

minister and ambassador to Sweden and to Tunis.  Both

these gentlemen afterward made me visits at Cornell

which I greatly enjoyed.



At this time, too, I made a friendship which became

precious to me--that of Gardner Hubbard, one of the

best, truest, and most capable men, in whatever he undertook,

that I have ever seen.  The matter which interested

him then has since interested the world.  His son-in-law

Mr. Alexander Graham Bell, was exhibiting what appeared

to be a toy,--a toy which on one occasion he

showed to Dom Pedro and to others of us, and which

enabled us to hear in one of the buildings of the exposition a

violin played in another building.  It was regarded as

an interesting plaything, and nothing more.  A controlling

right in its use might have been bought for a very moderate

sum--yet it was the beginning of the telephone!



In connection with these and other interesting men, I

had devoted myself to the educational exhibits of the

exposition; and the result was that, during the following

year, I was appointed by the Governor of the State of

New York one of two honorary commissioners to the Paris

Exposition; the other being Mr. Morton, afterward Minister

to France, Vice-President of the United States, and

Governor of the State of New York.



I was not inclined, at first, to take my appointment very

seriously, but went to Paris simply to visit the exposition,

hoping that my honorary function would give me good

opportunities.  But on arriving I found the commissioner-

general of the United States, Governor McCormick, hard

pressed by his duties, and looking about for help.  A large

number of regular commissioners had been appointed, but

very few of them were of the slightest use.  Hardly one

of them could speak French, and very few of them really

took any interest in the duties assigned them.  The main

exception, a very noble one, was my old friend President

Barnard of Columbia College, and he had not yet arrived. 

Under these circumstances, I yielded to the earnest

request of Governor McCormick and threw myself heartily

into the work of making our part of the exposition a

success.



The American representation at the Vienna Exposition

a few years before had resulted in a scandal which had

resounded through Europe, and this scandal had arisen

from the fact that a subordinate, who had gained the

confidence of our excellent commissioner-general at that post,

had been charged, and to all appearance justly, with

receiving money for assigning privileges to bar-keepers

and caterers.  The result was that the commissioner-general

was cruelly wounded, and that finally he and his

associates were ignominiously removed, and the American

minister to Austria put in his place until a new commission

could be formed.  Of course every newspaper in Europe

hostile to republican ideas, and they were very many,

made the most of this catastrophe.  One of them in Vienna

was especially virulent; it called attention to the model

of an American school-house in the exposition, and said

that ``it should be carefully observed as part of the

machinery which trains up such mercenary wretches as have

recently disgraced humanity at the exposition.''



To avoid scandals, to negotiate with the French

commissioners on one side, and the crowd of exhibitors on

the other, and especially to see that in all particulars the

representatives of American industry were fully recognized,

was a matter of much difficulty; but happily all

turned out well.



Among the duties of my position was membership of the

upper jury--that which, in behalf of the French Republic,

awarded the highest prizes.  Each day, at about nine in

the morning, we met, and a remarkable body it was.  At

my right sat Meissonier, then the most eminent of French

painters, and beyond him Quintana, the Spanish poet.  Of

the former of these two I possess a curious memento.  He

was very assiduous in attendance at our sessions, and the

moment he took his seat he always began drawing, his

materials being the block of letter-paper and the pencils,

pens, and ink lying before him.  No matter what was

under discussion, he kept on with his drawing.  While

he listened, and even while he talked, his pencil or pen

continued moving over the paper.  He seemed to bring

every morning a mass of new impressions caught during

his walk to the exposition, which he made haste to trans-

fer to paper.  Sometimes he used a pencil, sometimes, a

quill pen, and not infrequently he would plunge the

feather end of the quill into his inkstand and rapidly put

into his work broader and blacker strokes.  As soon as

he had finished a drawing he generally tore it into bits

and threw them upon the floor, but occasionally he would

fold the sketches carefully and put them into his pocket. 

This being the case, no one dared ask him for one of them.



But one morning his paper gave out, and for lack of it

he took up a boxwood paper-knife lying near and began

work on it.  First he decorated the handle in a sort of

rococo way, and then dashed off on the blade, with his pen,

a very spirited head--a bourgeois physiognomy somewhat

in Gavarni's manner.  But as he could not tear the

paper-knife into bits, and did not care to take it away, he

left it upon the table.  This was my chance.  Immediately

after the session I asked the director-general to allow me

to carry it off as a souvenir; he assented heartily, and so

I possess a picture which I saw begun, continued, and

ended by one of the greatest of French painters.



At my left was Tresca, director of the French National

Conservatory of Arts and Trades; and next him, the

sphinx of the committee--the most silent man I ever saw

the rector of the Portuguese University of Coimbra.  During

the three months of our session no one of us ever

heard him utter a word.  Opposite was Jules Simon, eminent

as an orator, philosopher, scholar, and man of letters;

an academician who had held positions in various cabinets,

and had even been prime minister of the republic. 

On one side of him was Tullo Massarani, a senator of the

Italian kingdom, eminent as a writer on the philosophy of

art; on the other, Boussingault, one of the foremost chemists

of the century; and near him, Wischniegradsky, director

of the Imperial Technical Institute at Moscow, whom I

afterward came to know as minister of finance at St.

Petersburg.  Each afternoon we devoted to examining the

greater exhibits which were to come before us in competition

for the grands prix on the following morning.



At one of our sessions a curious difficulty arose.  The

committee on the award of these foremost prizes for

advanced work in electricity brought in their report, and, to

my amazement, made no award to my compatriot Edison,

who was then at the height of his reputation.  Presently

Tresca, who read the report, and who really lamented the

omission, whispered to me the reason of it.  Through the

negligence of persons representing Edison, no proper

exhibition of his inventions had been made to the committee. 

They had learned that his agent was employed in showing

the phonograph in a distant hall on the boulevards to

an audience who paid an admission fee; but, although they

had tried two or three times to have his apparatus shown

them, they had been unsuccessful, until at last, from a

feeling of what was due their own self-respect, they passed

the matter over entirely.  Of course my duty was to do

what was possible in rectifying this omission, and in as

good French as I could muster I made a speech in Edison's

behalf, describing his career, outlining his work,

and saying that I should really be ashamed to return to

America without some recognition of him and of his

inventions.  This was listened to most courteously, but my

success was insured by a remark of a less serious character,

which was that if Edison had not yet made a sufficient

number of inventions to entitle him to a grand prize,

he would certainly, at the rate he was going on, have done

so before the close of the exposition.  At this there was a

laugh, and my amendment was unanimously carried.



Many features in my work interested me, but one had

a melancholy tinge.  One afternoon, having been summoned

to pass upon certain competing works in sculpture,

we finally stood before the great bronze entrance-

doors of the Cathedral of Strasburg, which, having been

designed before the Franco-Prussian War, had but just

been finished.  They were very beautiful; but I could see

that my French associates felt deeply the changed situation

of affairs which this exhibit brought to their minds.



In order to promote the social relations which go for

so much at such times, I had taken the large apartment

temporarily relinquished by our American minister,

Governor Noyes of Ohio, in the Avenue Josephine; and there,

at my own table, brought together from time to time a

considerable number of noted men from various parts of

Europe.  Perhaps the most amusing occurrence during

the series of dinners I then gave was the meeting between

Story, the American sculptor at Rome, and Judge Brady

of New York.  For years each had been taken for the other,

in various parts of the world, but they had never met. 

In fact, so common was it for people to mistake one for

the other that both had, as a rule, ceased to explain the

mistake.  I was myself present with Story on one occasion

when a gentleman came up to him, saluted him as Judge

Brady, and asked him about their friends in New York: 

Story took no trouble to undeceive his interlocutor, but

remarked that, so far as he knew, they were all well, and

ended the interview with commonplaces.



These two Dromios evidently enjoyed meeting, and

nothing could be more amusing than their accounts of

various instances in which each had been mistaken for the

other.  Each had a rich vein of humor, and both presented

the details of these occurrences with especial zest.



Another American, of foreign birth, was not quite so

charming.  He was a man of value in his profession; but

his desire for promotion outran his discretion.  Having

served as juror at the Vienna Exposition, he had now

been appointed to a similar place in Paris; and after one

of my dinners he came up to a group in which there were

two or three members of the French cabinet, and said: 

``Mr. Vite, I vish you vould joost dell dese zhentlemen vat

I am doing vor Vrance.  I vas on de dasting gommittee

for vines und peers at Vien, and it 'most killed me; and

now I am here doing de same duty, and my stomach has

nearly gone pack on me.  Tell dese zhentlemen dat de

French Government zurely ought to gonfer ubon me de

Legion of Honor.''  This was spoken with the utmost

seriousness, and was embarrassing, since, of all subjects,

that which a French minister least wishes to discuss

publicly is the conferring of the red ribbon.



Embarrassing also was the jubilation of some of our

American exhibitors at our celebration of the Fourth of

July in the Bois de Boulogne.  Doubtless they were

excellent citizens, but never was there a better

exemplification of Dr. Arnold's saying that ``a traveller is a

self-constituted outlaw.''  A generous buffet had been

provided, after the French fashion, with a sufficiency of

viands and whatever wine was needed.  To my amazement,

these men, who at home were most of them, probably,

steady-going ``temperance men,'' were so overcome with

the idea that champagne was to be served ad libitum, that

the whole thing came near degenerating into an orgy.  A

European of the same rank, accustomed to drinking wine

moderately with his dinner, would have simply taken a

glass or two and thought no more of it; but these gentlemen

seemed to see in it the occasion of their lives.  Bottles

were seized and emptied, glass after glass, down the

throats of my impulsive fellow-citizens: in many cases

a bottle and more to a man.  Then came the worst of it. 

It had been arranged that speeches should be made under

a neighboring tent by leading members of the French

cabinet who had accepted invitations to address us.  But

when they proceeded to do this difficulties arose.  A number

of our compatriots, unduly exhilarated, and understanding

little that was said, first applauded on general

principles, but at the wrong places, and finally broke out

into apostrophes such as ``Speak English, old boy!'' 

``Talk Yankee fashion!''  ``Remember the glorious

Fourth!''  ``Give it to the British!''  ``Make the eagle

scream!'' and the like.  The result was that we were

obliged to make most earnest appeals to these gentlemen,

begging them not to disgrace our country; and, finally, the

proceedings were cut short.



Nor was this the end.  As I came down the Champs

<E'>lys<e'>es afterward, I met several groups of these

patriots, who showed by their walk and conversation that

they were decidedly the worse for their celebration of the

day; and the whole thing led me to reflect seriously on the

drink problem, and to ask whether our American solution

of it is the best.  I have been present at many large

festive assemblages, in various parts of Europe, where wine

was offered freely as a matter of course; but never have

I seen anything to approach this performance of my

countrymen.  I have been one of four thousand people at

the H<o^>tel de Ville in Paris on the occasion of a great

ball, at other entertainments almost as large in other

Continental countries, and at dinner parties innumerable

in every European country; but never, save in one

instance, were the festivities disturbed by any man on

account of drink.



The most eminent of American temperance advocates

during my young manhood, Mr. Delavan, insisted that he

found Italy, where all people, men, women, and children,

drink wine with their meals, if they can get it, the most

temperate country he had ever seen; and, having made

more than twelve different sojourns in Italy, I can confirm

that opinion.



So, too, again and again, when traveling in the old days

on the top of a diligence through village after village in

France, where the people were commemorating the patron

saint of their district, I have passed through crowds of

men, women, and children seated by the roadside drinking

wine, cider, and beer, and, so far as one could see, there

was no drunkenness; certainly none of the squalid, brutal,

swinish sort.  It may indeed be said that, in spite of light

stimulants, drunkenness has of late years increased in

France, especially among artisans and day laborers.  If

this be so, it comes to strengthen my view.  For the main

reason will doubtless be found in the increased prices of

light wines, due to vine diseases and the like, which have

driven the poorer classes to seek far more noxious beverages.



So, too, in Germany.  Like every resident in that

country, I have seen great crowds drinking much beer,

and, though I greatly dislike that sort of guzzling, I never

saw anything of the beastly, crazy, drunken exhibitions

which are so common on Independence Day and county-

fair day in many American towns where total abstinence is

loudly preached and ostensibly practised.  Least of all do

I admire the beer-swilling propensities of the German

students, and still I must confess that I have never seen

anything so wild, wicked, outrageous, and destructive to soul

and body as the drinking of distilled liquors at bars

which, in my student days, I saw among American students. 

But I make haste to say that within the last twenty

or thirty years American students have improved immensely

in this respect.  Athletics and greater interest in

study, caused by the substitution of the students' own

aims and tastes for the old cast-iron curriculum, are

doubtless the main reasons for this improvement.[12]





[12] Further reasons for this improvement I have endeavored to

give more in detail elsewhere.





Yet, in spite of this redeeming thing, the fact remains

that one of the greatest curses of American life is the

dram-drinking of distilled liquors at bars; and one key of

the whole misery is the American habit of ``treating,''--a

habit unknown in other countries.  For example, in America,

if Tom, Dick, and Harry happen to meet at a hotel,

or in the street, to discuss politics or business, Tom

invites Dick and Harry to drink with him, which, in

accordance with the code existing among large classes of

our fellow-citizens, Dick and Harry feel bound to do. 

After a little more talk Dick invites Harry and Tom to

drink; they feel obliged to accept; and finally Harry

invites Tom and Dick, with like result; so that these three

men have poured down their throats several glasses of

burning stimulants, perhaps in the morning, perhaps just

before the midday meal, or at some other especially

unsuitable time, with results more or less injurious to each

of them, physically and morally.



The European, more sensible, takes with his dinner,

as a rule, a glass or two of wine or beer, and is little, if

at all, the worse for it.  If he ever takes any distilled

liquor, he sips a very small glass of it after his dinner,

to aid digestion.



It is my earnest conviction, based upon wide observation

in my own country as well as in many others during

about half a century, that the American theory and practice

as regards the drink question are generally more

pernicious than those of any other civilized nation.  I

am not now speaking of TOTAL ABSTINENCE--of that, more

presently.  But the best TEMPERANCE workers among us

that I know are the men who brew light, pure beer, and

the vine-growers in California who raise and sell at a very

low price wines pleasant and salutary, if any wines can be so.



As to those who have no self-restraint, beer and wine,

like many other things, promote the ``survival of the

fittest,'' and are, like many other things, ``fool-killers,''

aiding to free the next generation from men of vicious

propensities and weak will.



I repeat it, the curse of American social life, among a

very considerable class of our people, is ``perpendicular

drinking''--that is, the pouring down of glass after glass

of distilled spirits, mostly adulterated, at all sorts of

inopportune times, and largely under the system of ``treating.''



The best cure for this, in my judgment, would be for

States to authorize and local authorities to adopt the

``Swedish system,'' which I found doing excellent service

at Gothenburg in Sweden a few years since, and

which I am sorry to see the fanatics there have recently

wrecked.  Under this plan the various towns allowed a

company to open a certain number of clean, tidy drinking-

places; obliged them to purchase pure liquors; forbade

them, under penalties, to sell to any man who had already

taken too much; made it also obligatory to sell something

to eat at the same time with something to drink; and, best

of all, restricted the profits of these establishments to a

moderate percentage,--seven or eight per cent., if I re-

member rightly,--all the surplus receipts going to public

purposes, and especially to local charities.  The main point

was that the men appointed to dispense the drinks had no

motive to sell adulterated drinks, or any more liquor than

was consistent with the sobriety of the customer.



I may add that, in my opinion, the worst enemies of real

temperance in America, as in other countries, have been

the thoughtless screamers against intemperance, who have

driven vast numbers of their fellow-citizens to drink in

secret or at bars.  Of course I shall have the honor of

being railed at and denounced by every fanatic who reads

these lines, but from my heart I believe them true.



I remember that some of these people bitterly attacked

Governor Stanford of California for the endowment of

Stanford University, in part, from the rent of his vineyards. 

People who had not a word to say against one

theological seminary for accepting the Daniel Drew

endowment, or against another for accepting the Jay Gould

endowment, were horrified that the Stanford University

should receive revenue from a vineyard.  The vineyards

of California, if their product were legally protected from

adulteration, could be made one of the most potent influences

against drunkenness that our country has seen.  The

California wines are practically the only pure wines

accessible to Americans.  They are so plentiful that there is

no motive to adulterate them, and their use among those

of us who are so unwise as to drink anything except water

ought to be effectively advocated as supplanting the

drinking of beer poisoned with strychnine, whisky poisoned

with fusel-oil, and ``French claret'' poisoned with

salicylic acid and aniline.



The true way to supplant the ``saloon'' and the barroom,

as regards working-men who obey their social instincts

by seeking something in the nature of a club, and

therefore resorting to places where stimulants are sold,

is to take the course so ably advocated by Bishop Potter:

namely, to furnish places of refreshment and amusement

which shall be free from all tendency to beastliness, and

which, with cheerful open fireplaces, games of various

sorts, good coffee and tea, and, if necessary, light beer

and wine, shall be more attractive than the ``saloons''

and ``dives'' which are doing our country such vast harm.



My advice to all men is to drink nothing but water. 

That is certainly the wisest way for nine men out of ten

--and probably for all ten.  Indeed, one reason why

the great body of our people accomplish so much more in

a given time than those of any other country, and why the

average American working-man ``catches on'' and ``gits

thar'' more certainly and quickly than a man of the same

sort in any other country (and careful comparison between

various other countries and our own has shown that

this is the case), is that a much larger proportion of our

people do not stupefy themselves with stimulants.



In what I have said above I have had in view the

problem as it really stands: namely, the existence of a very

large number of people who WILL have stimulants of

some kind.  In such cases common sense would seem to

dictate that, in the case of those who persist in using

distilled liquors, something ought to be done to substitute

those which are pure for those which are absolutely

poisonous and maddening; and, in the case of those who

merely seek a mild stimulant, to substitute for distilled

liquors light fermented beverages; and, in the case of

those who seek merely recreation after toil, to substitute

for beverages which contain alcohol, light beverages like

coffee, tea, and chocolate.



This is a long digression, but liberavi animam meam,

and now I return to my main subject.



The American commissioners were treated with great

kindness by the French authorities.  There were exceedingly

interesting receptions by various ministers, and at

these one met the men best worth knowing in France:

the men famous in science, literature, and art, who redeem

France from the disgrace heaped upon her by the wretched

creatures who most noisily represent her through sensational

newspapers.



Of the men who impressed me most was Henri Martin,

the eminent historian.  He discussed with me the history

of France in a way which aroused many new trains of

thought.  Jules Simon, eminent both as a scholar and a

statesman, did much for me.  On one occasion he took

me about Paris, showing me places of special interest

connected with the more striking scenes of the Revolutionary

period; on another, he went with me to the distribution of

prizes at the French Academy--a most striking scene;

and on still another he piloted me through his beautiful

library, pointing out various volumes in which were

embedded bullets which the communards had fired through

his windows from the roof of the Madeleine just opposite.



Another interesting experience was a breakfast with the

eminent chemist Sainte-Claire Deville, at which I met

Pasteur, who afterward took me through his laboratories,

where he was then making some of his most important

experiments.  In one part of his domain there were cages

containing dogs, and on my asking about them he said

that he was beginning a course of experiments bearing

on the causes and cure of hydrophobia.  Nothing could be

more simple and modest than this announcement of one

of the most fruitful investigations ever made.



Visits to various institutions of learning interested me

much, among these a second visit to the Agricultural

College at Grignon and the wonderful Conservatoire des Arts

et M<e'>tiers, which gave me new ideas for the similar

departments at Cornell, and a morning at the <E'>cole Normale,

where I saw altogether the best teaching of a Latin classic

that I have ever known.  As I heard Professor Desjardins

discussing with his class one of Cicero's letters in the

light of modern monuments in the Louvre and of recent

archaeological discoveries, I longed to be a boy again.



Among the statesmen whom I met at that time in France,

a strong impression was made upon me by one who had

played a leading part in the early days of Napoleon III,

but who was at this time living in retirement, M. Drouyn

de Lhuys.  He had won distinction as minister of foreign 

affairs, but, having retired from politics, had given

himself up in his old age to various good enterprises,

among these, to the great Reform School at Mettray. 

This he urged me to visit, and, although it was at a

considerable distance from Paris, I took his advice, and was

much interested in it.  The school seemed to me well

deserving thorough study by all especially interested in the

problem of crime in our own country.



There is in France a system under which, when any

young man is evidently going all wrong,--squandering his

patrimony and bringing his family into disgrace,--a family

council can be called, with power to place the wayward

youth under restraint; and here, in one part of the

Mettray establishment, were rooms in which such youths were

detained in accordance with the requests of family councils. 

It appeared that some had derived benefit from these

detentions, for there were shown me one or two letters

from them: one, indeed, written by a young man on the

bottom of a drawer, and intended for the eye of his successor

in the apartment, which was the most contrite yet

manly appeal I have ever read.



Another man of great eminence whom I met in those

days was Thiers.  I was taken by an old admirer of

his to his famous house in the Place St. Georges, and

there found him, in the midst of his devotees, receiving

homage.



He said but little, and that little was commonplace; but

I was not especially disappointed: my opinion of him was

made up long before, and time has but confirmed it.  The

more I have considered his doings as minister or

parliamentarian, and the more I have read his works, whether

his political pamphlet known as the ``History of the

French Revolution,'' which did so much to arouse sterile

civil struggles, or his ``History of the Consulate and of the

Empire,'' which did so much to revive the Napoleonic

legend, or his speeches under the constitutional monarchy

of Louis Philippe, under the Republic, and under the Second

Empire, which did so much to promote confusion and

anarchy, the less I admire him.  He seems to me eminently

an architect of ruin.



It is true that when France was wallowing in the misery

into which he and men like him had done so much to

plunge her, he exerted himself wonderfully to accomplish

her rescue; but when the history of that country during

the last century shall be fairly written, his career, brilliant

as it once appeared, will be admired by no thinking patriot.



I came to have far more respect for another statesman

whom I then met--Duruy, the eminent historian of

France and of Rome, who had labored so earnestly under

the Second Empire, both as a historian and a minister of

state, to develop a basis for rational liberty.



Seated next me at dinner, he made a remark which

threw much light on one of the most serious faults of the

French Republic.  Said he, ``Monsieur, I was minister of

public instruction under the Empire for seven years; since

my leaving that post six years have elapsed, and in that

time I have had seven successors.''



On another occasion he discoursed with me about the

special difficulties of France; and as I mentioned to him

that I remembered his controversy with Cardinal de

Bonnechose, in which the latter tried to drive him out of

office because he did not fetter scientific teaching in the

University of Paris, he spoke quite freely with me.  Although

not at all a radical, and evidently willing to act

in concert with the church as far as possible, he gave

me to understand that the demands made by ecclesiastics

upon every French ministry were absolutely unendurable;

that France never could yield to these demands; and that,

sooner or later, a great break must come between the

church and modern society.  His prophecy now seems

nearing fulfilment.



Among the various meetings which were held in

connection with the exposition was a convention of literary

men for the purpose of securing better international

arrangements regarding copyright.  Having been elected

a member of this, I had the satisfaction of hearing most

interesting speeches from Victor Hugo, Tourgueneff, and

Edmond About.  The latter made the best speech of all,

and by his exquisite wit and pleasing humor fully showed

his right to the name which his enemies had given him--

``the Voltaire of the nineteenth century.''



The proceedings of this convention closed with a banquet

over which Victor Hugo presided; and of all the trying

things in my life, perhaps the most so was the speech

which I then attempted in French, with Victor Hugo looking

at me.



There were also various educational congresses at the

Sorbonne, in which the discussions interested me much;

but sundry receptions at the French Academy were far

more attractive.  Of all the exquisite literary performances

I have ever known, the speeches made on those occasions

by M. Charles Blanc, M. Gaston Boissier, and the

members who received them were the most entertaining. 

To see these witty Frenchmen attacking each other in the

most pointed way, yet still observing all the forms of

politeness, and even covering their adversaries with

compliments, gives one new conceptions of human ingenuity. 

But whether it is calculated to increase respect for the

main actors is another question.



The formal closing of the exposition was a brilliant

pageant.  Various inventors and exhibitors received gifts

and decorations from the hand of the President of the

Republic, and, among them, Dr. Barnard, Story, and myself

were given officers' crosses of the Legion of Honor

which none of us has ever thought of wearing; but,

alas! my Swiss-American friend who had pleaded so

pathetically his heroic services in ``Dasting de vines und

peers'' for France did not receive even the chevalier's

ribbon, and the expression of his disappointment was loud

and long.



Nor was he the only disappointed visitor.  It was my

fortune one day at the American legation to observe one

difficulty which at the western capitals of Europe has

become very trying, and which may be mentioned to show

that an American representative has sometimes to meet. 

As I was sitting with our minister, Governor Noyes of

Ohio, there was shown into the room a lady, very stately,

and dressed in the height of fashion.  It was soon evident

that she was on the war-path.  She said, ``Mr.

Minister, I have come to ask you why it is that I do not

receive any invitations to balls and receptions given by

the cabinet ministers?''  Governor Noyes answered very

politely, ``Mrs. ----, we have placed your name on the list

of those whom we would especially like to have invited,

and have every hope that it will receive attention.''  She

answered, ``Why is it that you can do so much less than

your predecessor did at the last exposition?  THEN I

received a large number of invitations; NOW I receive none.'' 

The minister answered, ``I am very sorry indeed, madam;

but there are perhaps twenty or thirty thousand Americans

in Paris; the number of them invited on each occasion

cannot exceed fifty or sixty; and the French authorities

are just now giving preference to those who have come

from the United States to take some special part in the

exposition as commissioners or exhibitors.''  At this the

lady was very indignant.  She rose and said, ``I will give

you no more trouble, Mr. Minister; but I am going back

to America, and shall tell Senator Conkling, who gave

me my letter of introduction to you, that either he has

very little influence with you, or you have very little

influence with the French Government.  Good morning!'' 

And she flounced out of the room.



This is simply an indication of what is perhaps the

most vexatious plague which afflicts American representatives

in the leading European capitals,--a multitude of

people, more or less worthy, pressing to be presented at

court or to be invited to official functions.  The whole

matter has a ridiculous look, and has been used by sundry

demagogues as a text upon which to orate against

the diplomatic service and to arouse popular prejudice

against it.  But I think that a patriotic American may

well take the ground that while there is so much snobbery 

shown by a certain sort of Americans abroad, it is

not an unwise thing to have in each capital a man who

in the intervals of his more important duties, can keep this

struggling mass of folly from becoming a scandal and a

byword throughout Europe.  No one can know, until he

has seen the inner workings of our diplomatic service,

how much duty of this kind is quietly done by our

representatives, and how many things are thus avoided which

would tend to bring scorn upon our country and upon

republican institutions.







CHAPTER XXX



AS MINISTER TO GERMANY--1879-1881



In the spring of 1879 I was a third time brought into

the diplomatic service, and in a way which surprised me. 

The President of the United States at that period was Mr.

Hayes of Ohio.  I had met him once at Cornell University,

and had an interesting conversation with him, but never

any other communication, directly or indirectly.  Great,

then, was my astonishment when, upon the death of Bayard

Taylor just at the beginning of his career as minister

to Germany, there came to me an offer of the post thus

made vacant.



My first duty after accepting it was to visit Washington

and receive instructions.  Calling upon the Secretary

of State, Mr. Evarts, and finding his rooms filled with

people, I said:  ``Mr. Secretary, you are evidently very

busy; I can come at any other time you may name.'' 

Thereupon he answered:  ``Come in, come in; there are

just two rules at the State Department: one is that no

business is ever done out of office hours; and the other is, that

no business is ever done IN office hours.''  It was soon

evident that this was a phrase to put me at ease, rather

than an exact statement of fact; and, after my conference

with him, several days were given to familiarizing myself

with the correspondence of my immediate predecessors,

and with the views of the department on questions then

pending between the two countries.



Dining at the White House next day, I heard Mr. Evarts

withstand the President on a question which has always

interested me--the admission of cabinet ministers to

take part in the debates of Congress.  Mr. Hayes

presented the case in favor of their admission cogently; but

the Secretary of State overmatched his chief.  This

greatly pleased me; for I had been long convinced that

next to the power given the Supreme Court, the best

thing in the Constitution of the United States is that

complete separation of the executive from the legislative

power which prevents every Congressional session becoming

a perpetual gladiatorial combat or, say, rather,

a permanent game of foot-ball.  Again and again I have

heard European statesmen lament that their constitution-

makers had adopted, in this respect, the British rather

than the American system.  What it is in France, with

cabals organized to oust every new minister as soon as he

is appointed, and to provide for a ``new deal'' from the

first instant of an old one, with an average of one or two

changes of ministry every year as a result, we all know;

and, with the exception of the German parliament, Continental

legislatures generally are just about as bad; indeed,

in some respects the Italian parliament is worse. 

The British system would have certainly excluded such

admirable Secretaries of State as Thomas Jefferson and

Hamilton Fish; possibly such as John Quincy Adams,

Seward, and John Hay.  In Great Britain, having been

evolved in conformity with its environment, it is

successful; but it is successful nowhere else.  I have always

looked back with great complacency upon such men as

those above named in the State Department, and such as

Hamilton, Gallatin, Chase, Stanton, and Gage in other

departments, sitting quietly in their offices, giving calm

thought to government business, and allowing the heathen

to rage at their own sweet will in both houses of

Congress.  Under the other system, our Republic might

perhaps have become almost as delectable as Venezuela

with its hundred and four revolutions in seventy years[13]





[13] See Lord Lansdowne's speech, December, 1902.





On the day following I dined with the Secretary of

State, and found him in his usual pleasant mood.  Noting

on his dinner-service the words, ``Facta non verba,'' I

called his attention to them as a singular motto for an

eminent lawyer and orator; whereupon he said that, two

old members of Congress dining with him recently, one of

them asked the other what those words meant, to which

the reply was given, ``They mean, `Victuals, not talk.' ''



On the way to my post, I stopped in London and was

taken to various interesting places.  At the house of my

old friend and Yale classmate, George Washburn Smalley,

I met a number of very interesting people, and among

these was especially impressed by Mr. Meredith Townshend,

whose knowledge of American affairs seemed amazingly

extensive and preternaturally accurate.  At the

house of Sir William Harcourt I met Lord Ripon, about

that time Viceroy of India, whose views on dealings with

Orientals interested me much.  At the Royal Institution

an old acquaintance was renewed with Tyndall and Huxley;

and during an evening with the eminent painter, Mr.

Alma-Tadema, at his house in the suburbs, and especially

when returning from it, I made a very pleasant acquaintance

with the poet Browning.  As his carriage did not

arrive, I offered to take him home in mine; but hardly had

we started when we found ourselves in a dense fog, and

it shortly became evident that our driver had lost his

way.  As he wandered about for perhaps an hour, hoping

to find some indication of it, Browning's conversation was

very agreeable.  It ran at first on current questions, then

on travel, and finally on art,--all very simply and naturally,

with not a trace of posing or paradox.  Remembering

the obscurity of his verse, I was surprised at the

lucidity of his talk.  But at last, both of us becoming

somewhat anxious, we called a halt and questioned the

driver, who confessed that he had no idea where he was. 

As good, or ill, luck would have it, there just then emerged

from the fog an empty hansom-cab, and finding that its

driver knew more than ours, I engaged him as pilot, first

to Browning's house, and then to my own.



One old friend to whom I was especially indebted was

Sir Charles Reed, who had been my fellow-commissioner

at the Paris and Philadelphia expositions.  Thanks to

him, I was invited to the dinner of the lord mayor at the

Guildhall.  As we lingered in the library before going

to the table, opportunity was given to study various eminent

guests.  First came Cairns, the lord chancellor, in

all the glory of official robes and wig; then Lord Derby;

then Lord Salisbury, who, if I remember rightly, was

minister of foreign affairs; then, after several other

distinguished personages, most interesting of all, Lord

Beaconsfield, the prime minister.  He was the last to arrive,

and immediately after his coming he presented his arm to

the lady mayoress, and the procession took its way toward

the great hall.  From my seat, which was but a little

way from the high table, I had a good opportunity to

observe these men and to hear their speeches.



All was magnificent.  Nothing of its kind could be more

splendid than the massive gold and silver plate piled

upon the lord mayor's table and behind it, nothing more

sumptuous than the dinner, nothing more quaint than

the ceremonial.  Near the lord mayor, who was arrayed

in his robes, chain, and all the glories of his office, stood

the toastmaster, who announced the toasts in a manner

fit to make an American think himself dreaming,--something,

in fact, after this sort, in a queer singsong way,

with comical cadences, brought up at the end with a sharp

snap:  ``Me lawds, la-a-a-dies and gentleme-e-e-n, by

commawnd of the Right Honorable the Lawrd Marr, I

cha-a-awrge you fill your glawse-e-e-s and drink to the

health of the Right Honorable the Ur-r-rll of Beck'nsfield.''



A main feature of the ceremony was the loving-cup. 

Down each long table a large silver tankard containing

a pleasing beverage, of which the foundation seemed to

be claret, was passed; and, as it came, each of us in turn

arose, and, having received it solemnly from his neighbor,

who had drunk to his health, drank in return, and then,

turning to his next neighbor, drank to him; the latter

then received the cup, returned the compliment, and in the

same way passed it on.



During the whole entertainment I had frequently turned

my eyes toward the prime minister, and had been much

impressed by his apparent stolidity.  When he presented

his arm to the lady mayoress, when he walked with her, and

during all the time at table, he seemed much like a wooden

image galvanized into temporary life.  When he rose to

speak, there was the same wooden stiffness and he went

on in a kind of mechanical way until, suddenly, he darted

out a brilliant statement regarding the policy of the

government that aroused the whole audience; then, after more

of the same wooden manner and mechanical procedure,

another brilliant sentence; and so on to the end of the

speech.



All the speeches were good and to the point.  There

were none of those despairing efforts to pump up fun

which so frequently make American public dinners

distressing.  The speakers evidently bore in mind the fact

that on the following day their statements would be

pondered in the household of every well-to-do Englishman,

would be telegraphed to foreign nations, and would be

echoed back from friends and foes in all parts of the world.



After the regular speeches came a toast to the diplomatic

corps, and the person selected to respond was our

representative, the Honorable Edwards Pierpont.  This

he did exceedingly well, and in less than five minutes.

Sundry American papers had indulged in diatribes

against fulsome speeches at English banquets by some of

Mr. Pierpont's predecessors, and he had evidently

determined that no such charge should be established against

him.



Much was added to my pleasure by my neighbors at

the table--on one side, Sir Frederick Pollock, the eminent

father of the present Sir Frederick; and on the other,

Mr. Rolf, the ``remembrancer'' of the City of London.



This suggests the remark that, in my experience among

Englishmen, I have found very little of the coldness and

stiffness which are sometimes complained of.  On the

contrary, whenever I have been thrown among them, whether

in Great Britain or on the Continent, they have generally

proved to be agreeable conversationists.  One thing has

seemed to me at times curious and even comical: they will

frequently shut themselves up tightly from their

compatriots,--even from those of their own station,--and yet

be affable, and indeed expansive, to any American they

chance to meet.  The reason for this is, to an American,

even more curious than the fact.  I may discuss it later.



My arrival in Berlin took place just at the beginning of

the golden-wedding festivities of the old Emperor

William I.  There was a wonderful series of pageants: historic

costume balls, gala operas, and the like, at court;

but most memorable to me was the kindly welcome extended

to us by all in authority, from the Emperor and

Empress down.  The cordiality of the diplomatic corps

was also very pleasing, and during the presentations to

the ruling family of the empire I noticed one thing especially:

the great care with which they all, from the monarch

to the youngest prince, had prepared themselves to

begin a conversation agreeable to the new-comer.  One

of these high personages started a discussion with me upon

American shipping; another, on American art; another, on

scenery in Colorado; another, on our railways and steamers;

still another, on American dentists and dentistry;

and, in case of a lack of other subjects, there was Niagara,

which they could always fall back upon.



The duty of a prince of the house of Hohenzollern is

by no means light; it involves toil.  In my time, when

the present emperor, then the young Prince William,

brought his bride home, in addition to their other receptions

of public bodies, day after day and hour after hour,

they received the diplomatic corps, who were arranged

at the palace in a great circle, the ladies forming one half

and the gentlemen the other.  The young princess,

accompanied by her train, beginning with the ladies, and

the young prince, with his train, beginning with the gentlemen,

each walked slowly around the interior of the entire

circle, stopping at each foreign representative and

speaking to him, often in the language of his own country,

regarding some subject which might be supposed to

interest him.  It was really a surprising feat, for which, no

doubt, they had been carefully prepared, but which would

be found difficult even by many a well-trained scholar.



An American representative, in presenting his letter of

credence from the President of the United States to the

ruler of the German Empire, has one advantage in the fact

that he has an admirable topic ready to his hand, such as

perhaps no other minister has.  This boon was given us

by Frederick the Great.  He, among the first of Continental

rulers, recognized the American States as an independent

power; and therefore every American minister since,

including myself, has found it convenient, on presenting the

President's autograph letter to the King or Emperor, to

recall this event and to build upon it such an oratorical

edifice as circumstances may warrant.  The fact that the

great Frederick recognized the new American Republic,

not from love of it, but on account of his detestation of

England, provoked by her conduct during his desperate

struggle against his Continental enemies, is, of course,

on such occasions diplomatically kept in the background.



The great power in Germany at that time was the

chancellor, Prince Bismarck.  Nothing could be more

friendly and simple than his greeting; and however stately

his official entertainments to the diplomatic corps might

be, simplicity reigned at his family dinners, when his

conversation was apparently frank and certainly delightful.



To him I shall devote another chapter.



In those days an American minister at Berlin was

likely to find his personal relations with the German

minister of foreign affairs cordial, but his official

relations continuous war.  Hardly a day passed without some

skirmish regarding the rights of ``German-Americans''

in their Fatherland.  The old story constantly recurred

in new forms.  Generally it was sprung by some man who

had left Germany just at the age for entering the army,

had remained in America just long enough to secure

naturalization, and then, without a thought of discharging

any of his American duties, had come back to claim

exemption from his German duties, and to flaunt his

American citizen papers in the face of the authorities of the

province where he was born.  This was very galling

to these authorities, from the fact that such Americans

were often inclined to glory over their old schoolmates

and associates who had not taken this means of escaping

military duty; and it was no wonder that these brand-

new citizens, if their papers were not perfectly regular,

were sometimes held for desertion until the American

representative could intervene.



Still other cases were those where fines had been

imposed upon men of this class for non-appearance when

summoned to military duty, and an American minister

was expected to secure their remission.



In simple justice to Germany, it ought to be said that

there is no foreign matter of such importance so little

understood in the United States as this.  The average

American, looking on the surface of things, cannot see

why the young emigrant is not allowed to go and come as

he pleases.  The fact is that German policy in this

respect has been evolved in obedience to the instinct of

national self-preservation.  The German Empire, the

greatest Continental home of civilization, is an open camp,

perpetually besieged.  Speaking in a general way, it has

no natural frontiers of any sort--neither mountains nor

wide expanses of sea.  Eastward are one hundred and

thirty millions of people fanatically hostile as regards

race, religion, and imaginary interests; westward is

another great nation of forty millions, with a hatred on all

these points intensified by desire for revenge; northward

is a vigorous race estranged by old quarrels; and south

is a power which is largely hostile on racial, religious, and

historic grounds, and at best a very uncertain reliance. 

Under such circumstances, universal military service in

Germany is a condition of its existence, and evasion of

this is naturally looked upon as a sort of treason.  The

real wonder is that Germany has been so moderate in her

dealing with this question.  The yearly ``budgets of military

cases'' in the archives of the American Embassy bear

ample testimony to her desire to be just and even lenient.



To understand the position of Germany, let us suppose

that our Civil War had left our Union--as at one time

seemed likely--embracing merely a small number of Middle

States and covering a space about as large as Texas,

with a Confederacy on our southern boundary bitterly

hostile, another hostile nation extending from the west

bank of the Mississippi to the Rocky Mountains; a Pacific

confederation jealous and faultfinding; British dominions

to the northward vexed by commercial and personal

grievances; and New England a separate and doubtful

factor in the whole situation.  In that case we too would

have established a military system akin to that of Germany;

but whether we would have administered it as

reasonably as Germany has done is very doubtful.



Fortunately for the United States and for me, there was

in the ministry of foreign affairs, when I arrived, one of

the most admirable men I have ever known in such a

position:  Baron von B<u:>low.  He came of an illustrious

family, had great influence with the old Emperor William,

with Parliament, and in society; was independent, large

in his views, and sincerely devoted to maintaining the

best relations between his country and ours.  In cases such

as those just referred to he was very broad-minded; and

in one of the first which I had to present to him, when

I perhaps showed some nervousness, he said, ``Mr.

Minister, don't allow cases of this kind to vex you; I had

rather give the United States two hundred doubtful cases

every year than have the slightest ill-feeling arise between

us.''  This being the fact, it was comparatively easy to

deal with him.  Unfortunately, he died early during my

stay, and some of the ministers who succeeded him had

neither his independence nor his breadth of view.



It sometimes seemed to me, while doing duty at the

German capital in those days as minister, and at a more

recent period as ambassador, that I could not enter my

office without meeting some vexatious case.  One day it

was an American who, having thought that patriotism

required him, in a crowded railway carriage, roundly to

denounce Germany, the German people, and the imperial

government, had passed the night in a guard-house;

another day, it was one who, feeling called upon, in a

restaurant, to proclaim very loudly and grossly his

unfavorable opinion of the Emperor, had been arrested; on still

another occasion it was one of our fellow-citizens who,

having thought that he ought to be married in Berlin as

easily as in New York, had found himself entangled in a

network of regulations, prescriptions, and prohibitions.



Of this latter sort there were in my time several curious

cases.  One morning a man came rushing into the

legation in high excitement and exclaimed, ``Mr. Minister,

I am in the worst fix that any decent man was ever

in; I want you to help me out of it.''  And he then went

on with a bitter tirade against everybody and everything

in the German Empire.  When his wrath had effervesced

somewhat, he stated his case as follows:  ``Last year, while

traveling through Germany, I fell in love with a young

German lady, and after my return to America became

engaged to her.  I have now come for my bride; the wedding

is fixed for next Thursday; our steamer passages are

taken a day or two later; and I find that the authorities

will not allow me to marry unless I present a multitude

of papers such as I never dreamed of; some of them it

will take months to get, and some I can never get.  My

intended bride is in distress; her family evidently distrust

me; the wedding is postponed indefinitely; and my business

partner is cabling me to come back to America as

soon as possible.  I am asked for a baptismal certificate--

a Taufschein.  Now, so far as I know, I was never

baptized.  I am required to present a certificate showing the

consent of my parents to my marriage--I, a man thirty

years old and in a large business of my own!  I am asked

to give bonds for the payment of my debts in Germany.  I

owe no such debts; but I know no one who will give

such a bond.  I am notified that the banns must be

published a certain number of times before the wedding. 

What kind of a country is this, anyhow?''



We did the best we could.  In an interview with the

minister of public worship I was able to secure a

dispensation from the publishing of the banns; then a bond was

drawn up which I signed and thus settled the question

regarding possible debts in Germany.  As to the baptismal

certificate, I ordered inscribed, on the largest possible

sheet of official paper, the gentleman's affidavit that, in

the State of Ohio, where he was born, no Taufschein, or

baptismal certificate, was required at the time of his birth,

and to this was affixed the largest seal of the legation, with

plenty of wax.  The form of the affidavit may be judged

peculiar; but it was thought best not to startle the

authorities with the admission that the man had not been

baptized at all.  They could easily believe that a State like

Ohio, which some of them doubtless regarded as still in

the backwoods and mainly tenanted by the aborigines,

might have omitted, in days gone by, to require a Taufschein;

but that an unbaptized Christian should offer himself

to be married in Germany would perhaps have so

paralyzed their powers of belief that permission for the

marriage could never have been secured.



In this and various other ways we overcame the

difficulties, and, though the wedding did not take place upon

the appointed day, and the return to America had to be

deferred, the couple, at last, after marriage first before

the public authorities, and then in church, were able to

depart in peace.



Another case was typical.  One morning a gentleman

came into the legation in the greatest distress; and I soon

learned that this, too, was a marriage case--but very

different from the other.  This gentleman, a naturalized

German-American in excellent standing, had come over

to claim his bride.  He had gone through all the 

formalities perfectly, and, as his business permitted it, had

decided to reside a year abroad in order that he might take

the furniture of his apartment back to America free of

duty.  This apartment, a large and beautiful suite of

rooms, he had already rented, had furnished it very fully,

and then, for the few days intervening before his marriage,

had put it under care of his married sister.  But, alas! this

sister's husband was a bankrupt, and hardly had she taken

charge of the apartment when the furniture was seized by

her husband's creditors, seals placed upon its doors by

the authorities, ``and,'' said the man, in his distress,

``unless you do something it will take two years to reach the

case on the calendar; meantime I must pay the rent of the

apartment and lose the entire use of it as well as of the

furniture.''  ``But,'' said I, ``what can be done?''  He

answered, ``My lawyer says that if you will ask it as a

favor from the judge, he will grant an order bringing the

case up immediately.''  To this I naturally replied that

I could hardly interfere with a judge in any case before

him; but his answer was pithy.  Said he, ``You are the

American minister, and if you are not here to get Americans

out of scrapes, I should like to know what you ARE

here for.''  This was unanswerable, and in the afternoon

I drove in state to the judge, left an official card upon him,

and then wrote, stating the case carefully, and saying that,

while I could not think of interfering in any case before

him, still, that as this matter appeared to me one of especial

hardship, if it could be reached at once the ends of justice

would undoubtedly be furthered thereby.  That my

application was successful was shown by the fact that the

man thus rescued never returned to thank his benefactor.



A more important part of a minister's duty is in

connection with the commercial relations between the two

nations.  Each country was attempting, by means of its

tariffs, to get all the advantage possible, and there resulted

various German regulations bearing heavily on some

American products.  This started questions which had to

be met with especial care, requiring many interviews with

the foreign office and with various members of the

imperial cabinet.



In looking after commercial relations, a general

oversight of the consuls throughout the empire was no small

part of the minister's duty.  The consular body was good

--remarkably good when one considers the radically

vicious policy which prevails in the selection and retention

of its members.  But the more I saw of it, the stronger

became my conviction that the first thing needed is that,

when our government secures a thoroughly good man in

a consular position, it should keep him there; and, moreover,

that it should establish a full system of promotions

for merit.  Under the present system the rule is that, as

soon as a man is fit for the duties, he is rotated out of office

and supplanted by a man who has all his duties to learn. 

I am glad to say that of late years there have been many

excellent exceptions to this rule; and one of my most

earnest hopes, as a man loving my country and desirous of its

high standing abroad, is that, more and more, the tendency,

both as regards the consular and diplomatic service,

may be in the direction of sending men carefully fitted for

positions, and of retaining them without regard to changes

in the home administration.



Still another part of the minister's duty was the careful

collection of facts regarding important subjects, and the

transmission of them to the State department.  These were

embodied in despatches.  Such subjects as railway

management, the organization and administration of city

governments, the growth of various industries, the creation

of new schools of instruction, the development of public

libraries, and the like, as well as a multitude of other

practical matters, were thus dwelt upon.



It was also a duty of the minister to keep a general

oversight of the interests of Americans within his

jurisdiction.  There are always a certain number of Americans

in distress,--real, pretended, or imaginary,--and these

must be looked after; then there are American statesmen

seeking introductions or information, American scholars

in quest of similar things in a different field, American

merchants and manufacturers seeking access to men and

establishments which will enable them to build up their

own interests and those of their country, and, most

interesting of all, American students at the university and

other advanced schools in Berlin and throughout

Germany.  To advise with these and note their progress

formed a most pleasing relief from strictly official matters.



Least pleasing of all duties was looking after fugitives

from justice or birds of prey evidently seeking new

victims.  On this latter point, I recall an experience which

may throw some light on the German mode of watching

doubtful persons.  A young American had appeared in

various public places wearing a naval uniform to which

he was not entitled, declaring himself a son of the President

of the United States, and apparently making ready

for a career of scoundrelism.  Consulting the minister of

foreign affairs one day, I mentioned this case, asking him

to give me such information as came to him.  He

answered, ``Remind me at your next visit, and perhaps I

can show you something.''  On my calling some days later,

the minister handed me a paper on which was inscribed

apparently not only every place the young man had

visited, but virtually everything he had done and said during

the past week, his conversations in the restaurants being

noted with especial care; and while the man was evidently

worthless, he was clearly rather a fool than a

scoundrel.  On my expressing surprise at the fullness of

this information, the minister seemed quite as much

surprised at my supposing it possible for any good

government to exist without such complete surveillance of

suspected persons.



Another curious matter which then came up was the

selling of sham diplomas by a pretended American university. 

This was brought to my notice in sundry letters, and

finally by calls from one or two young Germans who were

considering the advisability of buying a doctorate from a

man named Buchanan, who claimed to be president of the

``University of Philadelphia.''  Although I demonstrated

to them the worthlessness of such sham degrees of a non-

existent institution, they evidently thought that to obtain

one would aid them in their professions, and were inclined

to make a purchase.  From time to time there were slurs

in the German papers upon all American institutions of

learning, based upon advertisements of such diplomas;

and finally my patriotic wrath was brought to a climax

by a comedy at the Royal Theater, in which the rascal of

the piece, having gone through a long career of scoundrelism,

finally secures a diploma from the ``University

of PENNSYLVANIA''!



In view of this, I wrote not only despatches to the Secretary

of State, but private letters to leading citizens of

Philadelphia, calling their attention to the subject, and

especially to the injury that this kind of thing was doing

to the University of Pennsylvania, an institution of which

every Philadelphian, and indeed every American, has a

right to be proud.  As a result, the whole thing was broken

up, and, though it has been occasionally revived, it has not

again inflicted such a stigma upon American education.



But perhaps the most annoying business of all arose

from presentations at court.  The mania of many of our

fellow-citizens for mingling with birds of the finest feather

has passed into a European proverb which is unjust to the

great body of Americans; but at present there seems to

be no help for it, the reputation of the many suffering for

the bad taste of the few.  Nothing could exceed the

pertinacity shown in some cases.  Different rules prevail at

different courts, and at the imperial court of Germany

the rule for some years has been that persons eminent

in those walks of life that are especially honored will

always be welcome, and that the proper authority, on being

notified of their presence, will extend such invitations

as may seem warranted.  Unfortunately, while some of

the most worthy visitors did not make themselves known,

some persons far less desirable took too much pains to

attract notice.  A satirist would find rich material in the

archives of our embassies and legations abroad.  I have

found nowhere more elements of true comedy and even

broad farce than in some of the correspondence on this

subject there embalmed.



But while this class of applicants is mainly made up of

women, fairness compels me to say that there is a similar

class of men.  These are persons possessed of an insatiate

and at times almost insane desire to be able, on their

return, to say that they have talked with a crowned head.



Should the sovereign see one in ten of the persons from

foreign nations who thus seek him, he would have no time

for anything else.  He therefore insists, like any private

person in any country, on his right not to give his time to

those who have no real claim upon him, and some very

good fellow-citizens of ours have seemed almost inclined

to make this feeling of his Majesty a casus belli.



On the other hand there are large numbers of Americans

making demands, and often very serious demands, of time

and labor on their diplomatic representative which it is

an honor and pleasure to render.  Of these are such as,

having gained a right to do so by excellent work in their

respective fields at home, come abroad, as legislators

or educators or scientific investigators or engineers or

scholars or managers of worthy business enterprises, to

extend their knowledge for the benefit of their country. 

No work has been more satisfactory to my conscience than

the aid which I have been able to render to men and women

of this sort.



Still, one has to make discriminations.  I remember

especially a very charming young lady of, say, sixteen

summers, who came to me saying that she had agreed to write

some letters for a Western newspaper, and that she wished

to visit all the leading prisons, reformatory institutions,

and asylums of Germany.  I looked into her pretty face,

and soon showed her that the German Government would

never think of allowing a young lady like herself to

inspect such places as those she had named, and that in my

opinion they were quite right; but I suggested a series

of letters on a multitude of things which would certainly

prove interesting and instructive, and which she might

easily study in all parts of Germany.  She took my advice,

wrote many such letters, and the selection which she

published proved to be delightful.



But at times zeal for improvements at home goes

perilously far toward turning the activity of an ambassador

or minister from its proper channels.  Scores of people

write regarding schools for their children, instructors in

music, cheap boarding-houses, and I have had an excellent

fellow-citizen ask me to send him a peck of turnips. 

But if the applications are really from worthy persons,

they can generally be dealt with in ways which require no

especial labor--many of them through our consuls, to

whom they more properly belong.



Those who really ask too much, insisting that the

embassy shall look after their private business, may be

reminded that the rules of the diplomatic service forbid

such investigations, in behalf of individuals, without

previous instructions from the State Department.



Of the lesser troublesome people may be named, first,

those who are looking up their genealogies.  A typical

letter made up from various epistles, as a ``composite''

portrait is made out of different photographs, would run

much as follows:





SIR:  I have reason to suppose that I am descended from an

old noble family in Germany.  My grandfather's name was Max

Schulze.  He came, I think, from some part of Austria or Bavaria

or Schleswig-Holstein.  Please trace back my ancestry and let me

know the result at your earliest convenience.

                       Yours truly,

                            MARY SMITH.





Another more troublesome class is that of people seeking

inheritances.  A typical letter, compounded as above,

would run somewhat as follows:





SIR: I am assured that a fortune of several millions of marks

left by one John M<u:>ller, who died in some part of Germany two

or three centuries ago, is held at the imperial treasury awaiting

heirs.  My grandmother's name was Miller.  Please look the

matter up and inform me as to my rights.

                       Yours truly,

                            JOHN MYERS.





P.S.  If you succeed in getting the money, I will be glad to pay

you handsomely for your services.





Such letters as this are easily answered.  During this

first sojourn of mine at Berlin as minister, I caused a

circular, going over the whole ground, to be carefully

prepared and to be forwarded to applicants.  In this occur

the following words:  ``We have yearly, from various parts

of the United States, a large number of applications for

information or aid regarding great estates in Germany

supposed to be awaiting heirs.  They are all more or less

indefinite, many sad, and some ludicrous. . . .  There are

in Germany no large estates, awaiting distribution to

unknown heirs, in the hands of the government or of anybody,

and all efforts to discover such estates that the legation

has ever made or heard of have proved fruitless.''



Among the many odd applications received at that

period, one revealed an American superstition by no means

unusual.  The circumstances which led to it were as follows:



An ample fund, said to be forty or fifty thousand

dollars, had been brought together in Philadelphia for the

erection of an equestrian statue to Washington, and it had

been finally decided to intrust the commission to Professor

Siemering, one of the most eminent of modern German

sculptors.  One day there came to me a letter from

an American gentleman whom I had met occasionally

many years before, asking me to furnish him with a full

statement regarding Professor Siemering's works and

reputation.  As a result, I made inquiries among the leading

authorities on modern art, and, everything being most

favorable, I at last visited his studio, and found a large

number of designs and models of works on which he

was then engaged,--two or three being of the highest

importance, among them the great war monument at

Leipsic.



I also found that, although he had executed and was

executing important works for various other parts of

Germany, he had not yet put up any great permanent

work in Berlin, though the designs of the admirable

temporary statues and decorations on the return of the troops

from the Franco-Prussian War to the metropolis had

been intrusted largely to him.



These facts I stated to my correspondent in a letter, and

in due time received an answer in substance as follows:





SIR:  Your letter confirms me in the opinion I had formed. 

The intrusting of the great statue of Washington to a man like

Siemering is a job and an outrage.  It is clear that he is a mere

pretender, since he has erected no statue as yet in Berlin.  That

statue of the Father of our Country ought to have been intrusted

to native talent.  I have a son fourteen years old who has

already

greatly distinguished himself.  He has modeled a number of

figures in butter and putty which all my friends think are most

remarkable.  I am satisfied that he could have produced a work

which, by its originality and power, would have done honor to

our country and to art.

                    Yours very truly,

                         ---- ----.





Curious, too, was the following:  One morning the mail

brought me a large packet filled with little squares of

cheap cotton cloth.  I was greatly puzzled to know their

purpose until, a few days later, there came a letter which,

with changes of proper names, ran as follows:



                            PODUNK, ----, 1880.



SIR:  We are going to have a fancy fair for the benefit of the

---- Church in this town, and we are getting ready some autograph

bed-quilts.  I have sent you a package of small squares of

cotton cloth, which please take to the Emperor William and his

wife, also to Prince Bismarck and the other princes and leading

persons of Germany, asking them to write their names on them

and send them to me as soon as possible.

                         Yours truly,

                            ---- ----.





P.S. Tell them to be sure to write their names in the middle

of the pieces, for fear that their autographs may get sewed in.





My associations with the diplomatic corps I found

especially pleasing.  The dean, as regarded seniority, was

the Italian ambassador, Count Delaunay, a man of large

experience and kindly manners.  He gave me various

interesting reminiscences of his relations with Cavour, and

said that when he was associated with the great Italian

statesman, the latter was never able to get time for him,

except at five o'clock in the morning, and that this was

their usual hour of work.



Another very interesting person was the representative

of Great Britain--Lord Odo Russell.  He was full of

interesting reminiscences of his life at Washington, at Rome,

and at Versailles with Bismarck.  As to Rome, he gave me

interesting stories of Pope Pius IX, who, he said, was

inclined to be jocose, and even to speak in a sportive way

regarding exceedingly serious subjects.[14]  As to Cavour,

he thought him a greater man even than Bismarck; and

this from a man so intimate with the German chancellor

was a testimony of no small value.





[14] One of these reminiscences I have given elsewhere.





As to his recollections of Versailles, he was present at

the proclamation of the Empire in the Galerie des Glaces,

and described the scene to me very vividly.



His relations with Bismarck were very close, and the

latter once paid him a compliment which sped far; saying

that, as a rule, he distrusted an Englishman who spoke

French very correctly, but that there was one exception--

Lord Odo Russell.



At the risk of repeating a twice-told tale, I may refer

here to his visit to Bismarck when the latter complained

that he was bothered to death with bores who took his

most precious time, and asked Lord Odo how he got rid

of them.  After making some reply, the latter asked

Bismarck what plan he had adopted.  To this the chancellor

answered that he and Johanna (the princess) had hit

upon a plan, which was that when she thought her husband

had been bored long enough, she came in with a bottle

and said, ``Now, Otto, you know that it is time for you

to take your medicine.''  Hardly were the words out of

his mouth, when in came the princess with the bottle and

repeated the very words which her husband had just

given.  Both burst into titanic laughter, and parted on

the best of terms.



At court festivities, Lord Odo frequently became very

weary, and as I was often in the same case, we from time

to time went out of the main rooms together and sat

down in some quiet nook for a talk.  On one of these

occasions, just after he had been made a peer with the

title of Baron Ampthill, I said to him, ``You must allow

me to use my Yankee privilege of asking questions.'' 

On his assenting to this pleasantly, I asked, ``Why is it

that you are willing to give up the great historic name

of Russell and take a name which no one ever heard of?'' 

He answered, ``I have noticed that when men who have

been long in the diplomatic service return to England,

they become in many cases listless and melancholy, and

wander about with no friends and nothing to do.  They

have been so long abroad that they are no longer in touch

with leading men at home, and are therefore shelved. 

Entrance into the House of Lords gives a man something

to do, with new friends and pleasing relations.  As to the

name, I would gladly have retained my own, but had no

choice; in fact, when Lord John Russell was made an

earl, his insisting on retaining his name was not

especially liked.  Various places on the Russell estates were

submitted to me for my choice, and I took Ampthill.''



Alas! his plans came to nothing.  He died at his post

before his retirement to England.



Among those then connected with the British Embassy

at Berlin, one of the most interesting was Colonel (now

General) Lord Methuen, who, a few years since, took so

honorable a part in the South African War.  He was at

that time a tall, awkward man, kindly, genial, who always

reminded me of Thackeray's ``Major Sugarplums.'' 

He had recently lost his wife, and was evidently in deep

sorrow.  One morning there came a curious bit of news

regarding him.  A few days before, walking in some

remote part of the Thiergarten, he saw a working-man throw

himself into the river, and instantly jumped into the icy

stream after him, grappled him, pulled him out, laid him

on the bank, and rapidly walked off.  When news of

it got out, he was taxed with it by various members of

the diplomatic corps; but he awkwardly and blushingly

pooh-poohed the whole matter.



One evening, not long afterward, I witnessed a very

pleasant scene connected with this rescue.  As we were all

assembled at some minor festivity in the private palace

on the Linden, the old Emperor sent for the colonel, and

on his coming up, his Majesty took from his own coat

a medal of honor for life-saving and attached it to the

breast of Methuen, who received it in a very awkward

yet manly fashion.



The French ambassador was the Count de St. Vallier,

one of the most agreeable men I have ever met, who

deserved all the more credit for his amiable qualities

because he constantly exercised them despite the most

wretched health.  During his splendid dinners at the

French Embassy, he simply toyed with a bit of bread, not

daring to eat anything.



We were first thrown especially together by a

representation in favor of the double standard of value, which,

under instructions from our governments, we jointly

made to the German Foreign Office, and after that our

relations became very friendly.  Whenever the Fourth

of July or Washington's Birthday came round, he was

sure to remember it and make a friendly call.



My liking for him once brought upon me one of the

most embarrassing mishaps of my life.  It was at Nice,

and at the table d'h<o^>te of a great hotel on the Promenade

des Anglais, where I was seated next a French countess

who, though she had certainly passed her threescore

years and ten, was still most agreeable.  Day after day

we chatted together, and all went well; but one evening,

on our meeting at table as usual, she said, ``I am told that

you are the American minister at Berlin.''  I answered,

``Yes, madam.''  She then said, ``When I was a young

woman, I was well acquainted with the mother of the

present French ambassador there.''  At this I launched

out into praises of Count St. Vallier, as well I might;

speaking of the high regard felt for him at Berlin, the

honors he had received from the German Government,

and the liking for him among his colleagues.  The countess

listened in silence, and when I had finished turned

severely upon me, saying, ``Monsieur, up to this moment

I have believed you an honest man; but now I really don't

know what to think of you.''  Of course I was dumfounded,

but presently the reason for the remark occurred

to me, and I said, ``Madam, M. de St. Vallier serves

France.  Whatever his private opinions may be, he no

doubt feels it his duty to continue in the service of his

country.  It would certainly be a great pity if, at every

change of government in France, every officer who did

not agree with the new r<e'>gime should leave the diplomatic

service or the military service or the naval service, thus

injuring the interests of France perhaps most seriously. 

Suppose the Comte de Chambord should be called to the

throne of France, what would you think of Orleanists

and republicans who should immediately resign their

places in the army, navy, and diplomatic service, thus

embarrassing, perhaps fatally, the monarchy and the

country?''  At this, to my horror, the lady went into

hysterics, and began screaming.  She cried out, ``Oui,

monsieur, il reviendra, Henri Cinq; il reviendra.  Dieu

est avec lui; il reviendra malgr<e'> tout,'' etc., etc., and

finally she jumped up and rushed out of the room.  The 

eyes of the whole table were turned upon us, and I fully

expected that some gallant Frenchman would come up

and challenge me for insulting a lady; but no one moved,

and presently all went on with their dinners.  The next

day the countess again appeared at my side, amiable as

ever, but during the remainder of my stay I kept far

from every possible allusion to politics.



The Turkish ambassador, Sadoullah Bey, was a kindly

gentleman who wandered about, as the French expressively 

say, ``like a damn<e'>d soul.''  Something seemed to

weigh upon him heavily and steadily.  A more melancholy

human being I have never seen, and it did not surprise

me, a few years later, to be told that, after one of the

palace revolutions at Constantinople, he had been executed

for plotting the assassination of the Sultan.



The Russian ambassador, M. de Sabouroff, was a very

agreeable man, and his rooms were made attractive by

the wonderful collection of Tanagra statuettes which he

had brought from Greece, where he had formerly been

minister.  In one matter he was especially helpful to me. 

One day I received from Washington a cipher despatch

instructing me to exert all my influence to secure the

release of Madame ----, who, though married to a former

Russian secretary of legation, was the daughter of an

American eminent in politics and diplomacy.  The case

was very serious.  The Russian who had married this

estimable lady had been concerned in various shady

transactions, and, having left his wife and little children

in Paris, had gone to Munich in the hope of covering

up some doubtful matters which were coming to light. 

While on this errand he was seized and thrown into jail

whereupon he telegraphed his wife to come to him.  His

idea, evidently, was that when she arrived she also would

be imprisoned, and that her family would then feel forced

to intervene with the money necessary to get them both

out.  The first part of the programme went as he had

expected.  His wife, on arriving in Munich, was at once

thrown into prison, and began thence sending to the

Secretary of State and to me the most distressing letters

and telegrams.  She had left her little children in Paris,

and was in agony about them.  With the aid of the

Russian ambassador, who acknowledged that his compatriot

was one of the worst wretches in existence, I obtained

the release of the lady from prison after long negotiations. 

Unfortunately, I was obliged to secure that of her

husband at the same time; but as he died not long afterward,

he had no opportunity to do much more harm.



Of the ministers plenipotentiary, the chief was Baron

Nothomb of Belgium, noted as the ``Belgian father of

constitutional liberty.''  He was a most interesting old

man, especially devoted to the memory of my predecessor,

Bancroft, and therefore very kind to me.  Among

the reminiscences which he seemed to enjoy giving me

at his dinner-table were many regarding Talleyrand,

whom he had personally known.



Still another friend among the ministers was M. de

Rudhardt, who represented Bavaria.  He and his wife

were charming, and they little dreamed of the catastrophe

awaiting them when he should cross Bismarck's path. 

The story of this I shall recount elsewhere.[15]





[15] See chapter on Bismarck.





Yet another good friend was Herr von Nostitz-Wallwitz,

representative of Saxony, who was able, on one

occasion, to render a real service to American education. 

Two or three young ladies, one of whom is now the

admired head of one of the foremost American colleges for

women, were studying at the University of Leipsic.  I

had given them letters to sundry professors there, and

nothing could be better than the reports which reached

me regarding their studies, conduct, and social standing. 

But one day came very distressing telegrams and letters,

and, presently, the ladies themselves.  A catastrophe had

come.  A decree had gone forth from the Saxon Government

at Dresden expelling all women students from the

university, and these countrywomen of mine begged me

to do what I could for them.  Remembering that my

Saxon colleague was the brother of the prime minister of

Saxony, I at once went to him.  On my presenting the

case, he at first expressed amazement at the idea of women

being admitted to the lecture-rooms of a German

university; but as I showed him sundry letters,

especially those from Professors Georg Curtius and Ebers,

regarding these fair students, his conservatism melted

away and he presently entered heartily into my view, the

result being that the decree was modified so that all lady

students then in the university were allowed to remain

until the close of their studies, but no new ones were to

be admitted afterward.  Happily, all this has been changed,

and to that, as to nearly all other German universities,

women are now freely admitted.



Very amusing at times were exhibitions of gentle sarcasm

on the part of sundry old diplomatists.  They had

lived long, had seen the seamy side of public affairs, and

had lost their illusions.  One evening, at a ball given by

the vice-chancellor of the empire which was extremely

splendid and no less tedious, my attention was drawn to

two of them.  There had been some kind of absurd

demonstration that day in one of the principal European

parliaments, and coming upon my two colleagues, I

alluded to it.



``Yes,'' said Baron Jauru of Brazil, ``that comes of the

greatest lie prevalent in our time--the theory that the

majority of mankind are WISE; now it is an absolute fact

which all history teaches, and to-day even more than ever,

that all mankind are FOOLS.''  ``What you say is true,''

replied M. de Quade, the Danish minister, ``but it is not

the WHOLE truth: constitutional government also goes

on the theory that all mankind are GOOD; now it is an

absolute fact that all mankind are bad, utterly BAD.'' ``Yes,''

said Jauru, ``I accept your amendment; mankind are

fools and knaves.''  To this I demurred somewhat, and

quoted Mr. Lincoln's remark, ``You can fool some of the

people all the time, and all of the people some of the time;

but you can't fool all the people all the time.''



This restored their good humor, and I left them smilingly

pondering over this nugget of Western wisdom.



Interesting to me was the contrast between my two

colleagues from the extreme Orient.  Then and since at

Berlin I have known the Japanese Minister Aoki.  Like all

other Japanese diplomatic representatives I have met,

whether there or elsewhere, he was an exceedingly

accomplished man: at the first dinner given me after my

arrival in Berlin he made an admirable speech in German,

and could have spoken just as fluently and accurately in

French or English.



On the other hand, Li Fong Pao, the Chinese representative,

was a mandarin who steadily wore his Chinese costume,

pigtail and all, and who, though jolly, could speak

only through an interpreter who was almost as difficult to

understand as the minister himself.



Thus far it seems the general rule that whereas the

Japanese, like civilized nations in general, train men

carefully for foreign service in international law, modern

languages, history, and the like, the Chinese, like

ourselves, do little, if anything, of the kind.  But I may add

that recently there have been some symptoms of change

on their part.  One of the most admirable speeches during

the Peace Conference at The Hague was made by a

young and very attractive Chinese attach<e'>.  It was in

idiomatic French; nothing could be more admirable either

as regarded matter or manner; and many of the older

members of the conference came afterward to congratulate

him upon it.  The ability shown by the Chinese Minister

Wu at Washington would also seem to indicate that China

has learned something as to the best way of maintaining

her interests abroad.



This suggests another incident.  In the year 1880 the

newspapers informed us that the wife of the Chinese minister

at Berlin had just sailed from China to join her

husband.  The matter seemed to arouse general interest,

and telegrams announced her arrival at Suez, then at

Marseilles, then at Cologne, and finally at Berlin.  On

the evening of her arrival at court the diplomatic corps

were assembled, awaiting her appearance.  Presently the

great doors swung wide, and in came the Chinese minister

with his wife: he a stalwart mandarin in the full attire

of his rank; she a gentle creature in an exceedingly pretty

Chinese costume, tripping along on her little feet, and

behind her a long array of secretaries, interpreters, and

the like, many in Chinese attire, but some in European

court costume.  After all of us had been duly presented

to the lady by his Chinese excellency, he brought her

secretaries and presented them to his colleagues.  Among

these young diplomatists was a fine-looking man,

evidently a European, in a superb court costume frogged

and barred with gold lace.  As my Chinese colleague

introduced him to me in German, we continued in that

language, when suddenly this secretary said to me in

English, ``Mr. White, I don't see why we should be talking

in German; I was educated at Rochester University under

your friend, President Anderson, and I come from Waterloo

in Western New York.''  Had he dropped through

the ceiling, I could hardly have been more surprised. 

Neither Waterloo, though a thriving little town upon the New

York Central Railroad and not far from the city in which

I have myself lived, nor even Rochester with all the added

power of its excellent university, seemed adequate to

develop a being so gorgeous.  On questioning him, I found

that, having been graduated in America, he had gone to

China with certain missionaries, and had then been taken

into the Chinese service.  It gives me very great pleasure

to say that at Berlin, St. Petersburg, and The Hague,

where I have often met him since, he has proved to be

a thoroughly intelligent and patriotic man.  Faithful to

China while not unmindful of the interests of the United

States, in one matter he rendered a very great service

to both countries.



But a diplomatic representative who has a taste for

public affairs makes acquaintances outside the diplomatic

corps, and is likely to find his relations with the ministers

of the German crown and with members of the parliament

very interesting.  The character of German public

men is deservedly high, and a diplomatist fit to represent

his country should bring all his study and experience

to bear in eliciting information likely to be useful to his

country from these as well as from all other sorts and

conditions of men.  My own acquaintance among these

was large.  I find in my diaries accounts of conversations

with such men as Bismarck, Camphausen, Delbr<u:>ck, Windthorst,

Bennigsen, George von Bunsen, Lasker, Treitschke,

Gneist, and others; but to take them up one after the

other would require far too much space, and I must be

content to jot down what I received from them wherever,

in the course of these reminiscences, it may seem

pertinent.







CHAPTER XXXI



MEN OF NOTE IN BERLIN AND ELSEWHERE--1879-1881



My acquaintance at Berlin extended into regions

which few of my diplomatic colleagues explored,

especially among members of the university faculty and

various other persons eminent in science, literature, and

art.



Writing these lines, I look back with admiration and

affection upon three generations of Berlin professors:

the first during my student days at the Prussian capital

in 1855-1856, the second during my service as minister,

1879-1881, and the third during my term as ambassador

1897-1902.



The second of these generations seems to me the most

remarkable of the three.  It was a wonderful body of men. 

A few of them I had known during my stay in Berlin as a

student; and of these, first in the order of time, Lepsius,

the foremost Egyptologist of that period, whose lectures

had greatly interested me, and whose kindly characteristics

were the delight of all who knew him.



Ernst Curtius, the eminent Greek scholar and historian,

was also very friendly.  He was then in the midst of his

studies upon the famous Pergamon statues, which, by

skilful diplomacy, the German Government had obtained

from the Turkish authorities in Asia Minor, and brought

to the Berlin Museum.  He was also absorbed in the

excavations at Olympia, and above all in the sculptures found

there.  One night at court he was very melancholy, and on

my trying to cheer him, he told me, in a heartbroken tone,

that Bismarck had stopped the appropriations for the

Olympia researches; but toward the end of the evening he

again sought me, his face radiant, and with great glee told

me that all was now right, that he had seen the Emperor,

and that the noble old monarch had promised to provide

for the excavations from his own purse.



Still another friend was Rudolf von Gneist, the most

eminent authority of his time upon Roman law and the English

constitution.  He had acted, in behalf of the Emperor

William, as umpire between the United States and Great

Britain, with reference to the northwestern boundary, and

had decided in our favor.  In recognition of his labor, the

American Government sent over a large collection of valuable

books on American history, including various collections

of published state papers; and the first duty I ever

discharged as minister was to make a formal presentation

of this mass of books to him.  So began one of my most

cherished connections.



Especially prized by me was a somewhat close acquaintance

with the two most eminent professors of modern history

then at the university--Von Sybel and Droysen. 

Each was a man of great ability.  One day, after I had

been reading Lanfrey's ``Histoire de Napol<e'>on,'' which

I then thought, and still think, one of the most eloquent and

instructive books of the nineteenth century, Von Sybel

happened to drop in, and I asked his opinion of it.  He

answered:  ``It does not deserve to be called a history; it

is a rhapsody.''  Shortly after he had left, in came

Droysen, and to him I put the same question, when he held up

both hands and said:  ``Yes, there is a history indeed! 

That is a work of genius; it is one of the books which

throw a bright light into a dark time: that book will live.''



Professor Hermann Grimm was then at the climax of

his fame, and the gods of his idolatry were Goethe and

Emerson; but apparently he did not resemble them in

soaring above the petty comforts and vexations of life. 

Any one inviting him to dine was likely to receive an

answer asking how the dining-room was lighted--whether

by gas, oil, or wax; also how the lights were placed--

whether high or low; and what the principal dishes were to be:

and on the answer depended his acceptance or declination. 

Dining with him one night, I was fascinated by his wife; it

seemed to me that I had never seen a woman of such

wonderful and almost weird powers: there was something

exquisitely beautiful in her manner and conversation; and,

on my afterward speaking of this to another guest, he

answered:  ``Why, of course; she is the daughter of Goethe's

Bettina, to whom he wrote the `Letters to a Child.' ''



Another historian was Treitshke, eminent also as a

member of parliament--a man who exercised great power

in various directions, and would have been delightful but

for his deafness.  A pistol might have been fired beside

him, and he would never have known it.  Wherever he was,

he had with him a block of paper leaves and a pencil, by

means of which he carried on conversation; in parliament

he always had at his side a shorthand-writer who took

down the debates for him.



Some of the most interesting information which I

received regarding historical and current matters in Berlin

was from the biologist Du Bois-Reymond.  He was of

Huguenot descent, but was perhaps the most anti-Gallic

man in Germany.  Discussing the results of the expulsion

of the Huguenots under Louis XIV, the details he gave me

were most instructive.  Showing me the vast strength

which the Huguenots transferred from France to

Germany, he mentioned such men as the eminent lawyer

Savigny, the great merchant Raven<e'>, and a multitude of

other men of great distinction, who, like himself, had

retained their French names; and he added very many

prominent people of Huguenot descent who had changed

their French names into German.  He then referred to a

similar advantage given to various other countries, and

made a most powerful indictment against the intolerance

for which France has been paying such an enormous price

during more than two hundred years.



Interesting in another way were two men eminent in

physical science--Helmholtz and Hoffmann.  Meeting

them one evening at a court festivity, I was told by

Hoffmann of an experience of his in Scotland.  He had

arrived in Glasgow late on Saturday night, and on Sunday

morning went to call on Professor Sir William Thomson,

now Lord Kelvin.  The door-bell was answered by a woman

servant, of whom Hoffmann asked if Sir William was

at home.  To this the servant answered, ``Sir, he most

certainly is not.''  Hoffmann then asked, ``Could you tell

me where I might find him?''  She answered, ``Sir, you

will find him at church, where YOU ought to be.''



My acquaintance with university men was not confined

to Berlin; at Leipsic, Halle, Giessen, Heidelberg, and

elsewhere, I also found delightful professorial circles.  In my

favorite field, I was especially struck with the historian

Oncken.  As a lecturer he was perfect; and I have often

advised American historical students to pass a semester,

if not more, at Giessen, in order to study his presentation

of historical subjects.  As to manner, he was the best

lecturer on history I heard in Germany; and, with the

exception of Laboulaye at the Coll<e!>ge de France, Seelye at

English Cambridge, and Goldwin Smith at Cornell, the

best I ever heard anywhere.



Especially delightful were sundry men of letters.  Of

these I knew best Auerbach, whose delightful ``Dorfgeschichten''

were then in full fame.  He had been a warm

personal friend of Bayard Taylor, and this friendship I

inherited.  Many were the walks and talks we took

together in the Thiergarten, and he often lighted up my

apartment with his sunny temper.  But one day, as he

came in, returning from his long vacation, I said to him:

``So you have been having a great joy at the unveiling of

the Spinoza statue at The Hague.''  ``A great joy!'' he

said.  ``Bewahre! far from it; it was wretched--

miserable.''  I asked, ``How could that be?''  He answered,

``Renan, Kuno Fischer, and myself were invited to make

addresses at the unveiling of the statue; but when we

arrived at the spot, we found that the Dutch Calvinist domi-

nies and the Jewish rabbis had each been preaching to

their flocks that the judgments of Heaven would fall upon

the city if the erection of a statue to such a monstrous

atheist were permitted, and the authorities had to station

troops to keep the mob from stoning us and pulling down

the statue.  Think of such a charge against the 

`Gottbetrunkener Mensch,' who gave new proofs of God's 

existence, who saw God in everything!''



Another literary man whom I enjoyed meeting was

Julius Rodenberg; his ``Reminiscences of Berlin,'' which

I have read since, seem to me the best of their kind.



I also came to know various artists, one of them being

especially genial.  Our first meeting was shortly after my

arrival, at a large dinner, where, as the various guests were

brought up to be introduced to the new American minister,

there was finally presented a little, gentle, modest man as

``Herr Knaus.''  I never dreamed of his being the foremost

genre-painter in Europe; and, as one must say something,

I said, ``You are, perhaps, a relative of the famous

painter.''  At this he blushed deeply, seemed greatly

embarrassed, and said:  ``A painter I am; famous, I don't

know.  (Maler bin ich; ber<u:>hmt, das weiss ich nicht.)'' 

So began a friendship which has lasted from that day to

this.  I saw the beginning, middle, and end of some of his

most beautiful pictures, and, above all, of the ``Hinter

den Coulissen,'' which conveys a most remarkable

philosophical and psychological lesson, showing how near mirth

lies to tears.  It is the most comic and most pathetic of

pictures.  I had hoped that it would go to America; but,

after being exhibited to the delight of all parts of

Germany, it was bought for the royal gallery at Dresden.



Very friendly also was Carl Becker.  His ``Coronation

of Ulrich von Hutten,'' now at Cologne, of which he allowed

me to have a copy taken, has always seemed to me

an admirable piece of historical painting.  In it there is

a portrait of a surly cardinal-bishop; and once, during an

evening at Becker's house, having noticed a study for this

bishop's head, I referred to it, when he said:  ``Yes, that

bishop is simply the sacristan of an old church in Venice,

and certainly the most dignified ecclesiastic I have ever

seen.''  The musical soir<e'>es at Becker's beautiful

apartments were among the delights of my stay both then and

during my more recent embassy.



Very delightfully dwell in my memory, also, some

evenings at the palace, when, after the main ceremonies were

over, Knaus, Becker, and Auerbach wandered with me

through the more distant apartments and galleries,

pointing out the beauties and characteristics of various old

portraits and pictures.  In one long gallery lined with the

portraits of brides who, during the last three centuries,

had been brought into the family of Hohenzollern, we

lingered long.



Then began also my friendship with Anton von Werner. 

He had been present at the proclamation of the Emperor

William I in the great ``Hall of Mirrors'' at Versailles, by

express invitation, in order that he might prepare his

famous painting of that historic scene.  I asked him whether

the inscription on the shield in the cornice of the Galerie

des Glaces, ``Passage du Rhin,'' which glorified one of the

worst outrages committed by Louis XIV upon Germany,

was really in the place where it is represented in his

picture.  He said that it was.  It seemed a divine prophecy

of retribution.



The greatest genius in all modern German art--Adolf

Menzel--I came to know under rather curious circumstances. 

He was a little man, not more than four feet

high, with an enormous head, as may be seen by his bust

in the Berlin Museum.  On being presented to him during

an evening at court, I said to him:  ``Herr Professor, in

America I am a teacher of history; and of all works I

have ever seen on the history of Frederick the Great, your

illustrations of Kugler's history have taught me most.'' 

This was strictly true; for there are no more striking

works of genius in their kind than those engravings which

throw a flood of light into that wonderful period.  At this

he invited me to visit his studio, which a few days later I 

did, and then had a remarkable exhibition of some of his

most curious characteristics.



Entering the room, I saw, just at the right, a large

picture, finely painted, representing a group of Frederick's

generals, and in the midst of them Frederick himself,

merely outlined in chalk.  I said, ``There is a picture

nearly finished.''  Menzel answered, ``No; it is not finished

and never will be.''  I asked, ``Why not?''  He said,

``I don't deny that there is some good painting in it.  But

it is on the eve of the battle of Leuthen; it is the

consultation of Frederick the Great with his generals just

before that terrible battle; and men don't look like that just

before a struggle in which the very existence of their

country is at stake, and in which they know that most of

them must lay down their lives.''



We then passed on to another.  This represented the

great Gens d'Armes Church at Berlin; at the side of it,

piled on scaffoldings, were a number of coffins all decked

with wreaths and flowers; and in the foreground a crowd

of beholders wonderfully painted.  All was finished except

one little corner; and I said, ``Here is one which you

will finish.''  He said, ``No; never.  That represents the

funeral of the Revolutionists killed here in the uprising of

1848.  Up to this point''--and he put his finger on the

unfinished corner--``I believed in it; but when I arrived at

this point, I said to myself, `No; nothing good can come

out of that sort of thing; Germany is not to be made by

street fights.'  I shall never finish it.''



We passed on to another.  This was finished.  It

represented the well-known scene of the great Frederick

blundering in upon the Austrian bivouac at the castle of Lissa,

when he narrowly escaped capture.  I said to him, ``There

at least is a picture which is finished.''  ``Yes,'' he said;

``but the man who ordered it will never get it.''  I saw

that there was a story involved, and asked, ``How is

that?''  He answered, ``That picture was painted on the

order of the Duke of Ratibor, who owns the castle.  When

it was finished he came to see it, but clearly thought it

too quiet.  What he wanted was evidently something in

the big, melodramatic style.  I said nothing; but meeting

me a few days afterward, he said, `Why don't you send

me my picture?'  `No,' I said; `Serene Highness, that

picture is mine.'  `No, said he; `you painted it for me; it is

mine.'  `No,' said I; `I shall keep it.'  His Highness shall

never have it.''



My principal recreation was in excursions to historical

places.  Old studies of German history had stimulated a

taste for them, and it was a delight to leave Berlin on

Saturday and stay in one of these towns over Sunday. 

Frequently my guide was Frederick Kapp, a thoughtful

historian and one of the most charming of men.



A longer pilgrimage was made to the mystery-play at

Oberammergau.  There was an immense crowd; and, as

usual, those in the open, in front of our box, were drenched

with rain, as indeed were many of the players on the

stage.  I had ``come to scoff, but remained to pray.'' 

There was one scene where I had expected a laugh--

namely, where Jonah walks up out of the whale's belly. 

But when it arrived we all remained solemn.  It was

really impressive.  We sat there from nine in the morning

until half-past twelve, and then from half-past one

until about half-past four, under a spell which banished

fatigue.  The main point was that the actors BELIEVED

in what they represented; there was nothing in it

like that vague, wearisome exhibition of ``religiosity''

which, in spite of its wonderful overture, gave me, some

years afterward, a painful disenchantment--the ``Parsifal''

at Bayreuth.



At the close of the Passion Play, I sought out some of

the principal actors, and found them kindly and interesting. 

To the Christus I gave a commission for a carved

picture-frame, and this he afterward executed beautifully. 

With the Judas, who was by far the best actor in the whole

performance, I became still better acquainted.  Visiting

his workshop, after ordering of him two carved statuettes I

said to him:  ``You certainly ought to have a double salary,

as the Judas had in the miracle-plays of the middle ages;

this was thought due him on account of the injury done

to his character by his taking that part.''  At this the

Oberammergau Judas smiled pleasantly, and said:  ``No;

I am content to share equally with the others; but the

same feeling toward the Judas still exists''; and he then

told me the following story:  A few weeks before, while

he was working at his carving-bench, the door of his

workshop opened, and a peasant woman from the mountains

came in, stood still, and gazed at him intently.  On his

asking her what she wanted, she replied:  ``I saw you in the

play yesterday; I wished to look at you again; you look

so like my husband.  He is dead.  HE, TOO, WAS A VERY BAD

MAN.''



Occasionally, under leave of absence from the State

Department, I was able to make more distant excursions,

and first of all into France.  The President during one of

these visits was M. Gr<e'>vy.  Some years before I had heard

him argue a case in court with much ability; but now, on

my presentation to him at the palace of the <E'>lys<e'>e, he

dwelt less ably on the relations of the United States with

France, and soon fell upon the question of trade, saying, in

rather a reproachful way, ``Vous nous inondez de vos produits.'' 

To this I could only answer that this inundation of

American products would surely be of mutual benefit to

both nations, and he rather slowly assented.



Much more interesting to me was his minister of foreign

affairs, Barth<e'>lemy-Saint-Hilaire, a scholar, a statesman,

and a man of noble character.  We talked first of my

intended journey to the south of France; and on my telling

him that I had sent my eldest son to travel there, for the

reason that at Orange, Arles, N<i^>mes, and the like, a better

idea of Roman power can be obtained than in Italy itself,

he launched out on that theme most instructively.



The conversation having turned toward politics, he

spoke much of Bismarck and Moltke, pronouncing the

name of the latter in one syllable.  He said that Bismarck

was very kind personally to Thiers during the terrible

negotiations; that if Bismarck could have had his way he

would have asked a larger indemnity,--say, seven

milliards,--and would have left Alsace-Lorraine to France;

that France would gladly have paid a much larger sum

than five milliards if she could have retained Alsace-

Lorraine; that Bismarck would have made concessions; but

that ``Molkt'' would not.  He added that Bismarck told

``Molkt'' that he--the latter--had, by insisting on territory,

made peace too difficult.  Saint-Hilaire dwelt long on

the fearful legacy of standing armies left by the policy

which Germany finally adopted, and evidently considered

a great international war as approaching.[16]





[16] December, 1880.





Dining afterward at the Foreign Office with my old

friend Millet, who was second in command there, I met

various interesting Frenchmen, but was most of all

pleased with M. Ribot.  Having distinguished himself by

philosophical studies and made a high reputation in the

French parliament, he was naturally on his way to the

commanding post in the ministry which he afterward

obtained.  His wife, an American, was especially attractive.



It is a thousand pities that a country possessing such

men is so widely known to the world, not by these, but by

novelists and dramatists largely retailing filth, journalists

largely given to the invention of sensational lies, politicians

largely obeying either atheistic demagogues or clerical

intriguers; and all together acting like a swarm of

obscene, tricky, mangy monkeys chattering, squealing,

and tweaking one another's tails in a cage.  Some of these

monkeys I saw performing their antics in the National

Assembly then sitting at Versailles; and it saddened me

to see the nobler element in that assemblage thwarted by

such featherbrained creatures.[16]





[16] December, 1880.





Another man of note, next whom I found myself at a

dinner-party, was M. de Lesseps.  I still believe him to

have been a great and true man, despite the cloud of

fraud which the misdeeds of others drew over his latter

days.  Among sundry comments on our country, he said

that he had visited Salt Lake City, and thought a policy

of force against the Mormons a mistake.  In this I feel

sure that he was right.  Years ago I was convinced by

Bishop Tuttle of the Protestant Episcopal Church, who

had been stationed for some years at Salt Lake City, that

a waiting policy, in which proper civilization can be

brought to bear upon the Mormons, is the true course.



On the following Sunday I heard P<e!>re Hyacinthe

preach, as at several visits before; but the only thing at

all memorable was a rather happy application of Voltaire's

remark on the Holy Roman Empire, ``Ni Saint, ni

Empire, ni Romain.''



At the salon of Madame Edmond Adam, eminent as a

writer of review articles and as a hater of everything

Teutonic, I was presented to a crowd of literary men who,

though at that moment striking the stars with their lofty

heads, have since dropped into oblivion.  Among these I

especially remember <E'>mile de Girardin, editor, spouter,

intriguer--the ``Grand <E'>mile,'' who boasted that he

invented and presented to the French people a new idea

every day.  This futile activity of his always seemed to me

best expressed in the American simile:  ``Busy as a bee in

a tar-barrel.''  There was, indeed, one thing to his credit:

he had somehow inspired his former wife, the gifted Delphine

Gay, with a belief in his greatness; and a pretty

story was current illustrating this.  During the revolution

of 1848, various men of note, calling on Madame Girardin,

expressed alarm at the progress of that most foolish of

overturns, when she said, with an air of great solemnity,

and pointing upward, ``Gentlemen, there is one above who

watches over France.  (Il y a un l<a!>-haut qui veille sur la

France.)''  All were greatly impressed by this evidence

of sublime faith, until the context showed that it was not

the Almighty in whom she put her trust, but the great

<E'>mile, whose study was just above her parlor.



This reminds me that, during my student days at Paris,

I attended the funeral of this gifted lady, and in the crowd

of well-known persons present noticed especially Alexandre 

Dumas.  He was very tall and large, with an African

head, thick lips, and bushy, crisp hair.  He evidently

intended to be seen.  His good-natured vanity was as

undisguised as when his famous son said of him in his

presence, ``My father is so vain that he is capable of

standing in livery behind his own carriage to make people

think he sports a negro footman.''



Going southward, I stopped at Bourges, and was

fascinated by the amazing stonework of the crypt.  How the

mediaeval cathedral-builders were able to accomplish such

intricate work with the means at their command is still

one of the great mysteries.  There is to-day in the United

States no group of workmen who could execute anything

approaching this work, to say nothing of such pieces as

the vaulting of Henry VII's Chapel at Westminster or of

King's College Chapel at Cambridge.



Thence we went to the Church of Brou, near Lyons--

exquisitely beautiful, and filled with monuments even

more inspiring than the church itself.  But it was entirely

evident, from a look at the church and its surroundings,

that Matthew Arnold had written his charming poem without

ever visiting the place.  Going thence to Nice, we

stopped at Turin; and at the grave of Silvio Pellico there

came back to me vivid memories of his little book, which

had seemed to make life better worth living.



At Genoa a decision had to be made.  A mass of letters

of introduction to leading Italians had been given me, and

I longed to make their acquaintance; but I was weary, and

suddenly decided to turn aside and go upon the Riviera,

where we settled for our vacation at Nice.  There we

found various interesting people, more especially those

belonging to the American colony and to the ship-of-war

Trenton, then lying at Villefranche, near by.  Shortly

after our arrival, Lieutenant Emery of the navy called,

bearing an invitation to the ship from Admiral Howell,

who was in command at that station; and, a day or two

later, on arriving in the harbor, though I saw a long-boat

dressed out very finely, evidently awaiting somebody, and

suspected that it was intended for me, I quietly evaded

the whole business by joining a party of Americans in a

steam-launch, so that I had been on board some little time

before the admiral realized the omission in his programme. 

As a result, in order to quiet his conscientious

and patriotic feelings, I came again a day or two

afterward, was conveyed to the frigate with the regulation

pomp, and received the salutes due an American minister. 

My stay on the ship was delightful; but, though the admiral

most kindly urged me to revisit him, I could never again

gather courage to cause so much trouble and make so much

noise.



Most interesting to me of all the persons in Nice at that

time was a young American about fourteen years of age,

who seemed to me one of the brightest and noblest and

most promising youths I had ever seen.  Alas! how many

hopes were disappointed in his death not long afterward! 

The boy was young Leland Stanford.  The aspirations of

his father and mother were bound up in him, and the great

university at Palo Alto is perhaps the finest monument

ever dedicated by parents to a child.



During another of these yearly absences in Italy, I met

various interesting men, and, among these, at Florence the

syndic Ubaldino Peruzzi, a descendant of the great Peruzzis

of the middle ages, and one of the last surviving

associates of Cavour.  He was an admirable talker; but of all

he said I was most pleased with the tribute which he paid

to the American minister at Rome, Judge Stallo of Cincinnati. 

He declared that at a recent conference of statesmen

and diplomatists, Judge Stallo had carried off all the honors--

speaking with ease, as might be necessary, in Italian,

French, and English, and finally drawing up a protocol

in Latin.



At Florence also I made an acquaintance which has

ever since been a source of great pleasure to me--that of

Professor Villari, senator of the kingdom, historian of

Florence, and biographer of Savonarola.  So began a

friendship which has increased the delights of many 

Florentine visits since those days--a friendship not only 

with him, but with his gifted and charming wife.



This reminds me that at Rome the name of the eminent

professor once brought upon me a curious reproof.



I had met at various times, in the Eternal City and

elsewhere, a rising young professor and officer of Harvard

University; and, being one morning in Loescher's famous

book-shop on the Corso, with a large number of purchases

about me, this gentleman came in and, looking them over,

was pleased to approve several of them.  Presently, on

showing him a volume just published and saying, ``There

is the new volume of Villari's history,'' I pronounced the

name of the author with the accent on the first syllable, as

any one acquainted with him knows that it ought to be

pronounced.  At this the excellent professor took the book,

but seemed to have something on his mind; and, having

glanced through it, he at last said, rather solemnly, ``Yes;

VillAri''--accenting strongly the second syllable--``is an

admirable writer.''  I accepted his correction meekly and

made no reply.  A thing so trivial would not be worth

remembering were it not one of those evidences, which

professors from other institutions in our country have not

infrequently experienced, of a ``certain condescension''

in sundry men who do honor to one or two of our oldest

and greatest universities.



Of all people at Rome I was most impressed by Marco

Minghetti.  A conversation with him I have given in

another chapter.



Reminiscences of that first official life of mine at Berlin

center, first of all, in Bismarck, and then in the two great

rulers who have since passed away--the old hero,

Emperor William I, and that embodiment of all qualities

which any man could ask for in a monarch, the crown

prince who afterward became the Emperor Frederick III.



Both were kindly, but the latter was especially winning. 

At different times I had the pleasure of meeting and talking

with him on various subjects; but perhaps the most

interesting of these interviews was one which took place

when it became my duty to conduct him through the

American exhibit in the International Fisheries Exhibition

at Berlin.



He had taken great interest in developing the fisheries

along the northern coast of Germany, and this exhibition

was the result.  One day he sent the vice-chancellor of the

empire to ask me whether it was not possible to secure

an exhibit from the United States, and especially the loan

of our wonderful collections from the Smithsonian Institution

and from the Fisheries Institution of Wood's Holl {sic}. 

To do this was difficult.  Before my arrival an attempt

had been made and failed.  Word had come from persons

high in authority at Washington that Congress could not

be induced to make the large appropriation required, and

that sending over the collections was out of the question. 


I promised to do what I could; and, remembering that

Fernando Wood of New York was chairman of the Committee

of Ways and Means in the House, and that Governor

Seymour, then living in retirement near Utica, was

his old political associate, and especially interested in re-

stocking the waters of New York State with fish, I sent

the ex-governor a statement of the whole case, and urged

him to present it fully to Mr. Wood.  Then I wrote in the

same vein to Senator Conkling, and, to my great satisfaction,

carried the day.  The appropriation was made

by Congress; and the collections were sent over under the

control of Mr. Brown Goode of the Smithsonian, perhaps

the most admirable man who could have been chosen out

of the whole world for that purpose.  The prince was

greatly delighted with all he saw, showed remarkable

intelligence in his questions, and, thanks to Mr. Goode's

assistance, he received satisfactory answers.  The result was

that the American exhibit took the great prize--the silver-

gilt vase offered by the Emperor William, which is now

in the National Museum at Washington.



The prince showed a real interest in everything of

importance in our country.  I remember his asking me

regarding the Brooklyn Bridge--how it could possibly be

sustained without guy-ropes.  Of course it was easy to

show him that while in the first of our great suspension-

bridges--that at Niagara--guy-ropes were admissible, at

Brooklyn they were not: since ships of war as well as

merchant vessels of the largest size must pass beneath it; and

I could only add that Roebling, who built it, was a man of

such skill and forethought that undoubtedly, with the

weight he was putting into it and the system of trusses

he was placing upon it, no guy-ropes would be needed.



On many occasions the prince showed thoughtful kindness

to members of my family as well as to myself, and

the news of his death gave me real sorrow.  It was a vast

loss to his country; no modern monarch has shown so

striking a likeness to Marcus Aurelius.



Hardly less hearty and kindly was the Emperor then

reigning--William I.  Naturally enough, he remembered,

above all who had preceded me, Mr. Bancroft.  His

first question at court generally was, ``How goes it

with your predecessor?  (Wie geht es mit Ihrem

Vorg<a:>nger?)'' and I always knew that by my ``predecessor''

he meant Bancroft.  When I once told him that Mr.

Bancroft, who was not far from the old Kaiser's age, had

bought a new horse and was riding assiduously every

day, the old monarch laughed heartily and dwelt on his

recollections of my predecessor, with his long white beard,

riding through the Thiergarten.



Pleasant to me was the last interview, on the presentation

of my letter of recall.  It was at Babelsberg, the

Emperor's country-seat at Potsdam; and he detained me

long, talking over a multitude of subjects in a way which

showed much kindly feeling.  Among other things, he

asked where my family had been staying through the

summer.  My answer was that we had been at a hotel near

the park or palace of Wilhelmsh<o:>he above Cassel; and

that we all agreed that he had been very magnanimous in

assigning to the Emperor Napoleon III so splendid a

prison and such beautiful surroundings.  To this he

answered quite earnestly, ``Yes; and he was very grateful

for it, and wrote me to say so; but, after all, that is by

no means the finest palace in Germany.''  To this I

answered, ``Your Majesty is entirely right; that I saw on

visiting the palace of W<u:>rzburg.''  At this he laughed

heartily, and said, ``Yes, I see that you understand it;

those old prince-bishops knew how to live.''  As a matter

of fact, various prince-bishops in the eighteenth century

impoverished their realms in building just such imitations

of Versailles as that sumptuous W<u:>rzburg Palace.



He then asked me, ``On what ship do you go to

America?'' and I answered, ``On the finest ship in your

Majesty's merchant navy--the Elbe.''  He then asked me

something about the ship; and when I had told him how

beautifully it was equipped,--it being the first of the

larger ships of the North German Lloyd,--he answered,

``Yes; what is now doing in the way of shipbuilding is

wonderful.  I received a letter from my son, the crown

prince, this morning, on that very subject.  He is at

Osborne, and has just visited a great English iron-clad

man-of-war.  It is wonderful; but it cost a million pounds

sterling.''  At this he raised his voice, and, throwing up

both hands, said very earnestly, ``We can't stand it; we

can't stand it.''



After this and much other pleasant chat, he put out his

hand and said, ``Auf Wiedersehen''; and so we parted,

each to take his own way into eternity.



The other farewells to me were also gratifying.  The

German press was very kindly in its references to my

departure; and just before I left Berlin a dinner was

given me in the great hall of the Kaiserhof by leading men

in parliamentary, professional, literary, and artistic

circles.  Kindly speeches were made by Gneist, Camphausen,

Delbr<u:>ck, George von Bunsen, and others--all forming a

treasure in my memory which, as long as life lasts, I can

never lose.







CHAPTER XXXII



MY RECOLLECTIONS OF BISMARCK--1879-1881



My first glimpse of Bismarck was obtained during one

of my journeys through middle Germany, about the

time, I think, of the Franco-Prussian War.  Arriving at

the Kissingen junction, we found a crowd gathered outside

the barriers, and all gazing at a railway-carriage

about to be attached to our train.  Looking toward this, I

recognized the face and form of the great North-German

statesman.  He was in the prime of life--sturdy, hearty,

and happy in the presence of his wife and children.  The

people at the station evidently knew what was needed; for

hardly had he arrived when waiters appeared, bearing

salvers covered with huge mugs of foaming beer.  Thereupon

Bismarck took two of the mugs in immediate succession;

poured their contents down his throat, evidently with

great gusto; and a burly peasant just back of me, unable

longer to restrain his admiration, soliloquized in a deep,

slow, guttural, reverberating rumble:  ``A-a-a-ber er sieht

sehr-r-r gut aus.''  So it struck me also; the waters of

Kissingen had evidently restored the great man, and he

looked like a Titan ready for battle.



My personal intercourse with him began in 1879, when,

as chancellor of the German Empire, he received me

as minister of the United States.  On my entering his

workroom, he rose; and it seemed to me that I had

never seen another man so towering save Abraham

Lincoln.  On either side of him were his two big, black

dogs, the Reichshunde; and, as he put out his hand

with a pleasant smile, they seemed to join kindly in the

welcome.



His first remark was that I seemed a young man to

undertake the duties of a minister, to which I made the

trite reply that time would speedily cure that defect.  The

conversation then ran, for a time, upon commonplace

subjects, but finally struck matters of interest to both our

countries.



There were then, as ever since, a great number of

troublesome questions between the two nations, and among

them those relating to Germans who, having gone over to

the United States just at the military age, had lived there

merely long enough to acquire citizenship, and had then

hastened back to Germany to enjoy the privileges of both

countries without discharging the duties of either.  These

persons had done great harm to the interests of bona-fide

German-Americans, and Bismarck evidently had an intense

dislike for them.  This he showed then and afterward;

but his tendencies to severity toward them were

tempted {sic} by the minister of foreign affairs, Von B<u:>low,

one of the most reasonable men in public business with

whom I have ever had to do, and father of the present

chancellor, who greatly resembles him.



But Bismarck's feeling against the men who had

acquired American citizenship for the purpose of evading

their duties in both countries did not prevent his taking

a great interest in Germans who had settled in the United

States and, while becoming good Americans, had preserved

an interest in the Fatherland.  He spoke of these,

with a large, kindly feeling, as constituting a bond between

the two nations.  Among other things, he remarked that

Germans living in the United States become more tractable

than in the land of their birth; that revolutionists

thus become moderates, and radicals conservatives; that

the word Einigkeit (union) had always a charm for them;

that it had worked both ways upon them for good, the

union of States in America leading them to prize the

union of states in Germany, and the evils of disunion in

Germany, which had been so long and painful, leading

them to abhor disunion in America.



The conversation then fell into ordinary channels, and I

took leave after another hearty shake of the hand and

various kind assurances.  A few days later came an invitation

to dinner with him; and I prized this all the more because

it was not to be an official, but a family dinner, and

was to include a few of his most intimate friends in the

ministry and the parliament.  On the invitation it was

stated that evening dress was not to be worn; and on my

arrival, accompanied by Herr von Schl<o:>tzer, at that time

the German minister in Washington, I found all the guests

arrayed in simple afternoon costume.  The table had a

patriarchal character.  At the head sat the prince; at his

side, in the next seat but one, his wife; while between them

was the seat assigned me, so that I enjoyed to the full the

conversation of both.  The other seats at the head of the

table were occupied by various guests; and then, scattered

along down, were members of the family and some personages

in the chancery who stood nearest the chief.  The

conversation was led by him, and soon took a turn

especially interesting.  He asked me whether there had ever

been a serious effort to make New York the permanent

capital of the nation.  I answered that there had not; that

both New York and Philadelphia were, for a short period

at the beginning of our national history, provisional

capitals; but that there was a deep-seated idea that the

permanent capital should not be a commercial metropolis, and

that unquestionably the placing of it at Washington was

decided, not merely by the central position of that city, but

also by the fact that it was an artificial town, never likely

to be a great business center; and I cited Thomas Jefferson's

saying, ``Great cities are great sores.''  He answered

that in this our founders showed wisdom; that the

French were making a bad mistake in bringing their

national legislature back from Versailles to Paris; that the

construction of the human body furnishes a good hint for

arrangements in the body politic; that, as the human brain

is held in a strong inclosure, and at a distance from the

parts of the body which are most active physically, so the

brain of the nation should be protected with the greatest

care, and should not be placed in the midst of a great,

turbulent metropolis.  To this I assented, but said that during

my attendance at sessions of the French legislative bodies,

both in my old days at Paris and more recently at Versailles,

it seemed to me that their main defects are those

of their qualities; that one of the most frequent occupations

of their members is teasing one another, and that

when they tease one another they are wonderfully witty;

that in the American Congress and in the British Parliament

members are more slow to catch a subtle comment or

scathing witticism; that the members of American and

British assemblies are more like large grains of cannon-

powder, through which ignition extends slowly, so that

there comes no sudden explosion; whereas in the French

Assembly the members are more like minute, bright

grains of rifle-powder, which all take fire at the same

moment, with instant detonation, and explosions sometimes

disastrous.  He assented to this, but insisted that the curse

of French assemblies had been the tyranny of city mobs,

and especially of mobs in the galleries of their assemblies;

that the worst fault possible in any deliberative body is

speaking to the galleries; that a gallery mob is sure to get

between the members and the country, and virtually

screen off from the assembly the interests of the country. 

To this I most heartily assented.



I may say here that there had not then been fully

developed in our country that monstrous absurdity which

we have seen in these last few years--national conventions

of the two parties trying to deliberate in the midst of

audiences of twelve or fifteen thousand people; a vast

mob in the galleries, often noisy, and sometimes hysterical,

frequently seeking to throw the delegates off their

bearings, to outclamor them, and to force nominations

upon them.



A little later, as we discussed certain recent books, I re-

ferred to Jules Simon's work on Thiers's administration. 

Bismarck said that Thiers, in the treaty negotiations at

Versailles, impressed him strongly; that he was a patriot;

that he seemed at that time like a Roman among Byzantines.



This statement astonished me.  If ever there existed a

man at the opposite pole from Bismarck, Thiers was certainly

that man.  I had studied him as a historian, observed

him as a statesman, and conversed with him as a

social being; and he had always seemed, and still seems,

to me the most noxious of all the greater architects of

ruin that France produced during the latter half of the

nineteenth century--and that is saying much.  His policy

was to discredit every government which he found existing,

in order that its ruins might serve him as a pedestal;

and, while he certainly showed great skill in mitigating

the calamities which he did so much to cause, his whole

career was damning.



By his ``History of the French Revolution'' he revived

the worst of the Revolution legend, and especially the

deification of destructiveness; by his ``History of the

Consulate and of the Empire,'' and his translation of the body of

Napoleon to France, he effectively revived the Napoleonic

legend.  The Queen of the French, when escaping from the

Tuileries in 1848, was entirely right in reproaching him

with undermining the constitutional monarchy of 1830;

and no man did more than he to arouse and maintain the

anti-German spirit which led to the Franco-Prussian War.



By his writings, speeches, and intrigues he aided in

upsetting, not only the rule of the Bourbons in 1830, but

the rule of Louis Philippe in 1848, the Second Republic

in 1851, and the Second Empire in 1870; and, had he

lived, he would doubtless have done the same by the present

Republic.



Louis Blanc, a revolutionist of another bad sort--so

common in France--who can ruin but NOT restore, once

said to me that Thiers's ``greatest power lay in his voicing

average, unthinking, popular folly; so that after one of his

speeches every fool in France would cry out with delight,

``Mais, voil<a!> mon opinion!''



Doubtless Bismarck was impressed, for the time being,

by Thiers's skill in negotiation; but it is perfectly evident,

from the recollections of various officials since published,

that his usual opinion of Thiers was not at all indicated

by his remark above cited.



Later the conversation fell upon travel; and, as he spoke

of his experiences in various parts of Europe, I recommended

America to him as a new field of observation--alluding

playfully to the city named after him, and suggesting

that he take his family with him upon a large steamer,

and, after seeing the more interesting things in the United

States, pass on around the world, calling at the Samoan

Islands, on which I had recently heard him speak in

parliament.  After some humorous objections to this plan,

he said that early in life he had a great passion for travel,

but that upon his father's death he was obliged to devote

himself to getting his estate in order; that ever since that

time his political duties had prevented his traveling much;

and that now he had lost the love of wandering, and in

place of it had gained a desire to settle down in the midst

of his family.



He spoke English so perfectly that I asked him how

much time he had spent in England.  He said, ``Very

little--in fact, only two or three days.''  He had made but

two short visits, one of them many years ago,--I think he

said in 1842,--the other during the exposition of 1862.  He

seemed much struck with the beauty of England, and said

that if his lot had been cast there he would have been very

happy as an English country gentleman; that he could not

understand how Englishmen are so prone to live outside

of their own country.  He spoke of various Englishmen,

and referred to Lord Dufferin, who had dined with him

the day before, as one of the most abstemious men he had

ever seen, drinking only a little claret and water.  Upon

my speaking of the great improvement which I had noted

in England during the last quarter of a century, so that

the whole country was becoming more and more like a

garden, he said that such a statement was hardly likely to

please thinking Englishmen; that they could hardly be

glad that England should become more and more like a

garden; ``for,'' he said, ``feeding a great nation from a

garden is like provisioning an army with plum cake.''



He then dwelt on the fact that Great Britain had become

more and more dependent for her daily bread on other

countries, and especially on the United States.



The conversation next turned to the management of

estates, and he remarked, in a bluff, hearty way, that his

father had desired him to become a clergyman; that there

was a pastor's living, worth, if I remember rightly, about

fifteen hundred thalers a year, which his father thought

should be kept in the family.  This led to some amusing

conversation between him and the princess on what his

life would have been under such circumstances, ending by

his saying jocosely to her, ``You probably think that if I

had become a pastor I would have been a better man.''  To

which she answered that this she would not say; that it

would not be polite.  ``But,'' she continued, ``I will say

this: that you would have been a happier man.''



He referred to some of my predecessors, speaking very

kindly of Bayard Taylor and George Bancroft; but both

he and the princess dwelt especially upon their relations

with Motley.  The prince told me of their life together at

G<o:>ttingen and at Berlin, and of Motley's visits since,

when he always became Bismarck's guest.  The princess

said that there was one subject on which it was always a

delight to tease Motley--his suppressed novel

``Merrymount''; that Motley defended himself ingeniously in

various ways until, at his last visit, being pressed hard, he

declared that the whole thing was a mere myth; that he

had never written any such novel.



The dinner being ended, our assembly was adjourned to

the terrace at the back of the chancellor's palace, looking

out upon the park in which he was wont to take his famous

midnight walks.  Coffee and cigars were brought, but for

Bismarck a pipe with a long wooden stem and a large

porcelain bowl.  It was a massive affair; and, in a jocose,

apologetic way, he said that, although others might smoke

cigars and cigarettes, he clung to the pipe--and in spite

of the fact that, at the Philadelphia Exposition, as he had

heard, a great German pipe was hung among tomahawks,

scalping-knives, and other relics of barbarism.  From time

to time a servant refilled his pipe, while he discoursed upon

various subjects--first upon the condition of America and

of Germany; then upon South American matters, and of

the struggle between Chile and other powers.  He showed

great respect for the Chileans, and thought that they manifested

really sterling qualities.



He spoke of ship-building, and showed, as it seemed to

me, rather a close knowledge of the main points involved. 

He referred to the superiority of Russian ships, the wood

used being more suitable than that generally found elsewhere. 

As to American ships, he thought they were built,

as a rule, of inferior woods, and that their reputation had

suffered in consequence.



The conversation again falling upon public men, a reference

of mine to Gladstone did not elicit anything like a

hearty response; but the mention of Disraeli seemed to

arouse a cordial feeling.



Among the guests was Lothar Bucher, whom Bismarck,

in earlier days, would have hanged if he had caught him,

but who had now become the chancellor's most confidential

agent; and, as we came out together, Bucher said:  ``Well,

what do you think of him?''  My answer was:  ``He seems

even a greater man than I had expected.''  ``Yes,'' said

Bucher; ``and I am one of those who have suffered much

and long to make him possible.''  I said:  ``The result is

worth it, is it not?''  ``Yes,'' was the reply; ``infinitely

more than worth it.''



My next visit was of a very peculiar sort.  One day

there arrived at the legation Mr. William D. Kelly of

Pennsylvania, anxious, above all things, to have a talk

with Bismarck, especially upon the tariff and the double

monetary standard, both of which were just then burning

questions.  I told Mr. Kelly that it was much easier to

present him to the Emperor than to the chancellor, but that

we would see what could be done.  Thereupon I wrote a

note telling Bismarck who Mr. Kelly was--the senior

member of the House of Representatives by term of service,

the leading champion therein of protection and of the

double standard of value; that he was very anxious to

discuss these subjects with leading German authorities;

and that, knowing the prince's interest in them, it had

seemed to me that he might not be sorry to meet Mr.

Kelly for a brief interview.  To this I received a hearty

response:  ``By all means bring Mr. Kelly over at four

o'clock.''  At four o'clock, then, we appeared at the palace,

and were received immediately and cordially.  When

we were seated the prince said:  ``I am very sorry; but the

new Prussian ministry is to meet here in twenty minutes,

and I must preside over it.''  The meaning of this was

clear, and the conversation began at once, I effacing

myself in order to enjoy it more fully.  In a few seconds they

were in the thick of the tariff question; and, as both were

high protectionists, they got along admirably.  Soon rose

the question of the double standard in coinage; and

on this, too, they agreed.  Notable was the denunciation

by the chancellor of those who differed from him; he

seemed to feel that, as captain of the political forces of

the empire, he was entitled to the allegiance of all honest

members of parliament, and on all questions.  The discussion

ran through various interesting phases, when, noticing

that the members of the Prussian ministry were gathering

in the next room, I rose to go; whereupon the

prince, who seemed greatly interested both in the presentation

of his own views and those of Mr. Kelly, said:  ``No,

no; let them wait.''  The new ministers therefore waited,

the argument on the tariff and the double standard being

more vigorously prosecuted than ever.  After fifteen or

twenty minutes more, I rose again; but Bismarck said: 

``No, no; there's no hurry; let's go and take a walk.'' 

On this we rose and went into the garden.  As we stopped

for an instant to enable him to take down his military cap,

I noticed two large photographs with autographs beneath

them,--one of Lord Beaconsfield, and the other of King

Victor Emmanuel,--and, as I glanced at the latter, I

noticed an inscription beneath it:



          Al mio caro cugino Bismarck.

                       VITTORIO EMANUELE.



Bismarck, seeing me look at it, said:  ``He calls me `cousin'

because he has given me his Order of the Annunciata.'' 

This remark for a moment surprised me.  It was hard for

me to conceive that the greatest man in Europe could care

whether he was entitled to wear the Annunciata ribbon or

not, or whether any king called him ``cousin'' or not.  He

seemed, for a moment, to descend to a somewhat lower

plane than that upon which he had been standing; but, as

we came out into the open and walked up and down the

avenues in the park, he resumed his discussion of greater

things.  During this, he went at considerable length into

the causes which led to the partial demonetization of silver

in the empire; whereupon Mr. Kelly, interrupting him,

said:  ``But, prince, if you fully believed in using both the

precious metals, why did you allow the demonetization of

silver?''  ``Well,'' said Bismarck, ``I had a great many

things to think of in those days, and as everybody said that

Camphausen and ---- were great financiers, and that

they understood all about these questions, I allowed them

to go on; but I soon learned, as our peasants say of those

who try to impose upon their neighbors, that they had

nothing but hot water in their dinner-pots, after all.''  He

then went on discussing the mistakes of those and other

gentlemen before he himself had put his hand to the work

and reversed their policy.  There were curious allusions

to various individuals whose ideas had not suited him,

most of them humorous, but some sarcastic.  At last, after

a walk of about twenty minutes, bearing in mind the

ministers who had been so long waiting for their chief, I

insisted that we must go; whereupon the prince conducted

us to the gate, and most cordially took leave of us.



As we left the place, I said to Mr. Kelly, knowing that

he sometimes wrote letters for publication:  ``Of course, in

whatever you may write to America, you will be careful

not to mention names of persons.''  ``Certainly,'' he said;

``that, of course, I shall never think of doing.''  But alas

for his good resolutions!  In his zeal for protection and

the double standard, all were forgotten.  About a fortnight

later there came back by cable a full statement regarding

his interview, the names all given, and Bismarck's references

to his colleagues brought out vividly.  The result

was that a large portion of the German press was indignant

that Bismarck should have spoken in such a manner

to a foreigner regarding Germans of such eminence,

who had been his trusted colleagues, and who had rendered

to the country very great services; so that, for some

days, the ``Affaire Kelly'' made large demands upon

public attention.  It had hardly subsided when there came

notice to me from the State Department at Washington

that a very eminent American financier was about to be

sent to Berlin; and I was instructed to secure for him an

audience with the chancellor, in order that some arrangements

might be arrived at regarding the double standard

of value.  I must confess that, in view of the ``Affaire

Kelly,'' these instructions chilled me.  Fortunately,

Bismarck was just then taking his usual cure at Kissingen,

during which he always refused to consider any matter of

business; but, on his return to Berlin, I sent him a note

requesting an audience for this special American

representative.  This brought a very kind answer expressing

regret that the chancellor was so pressed with arrears of

business that he desired to be excused; but that the minister

of finance and various other members of the cabinet

had been instructed to receive the American agent and to

communicate with him to the fullest extent.  That was all

very well, but there were my instructions; and I felt

obliged to write again, making a more earnest request. 

Thereupon came an answer that settled the question: the

chancellor regretted that he was too much overwhelmed

with work to meet the gentleman; but said that he would

gladly see the American minister at any time, and must,

for the present, be excused from meeting any unaccredited

persons.



Of course, after that there was nothing to be said; and

the special American agent was obliged to content himself

with what he could obtain in interviews with various

ministers.



Mr. Kelly urged, as his excuse for publishing personal

details in his letters, that it was essential that the whole

world should know just what the great chancellor had said

on so important a subject.  As it turned out, Mr. Kelly's

zeal defeated his purpose; for, had the special agent been

enabled to discuss the matter with the chancellor, there is

little doubt that Germany would have at least endeavored

to establish a permanent double standard of value.



Each year, during my stay, Bismarck gave a dinner to

the diplomatic corps on the Emperor's birthday.  The

table was set then, as now, in the great hall of the

chancellor's palace--the hall in which the Conference of

Berlin was held after the Russo-Turkish War.  The culminating

point of each dinner was near its close, when the

chancellor rose, and, after a brief speech in French,

proposed the health of the heads of all the states there

represented.  This was followed by a toast to the health of

the Emperor, given by the senior member of the diplomatic

corps, and shortly after came an adjournment for

coffee and cigars.  One thing was, at first sight, somewhat

startling; for, as Bismarck arose to propose the toast, the

big black head of a Danish dog appeared upon the table

on either side of him; but the bearing of the dogs was so

solemn that they really detracted nothing from the dignity

of the occasion.



In the smoking-room the guests were wont to gather in

squads, as many of them as possible in the immediate

neighborhood of our host.  During one of these assemblages 

he asked me to explain the great success of Carl

Schurz in America.  My answer was that, before the Lincoln

presidential campaign, in which Schurz took so large

a part, slavery was always discussed either from a constitutional

or a philanthropic point of view, orators seeking to

show either that it was at variance with the fundamental

principles of our government or an offense against humanity;

but that Schurz discussed it in a new way, and mainly

from the philosophic point of view, showing, not merely

its hostility to American ideas of liberty and the wrong

it did to the slaves, but, more especially, the injury it

wrought upon the country at large, and, above all, upon

the slave States themselves; and that, in treating all public

questions, he was philosophic, eloquent, and evidently

sincere.  Bismarck heard what I had to say, and then

answered:  ``As a German, I am proud of Carl Schurz.'' 

This was indeed a confession; for it is certain that, if

Bismarck could have had his way with Carl Schurz in 1848

or 1849, he would have hanged him.



The chancellor's discussions at such times were

frequently of a humorous sort.  He seemed, most of all, to

delight in lively reminiscences of various public men in

Europe.  Nothing could be more cordial and hearty than

his bearing; but that he could take a different tone was

found out by one of my colleagues shortly after my

arrival.  This colleague was Herr von Rudhardt, the

diplomatic and parliamentary representative of Bavaria.  I

remember him well as a large, genial man; and the beauty

and cordial manner of his wife attracted general admiration. 

One day this gentleman made a speech or cast a

vote which displeased Bismarck, and shortly afterward

went to one of the chancellor's parliamentary receptions. 

As he, with his wife leaning on his arm, approached his

host, the latter broke out into a storm of reproaches,

denouncing the minister's conduct, and threatening to

complain of it to his royal master.  Thereupon the diplomatist

simply bowed, made no answer, returned home at once,

and sent his resignation to his government.  All the efforts 

of the Emperor William were unable to appease

him, and he was shortly afterward sent to St. Petersburg

as minister at that court.  But the scene which separated

him from Berlin seemed to give him a fatal shock; he

shortly afterward lost his reason, and at last accounts was

living in an insane asylum.



On another occasion I had an opportunity to see how

the chancellor, so kind in his general dealings with men

whom he liked, could act toward those who crossed his

path.



Being one evening at a reception given by the Duke of

Ratibor, president of the Prussian House of Lords, he

said to me:  ``I saw you this afternoon in the diplomatic

box.  Our proceedings must have seemed very stupid.''  I

answered that they had interested me much.  On this he

put his lips to my ear and whispered:  ``Come to-morrow

at the same hour, and you will hear something of real

interest.''  Of course, when the time arrived, I was in my

seat, wondering what the matter of interest could be. 

Soon I began to suspect that the duke had made some mistake,

for business seemed following the ordinary routine;

but presently a bill was brought in by one of the leading

Prussian ministers, a member of one of the most eminent

families in Germany, a man of the most attractive manners,

and greatly in favor with the Emperor William and

the crown prince, afterward the Emperor Frederick.  The

bill was understood to give a slight extension of suffrage

in the choice of certain leading elected officials.  The question

being asked by some one on the floor whether the head

of the ministry, Prince Bismarck, approved the bill, this

leading minister, who had introduced it, answered in the

affirmative, and said that, though Prince Bismarck had

been kept away by illness from the sessions in which it had

been discussed, he had again and again shown that he was

not opposed to it, and there could be no question on the

subject.  At this a member rose and solemnly denied the

correctness of this statement; declared that he was in

possession of information to the very opposite effect; and

then read a paper, claiming to emanate directly from the

chancellor himself, to the effect that he had nothing whatever

to do with the bill and disapproved it.  Upon Bismarck's

colleagues in the ministry, who thought that his

silence had given consent, this came like a thunderbolt;

and those who had especially advocated the measure saw

at once that they had fallen into a trap.  The general

opinion was that the illness of the chancellor had been a

stratagem; that his sudden disclaimer, after his leading

colleagues had thus committed themselves, was intended to

drive them from the ministry; and that he was determined

to prevent the minister who had most strongly

supported the bill from securing popularity by it.  This

minister, then, and the other members of the cabinet at

once resigned, giving place to men whom the chancellor

did not consider so likely to run counter to his ideas and

interests.



Indeed, it must be confessed that the great statesman

not infrequently showed the defects of his qualities.  As

one out of many cases may be cited his treatment of Eduard

Lasker.  This statesman during several years rendered

really important services.  Though an Israelite, he

showed none of the grasping propensities so often ascribed

to his race.  He seemed to care nothing for wealth or

show, lived very simply, and devoted himself to the public

good as he understood it.  Many capitalists, bankers, and

promoters involved in the financial scandals which followed

the Franco-Prussian War were of his race; but this

made no difference with him: in his great onslaught on the

colossal scoundrelism of that time, he attacked Jew and

Gentile alike; and he deserved well of his country for

aiding to cleanse it of all that fraud and folly.  On a

multitude of other questions, too, he had been very serviceable

to the nation and to Bismarck; but, toward the end of his

career, he had, from time to time, opposed some of the

chancellor's measures, and this seemed to turn the latter

completely against him.



At the opening of the Northern Pacific Railway, Lasker

was one of the invited guests, but soon showed himself

desperately ill; and, one day, walking along a street in

New York, suddenly dropped dead.



A great funeral was given him; and, of all the ceremonies

I have ever seen, this was one of the most remarkable

for its simplicity and beauty.  Mr. Carl Schurz and myself

were appointed to make addresses on the occasion in the

temple of the Israelites on Fifth Avenue; and we agreed

in thinking that we had never seen a ceremony of the kind

more appropriate to a great statesman.



At the next session of Congress, a resolution was

introduced condoling with the government of Germany on the

loss of so distinguished a public servant.  This resolution

was passed unanimously, and in perfect good faith, every

person present--and, indeed, every citizen in the whole

country who gave the matter any thought--supposing that

it would be welcomed by the German Government as a

friendly act.



But the result was astounding.  Bismarck took it upon

himself, when the resolution reached him, to treat it with

the utmost contempt, and to send it back without really

laying it before his government, thus giving the American

people to understand that they had interfered in a matter

which did not concern them.  For a time, this seemed

likely to provoke a bitter outbreak of American feeling;

but, fortunately, the whole matter was allowed to drift by.



Among the striking characteristics of Bismarck was his

evident antipathy to ceremonial.  He was never present

at any of the great court functions save the first reception

given at the golden wedding of the Emperor William

I, and at the gala opera a few evenings afterward.



The reason generally assigned for this abstention was

that the chancellor, owing to his increasing weight and

weakness, could not remain long on his feet, as people are

expected to do on such occasions.  Nor do I remember

seeing him at any of the festivities attending the marriage

of the present Emperor William, who was then merely

the son of the crown prince.  One reason for his absence,

perhaps, was his reluctance to take part in the Fackeltanz,

a most curious survival.  In this ceremony, the ministers

of Prussia, in full gala dress, with flaring torches in their

hands, precede the bride or the groom, as the case may be,

as he or she solemnly marches around the great white hall

of the palace, again and again, to the sound of solemn

music.  The bride first goes to the foot of the throne, and

is welcomed by the Emperor, who gravely leads her once

around the hall, and then takes his seat.  The groom then

approaches the throne, and invites the Empress to march

solemnly around the room with him in the same manner,

and she complies with his request.  Then the bride takes

the royal prince next in importance, who, in this particular

case, happened to be the Prince of Wales, at present King

Edward VII; the groom, the next princess; and so on, until

each of the special envoys from the various monarchs of

Europe has gone through this solemn function.  So it is

that the ministers, some of them nearly eighty years of

age, march around the room perhaps a score of times; and

it is very easy to understand that Bismarck preferred to

avoid such an ordeal.



From time to time, the town, and even the empire, was

aroused by news that he was in a fit of illness or ill

nature, and insisting on resigning.  On such occasions

the old Emperor generally drove to the chancellor's palace

in the Wilhelmstrasse, and, in his large, kindly, hearty

way, got the great man out of bed, put him in good humor,

and set him going again.  On one of these occasions,

happening to meet Rudolf von Gneist, who had been, during a

part of Bismarck's career, on very confidential terms with

him, I asked what the real trouble was.  ``Oh,'' said Gneist,

``he has eaten too many plover's eggs (Ach, er hat zu viel

Kibitzeier gegessen).''  This had reference to the fact

that certain admirers of the chancellor in the neighborhood

of the North Sea were accustomed to send him, each

year, a large basket of plovers' eggs, of which he was very

fond; and this diet has never been considered favorable

to digestion.



This reminds me that Gneist on one occasion told me

another story, which throws some light on the chancellor's

habits.  Gneist had especial claims on Americans.  As the

most important professor of Roman law at the university

he had welcomed a long succession of American students;

as a member of the imperial parliament, of the Prussian

legislature, and of the Berlin town council, he had shown

many kindnesses to American travelers; and as the

representative of the Emperor William in the arbitration

between the United States and Great Britain on our north-

western boundary, he had proved a just judge, deciding in

our favor.  Therefore it was that, on the occasion of one of

the great Thanksgiving dinners celebrated by the American

colony, he was present as one of the principal guests. 

Near him was placed a bottle of Hermitage, rather a heavy,

heady wine.  Shortly after taking his seat, he said to me

with a significant smile, ``That is some of the wine I sent

to Bismarck, and it did not turn out well.''  ``How was

that?'' I asked.  ``Well,'' he said, ``one day I met

Bismarck and asked him about his health.  He answered, `It

is wretched; I can neither eat nor sleep.'  I replied, `Let

me send you something that will help you.  I have just

received a lot of Hermitage, and will send you a dozen

bottles.  If you take a COUPLE OF GLASSES each day with

your dinner, it will be the best possible tonic, and will

do you great good.'  Sometime afterward,'' continued

Gneist, ``I met him again, and asked how the wine agreed

with him.  `Oh,' said Bismarck, `not at all; it made me

worse than ever.'  `Why,' said I, `how did you take it?' 

`Just as you told me,' replied Bismarck, `A COUPLE OF

BOTTLES each day with my dinner.' ''



Bismarck's constant struggle against the diseases which

beset him became pathetic.  He once asked me how I managed

to sleep in Berlin; and on my answering him he

said--``Well, I can never sleep in Berlin at night when it

is quiet; but as soon as the noise begins, about four o'clock

in the morning, I can sleep a little and get my rest for

the day.''



It was frequently made clear that the Emperor William

and the German officials were not the only ones to experience

the results of Bismarck's ill health: the diplomatic

corps, and among them myself, had sometimes to take it

into account.



Bismarck was especially kind to Americans, and, above

all, to the American diplomatic representatives.  To this

there was but one exception, my immediate successor, and

that was a case in which no fault need be imputed to

either side.  That Bismarck's feeling toward Americans

generally was good is abundantly proven, and especially

by such witnesses as Abeken, Sidney Whitman, and Moritz

Busch, the last of whom has shown that, while the chancellor

was very bitter against sundry German princes who

lingered about the army and lived in Versailles at the

public expense, he seemed always to rejoice in the presence

of General Sheridan and other compatriots of ours who

were attached to the German headquarters by a tie of

much less strength.



But, as I have already hinted, there was one thing which

was especially vexatious to him; and this was the evasion,

as he considered it, of duty to the German Fatherland

by sundry German-Americans.  One day I received a letter

from a young man who stated his case as follows: 

He had left his native town in Alsace-Lorraine just

before arriving at the military age; had gone to the United

States; had remained there, not long enough to learn        

English, but just long enough to obtain naturalization; and

had then lost no time in returning to his native town.  He

had been immediately thrown into prison; and thence he

wrote me, expressing his devotion to the American flag,

his pride in his American citizenship,--and his desire to

live in Germany.  I immediately wrote to the minister of

foreign affairs, stating the man's case, and showing that

it came under the Bancroft treaties, or at least under the

construction of them which the German Government up to

that time had freely allowed.  To this I received an

answer that the Bancroft treaties, having been made before

Alsace-Lorraine was annexed to the empire, did not apply

to these new provinces, and that the youth was detained as

a deserter.  To this I replied that, although the minister's

statement was strictly true, the point had been waived

long before in our favor; that in no less than eight cases

the German Government had extended the benefit of the

Bancroft treaties over Alsace-Lorraine; and that in one

of these cases the acting minister of foreign affairs had

declared the intention of the government to make this

extension permanent.



But just at this period, after the death of Baron von

B<u:>low, who had been most kindly in all such matters, the

chancellor had fallen into a curious way of summoning

eminent German diplomatists from various capitals of

Europe into the ministry of foreign affairs for a limited

time--trying them on, as it were.  These gentlemen were

generally very agreeable; but on this occasion I had to

deal with one who had been summoned from service at

one of the lesser German courts, and who was younger

than most of his predecessors.  To my surprise, he brushed

aside all the precedents I had cited, and also the fact that

a former acting minister of foreign affairs had distinctly

stated that, as a matter of comity, the German Government

proposed to consider the Bancroft treaties as applying

permanently to Alsace-Lorraine.  Neither notes nor verbal

remonstrances moved him.  He was perfectly civil, and

answered my arguments, in every case, as if he were about

to yield, yet always closed with a ``but''--and did nothing. 

He seemed paralyzed.  The cause of the difficulty was soon

evident.  It was natural that Bismarck should have a feeling

that a young man who had virtually deserted the German

flag just before reaching the military age deserved the

worst treatment which the law allowed.  His own sons had

served in the army, and had plunged into the thickest of

the fight, one of them receiving a serious wound; and that

this young Alsatian Israelite should thus escape service

by a trick was evidently hateful to him.  That the chancellor

himself gave the final decision in this matter was the

only explanation of the fact that this particular acting

minister of foreign affairs never gave me an immediate

answer.



The matter became more and more serious.  The letter

of the law was indeed on Bismarck's side; but the young

man was an American citizen, and the idea of an American

citizen being held in prison was anything but pleasant to

me, and I knew that it would be anything but pleasant

to my fellow-citizens across the water.  I thought on the

proud words, ``civis Romanus sum,'' and of the analogy

involved in this case.  My position was especially difficult,

because I dared not communicate the case fully to the

American State Department of that period.  Various private

despatches had got out into the world and made

trouble for their authors, and even so eminent a

diplomatist as Mr. George P. Marsh at Rome came very near

being upset by one.  My predecessor, Bayard Taylor, was

very nearly wrecked by another; and it was the escape

and publication of a private despatch which plunged my

immediate successor into his quarrel with Bismarck, and

made his further stay in Germany useless: I therefore

stopped short with my first notification to the State

Department--to the effect that a naturalized American had

been imprisoned for desertion in Alsace-Lorraine, and

that the legation was doing its best to secure his release. 

To say more than this involved danger that the affair

might fall into the hands of sensation-mongers, and result

in howls and threats against the German Government and

Bismarck; and I knew well that, if such howls and threats

were made, Bismarck would never let this young Israelite

out of prison as long as he lived.



It seemed hardly the proper thing, serious as the case

was, to ask for my passports.  It was certain that, if this

were done, there would come a chorus of blame from both

sides of the Atlantic.  Deciding, therefore, to imitate the

example of the old man in the school-book, who, before

throwing stones at the boy in his fruit-tree, threw turf

and grass, I secured from Washington by cable a leave

of absence, but, before starting, saw some of my diplomatic

colleagues, who were wont to circulate freely and

talk much, stated the main features of the case to them,

and said that I was ``going off to enjoy myself''; that

there seemed little use for an American minister in a

country where precedents and agreements were so easily

disregarded.  Next day I started for the French Riviera. 

The journey was taken leisurely, with interesting halts

at Cologne and Aix-la-Chapelle; and, as I reached the

hotel in Paris, a telegram was handed me--``Your man

in Alsace-Lorraine is free.''  It was evident that the

chancellor had felt better and had thought more leniently

of the matter, and I had never another difficulty of the sort

during the remainder of my stay.



The whole weight of testimony as regards Bismarck's

occasional severity is to the effect that, stern and

persistent as he was, he had much tenderness of heart; but

as to the impossibility of any nation, government, or press

scaring or driving him, I noticed curious evidences during

my stay.  It was well known that he was not unfriendly

to Russia; indeed, he more than once made declarations

which led some of the Western powers to think him too

ready to make concessions to Russian policy in the East;

but his relations to Prince Gortchakoff, the former Russian

chancellor, were not of the best; and after the Berlin

Conference the disappointment of Russia led to various

unfriendly actions by Russian authorities and individuals

of all sorts, from the Czar down.  There was a general

feeling that it was dangerous for Germany to resent

this, and a statesman of another mold would have deprecated

these attacks, or sought to mitigate them.  Not so

Bismarck: he determined to give as good as was sent;

and, for a very considerable time he lost no chance to show

that the day of truckling by Germany to her powerful

neighbor was past.  This became at last so marked that

bitter, and even defiant, presentation of unpalatable

truths regarding Russia, in the press inspired from the

chancery, seemed the usual form in which all Russian

statesmen, and especially members of the imperial house,

were welcomed in Berlin.  One morning, taking up my

copy of the paper most directly inspired by the chancellor,

I found an article on the shortcomings of Russia,

especially pungent--almost vitriolic.  It at once occurred

to me to look among the distinguished arrivals to see

what Muscovite was in town; and my search was rewarded

by the discovery that the heir to the imperial crown,

afterward Alexander III, had just arrived and was staying

a day or two in the city.



When Bismarck uttered his famous saying, ``We Germans

fear God and naught beside,'' he simply projected

into the history of Germany his own character.  Fearlessness

was a main characteristic of his from boyhood,

and it never left him in any of the emergencies of his

later life.



His activity through the press interested me much at

times.  It was not difficult to discern his work in many of

the ``inspired'' editorials and other articles.  I have in

my possession sundry examples of the originals of these,

--each page is divided into two columns,--the first the

work of one of his chosen scribes, the second copiously

amended in the chancellor's own hand, and always with

a gain in lucidity and pungency.



Of the various matters which arose between us, one is

perhaps worthy of mention, since it has recently given

rise to a controversy between a German-American journalist

and Bismarck's principal biographer.



One morning, as I sat in dismay before my work-table,

loaded with despatches, notes, and letters, besides futilities

of every sort, there came in the card of Lothar

Bucher.  Everything else was, of course, thrown aside. 

Bucher never made social visits.  He was the pilot-fish of

the whale, and a visit from him ``meant business.''



Hardly had he entered the room when his business was

presented: the chancellor wished to know if the United

States would join Germany and Great Britain in representations

calculated to stop the injuries to the commerce

of all three nations caused by the war then going on

between Chile and Peru.



My answer was that the United States could not join

other powers in any such effort; that our government

might think it best to take separate action; and that it

would not interfere with any proper efforts of other

powers to secure simple redress for actual grievances; but that

it could not make common cause with other powers in any

such efforts.  To clinch this, I cited the famous passage

in Washington's Farewell Address against ``entangling

alliances with foreign powers'' as American gospel, and

added that my government would also be unalterably

opposed to anything leading to permanent occupation of

South American territory by any European power, and

for this referred him to the despatches of John Quincy

Adams and the declarations of President Monroe.



He seemed almost dumfounded at this, and to this day

I am unable to decide whether his surprise was real or

affected.  He seemed to think it impossible that we could

take any such ground, or that such a remote, sentimental

interest could outweigh material interests so pressing as

those involved in the monkey-and-parrot sort of war going

on between the two South American republics.  As he was

evidently inclined to dwell on what appeared to him the

strangeness of my answer, I said to him:  ``What I state

to you is elementary in American foreign policy; and to

prove this I will write, in your presence, a cable despatch

to the Secretary of State at Washington, and you shall see

it and the answer it brings.''



I then took a cable blank, wrote the despatch, and

showed it to him.  It was a simple statement of the

chancellor's proposal, and on that he left me.  In the

evening came the answer.  It was virtually my statement to

Bucher, and I sent it to him just as I had received it. 

That was the last of the matter.  No further effort was

made in the premises, so far as I ever heard, either by

Germany or Great Britain.  It has recently been stated,

in an American magazine article, that Bismarck, toward

the end of his life, characterized the position taken by

Mr. Cleveland regarding European acquisition of South

American territory as something utterly new and unheard

of.  To this, Poschinger, the eminent Bismarck biographer,

has replied in a way which increases my admiration

for the German Foreign Office; for it would appear that

he found in the archives of that department a most exact

statement of the conversation between Bucher and myself,

and of the action which followed it.  So precise was his

account that it even recalled phrases and other minutiae

of the conversation which I had forgotten, but which I at

once recognized as exact when thus reminded of them. 

The existence of such a record really revives one's child-

like faith in the opening of the Great Book of human deeds

and utterances at ``the last day.''



Perhaps the most interesting phase of Bismarck's life

which a stranger could observe was his activity in the

imperial parliament.



That body sits in a large hall, the representatives of the

people at large occupying seats in front of the president's

desk, and the delegates from the various states--known

as the Imperial Council--being seated upon an elevated

platform at the side of the room, right and left of the

president's chair.  At the right of the president, some

distance removed, sits the chancellor, and at his right hand

the imperial ministry; while in front of the president's

chair, on a lower stage of the platform, is the tribune from

which, as a rule, members of the lower house address the

whole body.



It was my good fortune to hear Bismarck publicly

discuss many important questions, and his way of speaking

was not like that of any other man I have ever heard.  He

was always clothed in the undress uniform of a Prussian

general; and, as he rose, his bulk made him imposing. 

His first utterances were disappointing.  He seemed

wheezy, rambling, incoherent, with a sort of burdensome

self-consciousness checking his ideas and clogging his

words.  His manner was fidgety, his arms being thrown

uneasily about, and his fingers fumbling his mustache

or his clothing or the papers on his desk.  He puffed,

snorted, and floundered; seemed to make assertions without

proof and phrases without point; when suddenly he

would utter a statement so pregnant as to clear up a whole

policy, or a sentence so audacious as to paralyze a whole

line of his opponents, or a phrase so vivid as to run

through the nation and electrify it.  Then, perhaps after

more rumbling and rambling, came a clean, clear, historical

illustration carrying conviction; then, very likely, a

simple and strong argument, not infrequently ended by

some heavy missile in the shape of an accusation or taunt

hurled into the faces of his adversaries; then, perhaps at

considerable length, a mixture of caustic criticism and

personal reminiscence, in which sparkled those wonderful

sayings which have gone through the empire and settled

deeply into the German heart.  I have known many clever

speakers and some very powerful orators; but I have

never known one capable, in the same degree, of

overwhelming his enemies and carrying his whole country with

him.  Nor was his eloquence in his oratory alone.  There

was something in his bearing, as he sat at his ministerial

desk and at times looked up from it to listen to a speaker,

which was very impressive.



Twice I heard Moltke speak, and each time on the army

estimates.  Nothing could be more simple and straight-

forward than the great soldier's manner.  As he rose, he

looked like a tall, thin, kindly New England schoolmaster. 

His seat was among the representatives, very nearly in

front of that which Bismarck occupied on the estrade.  On

one of these occasions I heard him make his famous

declaration that for the next fifty years Germany must be in

constant readiness for an attack from France.  He spoke

very rarely, was always brief and to the point, saying with

calm strength just what he thought it a duty to say--neither

more nor less.  So Caesar might have spoken.  Bismarck,

I observed, always laid down his large pencil and

listened intently to every word.



The most curious example of the eloquence of silence in

Bismarck's case, which I noted, was when his strongest

opponent, Windthorst, as the representative of the

combination of Roman Catholics and others generally in

opposition, but who, at that particular time, seemed to have

made a sort of agreement to support some of Bismarck's

measures, went to the tribune and began a long and very

earnest speech.  Windthorst was a man of diminutive

stature, smaller even than Thiers,--almost a dwarf,--and

his first words on this occasion had a comical effect.  He

said, in substance, ``I am told that if we enter into a

combination with the chancellor in this matter, we are

sure to come out second best.''  At this Bismarck raised

his head, turned and looked at the orator, the attention of

the whole audience being fastened upon both.  ``But,''

continued Windthorst, ``the chancellor will have to get

up very early in the morning to outwit us in this matter.'' 

There was a general outburst of laughter as the two

leaders eyed each other.  It reminded one of nothing so

much as a sturdy mastiff contemplating a snappish terrier.



As to his relations with his family, which, to some little

extent, I noticed when with them, nothing could be more

hearty, simple, and kindly.  He was beautifully devoted

to his wife, and evidently gloried in his two stalwart sons,

Prince Herbert and ``Count Bill,'' and in his daughter,

Countess von Rantzau; and they, in return, showed a

devotion to him not less touching.  No matter how severe

the conflicts which raged outside, within his family the

stern chancellor of ``blood and iron'' seemed to disappear;

and in his place came the kindly, genial husband, father,

and host.



The last time I ever saw him was at the Sch<o:>nhausen

station on my way to Bremen.  He walked slowly from the

train to his carriage, leaning heavily on his stick.  He

seemed not likely to last long; but Dr. Schweninger's

treatment gave him a new lease of life, so that, on my

return to Berlin eighteen years later, he was still living. 

In reply to a respectful message he sent me a kindly

greeting, and expressed the hope that he would, ere long,

be well enough to receive me; but he was even then sinking,

and soon passed away.  So was lost to mortal sight

the greatest German since Luther.











End of Volume 1


