




Autobiography of Andrew Dickson White  Volume II



by Andrew Dickson White





VOLUME II








 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF ANDREW DICKSON WHITE



Volume II





CHAPTER XXXIII



AS MINISTER TO RUSSIA--1892-1894



During four years after my return from service as minister to

Germany I devoted myself to the duties of the presidency at

Cornell, and on resigning that position gave all time possible to

study and travel, with reference to the book on which I was then

engaged: "A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology."



But in 1892 came a surprise. In the reminiscences of my political

life I have given an account of a visit, with Theodore Roosevelt,

Cabot Lodge, Sherman Rogers, and others, to President Harrison at

the White House, and of some very plain talk, on both sides,

relating to what we thought shortcomings of the administration in

regard to reform in the civil service. Although President

Harrison greatly impressed me at the time by the clearness and

strength of his utterances, my last expectation in the world

would have been of anything in the nature of an appointment from

him. High officials do not generally think very well of people

who comment unfavorably on their doings or give them unpleasant

advice; this I had done, to the best of my ability, in addressing

the President; and great, therefore, was my astonishment when, in

1892, he tendered me the post of minister plenipotentiary at St.

Petersburg.



On my way I stopped in London, and saw various interesting

people, but especially remember a luncheon with Lord Rothschild,

with whom I had a very interesting talk about the treatment of

the Jews in Russia. He seemed to feel deeply the persecution to

which they were subjected,--speaking with much force regarding

it, and insisting that their main crime was that they were sober,

thoughtful, and thrifty; that as to the charge that they were

preying upon the agricultural population, they preyed upon it as

do the Quakers in England--by owning agricultural machines and

letting them out; that as to the charge of usury, they were much

less exacting than many Christians; and that the main effort upon

public opinion there, such as it is, should be in the direction

of preventing the making of more severe laws. He incidentally

referred to the money power of Europe as against Russia, speaking

of Alexander II as kind and just, but of Alexander III as really

unacquainted with the great questions concerned, and under

control of the church.



I confess that I am amazed, as I revise this chapter, to learn

from apparently trustworthy sources that his bank is now making a

vast loan to Russia--to enable her to renew her old treatment of

Japan, China, Armenia, Finland, Poland, the Baltic Provinces, and

her Jewish residents. I can think of nothing so sure to

strengthen the anti-Semites throughout the world.



A few days later Sir Julian Goldschmidt came to me on the same

subject, and he impressed me much more deeply than the head of

the house of Rothschild had done. There was nothing of the

ennobled millionaire about him; he seemed to me a gentleman from

the heart outward. Presenting with much feeling the disabilities

and hardships of the Jews in Russia, he dwelt upon the

discriminations against them, especially in the matter of

military fines; their gradual and final exclusion from

professions; and the confiscation of their property at Moscow,

where they had been forced to leave the city and therefore to

realize on their whole estates at a few days' notice.



At Paris I also had some interesting conversations, regarding my

new post, with the Vicomte de Vogue, the eminent academician, who

has written so much that is interesting on Russia. Both he and

Struve, the Russian minister at Washington, who had given me a

letter to him, had married into the Annenkoff family; and I found

his knowledge of Russia, owing to this fact as well as to his

former diplomatic residence there, very suggestive. Another

interesting episode was the funeral of Renan at the College de

France, to which our minister, Mr. Coolidge, took me. Eloquent

tributes were paid, and the whole ceremony was impressive after

the French manner.



Dining with Mr. Coolidge, I found myself seated near the Duchesse

de la Rochefoucauld,--a charming American, the daughter of Mr.

Mitchell, former senator from Oregon. The duke seemed to be a

quiet, manly young officer, devoted to his duties in the army;

but it was hard to realize in him the successor of the great

duke, the friend of Washington and of Louis XVI, who showed

himself so broad-minded during our War of Independence and the

French Revolution.



At Berlin I met several of my old friends at the table of our

minister, my friend of Yale days, William Walter Phelps--among

these Virchow, Professor von Leyden, Paul Meyerheim, Carl Becker,

and Theodor Barth; and at the Russian Embassy had an interesting

talk with Count Shuvaloff, more especially on the Behring Sea

question. We agreed that the interests of the United States and

Russia in the matter were identical.



On the 4th of November I arrived in St. Petersburg after an

absence of thirty-seven years. Even in that country, where

everything moves so slowly, there had clearly been changes; the

most evident of these being the railway from the frontier. At my

former visit the journey from Berlin had required nine days and

nine nights of steady travel, mainly in a narrow post-coach; now

it was easily done in one day and two nights in very comfortable

cars. At that first visit the entire railway system of Russia,

with the exception of the road from the capital to Gatshina only

a few miles long, consisted of the line to Moscow; at this second

visit the system had spread very largely over the empire, and was

rapidly extending through Siberia and Northern China to the

Pacific.



But the deadening influence of the whole Russian system was

evident. Persons who clamor for governmental control of American

railways should visit Germany, and above all Russia, to see how

such control results. In Germany its defects are evident enough;

people are made to travel in carriages which our main lines would

not think of using, and with a lack of conveniences which with us

would provoke a revolt; but the most amazing thing about this

administration in Russia is to see how, after all this vast

expenditure, the whole atmosphere of the country seems to

paralyze energy. During my stay at St. Petersburg I traveled over

the line between that city and Berlin six or eight times, and

though there was usually but one express-train a day, I never saw

more than twenty or thirty through passengers. When one bears in

mind the fact that this road is the main artery connecting one

hundred and twenty millions of people at one end with over two

hundred millions at the other, this seems amazing; but still more

so when one considers that in. the United States, with a

population of, say, eighty millions in all, we have five great

trunk-lines across the continent, each running large

express-trains several times a day.



There was apparently little change as regards enterprise in

Russia, whatever there might be as regarded facilities for

travel. St. Petersburg had grown, of course. There were new

streets in the suburbs, and where the old admiralty wharves had

stood,--for the space of perhaps an eighth of a mile along the

Neva,--fine buildings had been erected. But these were the only

evident changes, the renowned Nevskii Prospekt remaining as

formerly--a long line of stuccoed houses on either side, almost

all poor in architecture; and the street itself the same unkempt,

shabby, commonplace thoroughfare as of old. No new bridge had

been built across the Neva for forty years. There was still but

one permanent structure spanning the river, and the great stream

of travel and traffic between the two parts of the city was

dependent mainly on the bridges of boats, which, at the breaking

of the ice in the spring, had sometimes to be withdrawn during

many days.



A change had indeed been brought by the emancipation of the

serfs, but there was little outward sign of it. The muzhik

remained, to all appearance, what he was before: in fact, as our

train drew into St. Petersburg, the peasants, with their

sheepskin caftans, cropped hair, and stupid faces, brought back

the old impressions so vividly that I seemed not to have been

absent a week. The old atmosphere of repression was evident

everywhere. I had begun my experience of it under Nicholas I, had

seen a more liberal policy under Alexander II, but now found a

recurrence of reaction, and everywhere a pressure which deadened

all efforts at initiating a better condition of things.



But I soon found one change for the better. During my former stay

under Nicholas I and Alexander II, the air was full of charges of

swindling and cheatery against the main men at court. Now next to

nothing of that sort was heard; it was evident that Alexander

III, narrow and illiberal though he might be, was an honest man,

and determined to end the sort of thing that had disgraced the

reigns of his father and grandfather.



Having made the usual visit to the Foreign Office upon my

arrival, I was accompanied three days later by the proper

officials, Prince Soltykoff and M. de Koniar, on a special train

to Gatchina, and there received by the Emperor. I found

him--though much more reserved than his father--agreeable and

straightforward. As he was averse to set speeches, we began at

once a discussion on various questions interesting the two

nations, and especially those arising out of the Behring Sea

fisheries. He seemed to enter fully into the American view;

characterizing the marauders in that sea as "ces poachers

la"--using the English word, although our conversation was in

French; and on my saying that the Russian and American interests

in that question were identical, he not only acquiesced, but

spoke at considerable length, and earnestly, in the same sense.



He alluded especially to the Chicago Exposition, spoke in praise

of its general conception and plan, said that though in certain

classes of objects of art it might not equal some of the European

expositions, it would doubtless in very many specialties surpass

all others; and on my expressing the hope that Russia would be

fully represented, he responded heartily, declaring that to be

his own wish.



Among the various subjects noted was one which was rather

curious. In the anteroom I had found the Greek Archbishop of

Warsaw arrayed in a purple robe and hat--the latter adorned with

an exceedingly lustrous cross of diamonds, and, engaging in

conversation with him, had learned that he had a few years before

visited China as a missionary; his talk was that of a very

intelligent man; and on my saying that one of our former American

bishops, Dr. Boone, in preparing a Chinese edition of the

Scriptures had found great difficulty in deciding upon a proper

equivalent for the word "God," the archbishop answered, "That is

quite natural, for the reason that the Chinese have really no

conception of such a Being."



Toward the close of my interview with the Emperor, then, I

referred to the archbishop, and congratulated the monarch on

having so accomplished and devoted a prelate in his church. At

this he said, "You speak Russian, then?" to which I answered in

the negative. "But," he said, "how then could you talk with the

archbishop?" I answered, "He spoke in French." The Emperor seemed

greatly surprised at this, and well he might be, for the

ecclesiastics in Russia seem the only exceptions to the rule that

Russians speak French and other foreign languages better and more

generally than do any other people.



This interview concluded, I was taken through a long series of

apartments filled with tapestries, porcelain, carvings,

portraits, and the like, to be received by the Empress. She was

slight in figure, graceful, with a most kindly face and manner,

and she put me at ease immediately, addressing me in English, and

detaining me much longer than I had expected. She, too, spoke of

the Chicago Exposition, saying that she had ordered some things

of her own sent to it. She also referred very pleasantly to the

Rev. Dr. Talmage of Brooklyn, who had come over on one of the

ships which brought supplies to the famine-stricken; and she

dwelt upon sundry similarities and dissimilarities between our

own country and Russia, discussing various matters of local

interest, and was in every way cordial and kindly.



The impression made by the Emperor upon me at that time was

deepened during my whole stay. He was evidently a strong

character, but within very unfortunate limits--upright, devoted

to his family, with a strong sense of his duty to his people and

of his accountability to the Almighty. But more and more it

became evident that his political and religious theories were

narrow, and that the assassination of his father had thrown him

back into the hands of reactionists. At court and elsewhere I

often found myself looking at him and expressing my thoughts

inwardly much as follows: "You are honest, true-hearted, with a

deep sense of duty; but what a world of harm you are destined to

do! With your immense physical frame and giant strength, you will

last fifty years longer; you will try by main force to hold back

the whole tide of Russian thought; and after you will come the

deluge." There was nothing to indicate the fact that he was just

at the close of his life.



At a later period I was presented to the heir to the throne, now

the Emperor Nicholas II. He seemed a kindly young man; but one of

his remarks amazed and disappointed me. During the previous year

the famine, which had become chronic in large parts of Russia,

had taken an acute form, and in its train had come typhus and

cholera. It was, in fact, the same wide-spread and deadly

combination of starvation and disease which similar causes

produced so often in Western-Europe during the middle ages. From

the United States had come large contributions of money and

grain; and as, during the year after my arrival, there had been a

recurrence of the famine, about forty thousand rubles more had

been sent me from Philadelphia for distribution. I therefore

spoke on the general subject to him, referring to the fact that

he was president of the Imperial Relief Commission. He answered

that since the crops of the last year there was no longer any

suffering; that there was no famine worthy of mention; and that

he was no longer giving attention to the subject. This was said

in an offhand, easy-going way which appalled me. The simple fact

was that the famine, though not so wide-spread, was more trying

than during the year before; for it found the peasant population

in Finland and in the central districts of the empire even less

prepared to meet it. They had, during the previous winter, very

generally eaten their draught-animals and burned everything not

absolutely necessary for their own shelter; from Finland

specimens of bread made largely of ferns had been brought me

which it would seem a shame to give to horses or cattle; and yet

his imperial highness the heir to the throne evidently knew

nothing of all this.



In explanation, I was afterward told by a person who had known

him intimately from his childhood, that, though courteous, his

main characteristic was an absolute indifference to most persons

and things about him, and that he never showed a spark of

ambition of any sort. This was confirmed by what I afterward saw

of him at court. He seemed to stand about listlessly, speaking in

a good-natured way to this or that person when it was easier than

not to do so; but, on the whole, indifferent to all which went on

about him.



After his accession to the throne, one of the best judges in

Europe, who had many opportunities to observe him closely, said

to me, "He knows nothing of his empire or of his people; he never

goes out of his house, if he can help it." This explains in some

degree the insufficiency of his programme for the Peace

Conference at The Hague and for the Japanese War, which, as I

revise these lines, is bringing fearful disaster and disgrace

upon Russia.



The representative of a foreign power in any European capital

must be presented to the principal members of the reigning

family, and so I paid my respects to the grand dukes and

duchesses. The first and most interesting of these to me was the

old Grand Duke Michael--the last surviving son of the first

Nicholas. He was generally, and doubtless rightly, regarded as,

next to his elder brother, Alexander II, the flower of the flock;

and his reputation was evidently much enhanced by comparison with

his brother next above him in age, the Grand Duke Nicholas. It

was generally charged that the conduct of the latter during the

Turkish campaign was not only unpatriotic, but inhuman. An army

officer once speaking to me regarding the suffering of his

soldiers at that time for want of shoes, I asked him where the

shoes were, and he answered: "In the pockets of the Grand Duke

Nicholas."



Michael was evidently different from his brother--not haughty and

careless toward all other created beings; but kindly, and with a

strong sense of duty. One thing touched me. I said to him that

the last time I had seen him was when he reached St. Petersburg

from the seat of the Crimean War in the spring of 1855, and drove

from the railway to the palace in company with his brother

Nicholas. Instantly the tears came into his eyes and flowed down

his cheeks. He answered: "Yes, that was sad indeed. My

father"--meaning the first Emperor Nicholas--"telegraphed us that

our mother was in very poor health, longed to see us, and

insisted on our coming to her bedside. On our way home we learned

of his death."



Of the younger generation of grand dukes,--the brothers of

Alexander III,--the greatest impression was made upon me by

Vladimir. He was apparently the strongest of all the sons of

Alexander II, being of the great Romanoff breed--big, strong,

muscular, like his brother the Emperor. He chatted pleasantly;

and I remember that he referred to Mr. James Gordon Bennett--whom

he had met on a yachting cruise--as "my friend."



Another of these big Romanoff grand dukes was Alexis, the grand

admiral. He referred to his recollections of the United States

with apparent pleasure, in spite of the wretched Catacazy

imbroglio which hindered President Grant from showing him any

hospitality at the White House, and which so vexed his father the

Emperor Alexander II.



The ladies of the imperial family were very agreeable. A remark

of one of them--a beautiful and cultivated woman, born a princess

of one of the Saxon duchies--surprised me; for, when I happened

to mention Dresden, she told me that her great desire had been to

visit that capital of her own country, but that she had never

been able to do so. She spoke of German literature, and as I

mentioned receiving a letter the day before from Professor Georg

Ebers, the historical novelist, she said: "You are happy indeed

that you can meet such people; how I should like to know Ebers!"

Such are the limitations of royalty.



Meantime, I made visits to my colleagues of the diplomatic corps,

and found them interesting and agreeable--as it is the business

of diplomatists to be. The dean was the German ambassador,

General von Schweinitz, a man ideally fit for such a position--of

wide experience, high character, and evidently strong and firm,

though kindly. When ambassador at Vienna he had married the

daughter of his colleague, the American minister, Mr. John Jay,

an old friend and colleague of mine in the American Historical

Association; and so came very pleasant relations between us. His

plain, strong sense was of use to me in more than one difficult

question.



The British ambassador was Sir Robert Morier. He, too, was a

strong character, though lacking apparently in some of General

von Schweinitz's more kindly qualities. He was big, roughish, and

at times so brusque that he might almost be called brutal. When

bullying was needed it was generally understood that he could do

it con amore. A story was told of him which, whether exact or

not, seemed to fit his character well. He had been, for a time,

minister to Portugal; and, during one of his controversies with

the Portuguese minister of foreign affairs, the latter, becoming

exasperated, said to him: "Sir, it is evident that you were not

born a Portuguese cavalier." Thereupon Morier replied: "No, thank

God, I was not: if I had been, I would have killed myself on the

breast of my mother."



And here, perhaps, is the most suitable place for mentioning a

victory which Morier enabled Great Britain to obtain over the

United States. It might be a humiliating story for me to tell,

had not the fault so evidently arisen from the shortcomings of

others. The time has come to reveal this piece of history, and I

do so in the hope that it may aid in bettering the condition in

which the Congress of the United States has, thus far, left its

diplomatic servants.



As already stated, the most important question with which I had

to deal was that which had arisen in the Behring Sea. The United

States possessed there a great and flourishing fur-seal industry,

which was managed with care and was a source of large revenue to

our government. The killing of the seals under the direction of

those who had charge of the matter was done with the utmost care

and discrimination on the Pribyloff Islands, to which these

animals resorted in great numbers during the summer. It was not

at all cruel, and was so conducted that the seal herd was fully

maintained rather than diminished. But it is among the

peculiarities of the seals that, each autumn, they migrate

southward, returning each spring in large numbers along the

Alaskan coast, and also that, while at the islands, the nursing

mothers make long excursions to fishing-banks at distances of

from one to two hundred miles. The return of these seal herds,

and these food excursions, were taken advantage of by Canadian

marauders, who slaughtered the animals, in the water, without

regard to age or sex, in a way most cruel and wasteful; so that

the seal herds were greatly diminished and in a fair way to

extermination. Our government tried to prevent this and seized

sundry marauding vessels; whereupon Great Britain felt obliged,

evidently from political motives, to take up the cause of these

Canadian poachers and to stand steadily by them. As a last

resort, the government of the United States left the matter to

arbitration, and in due time the tribunal began its sessions at

Paris. Meantime, a British commission was, in 1891-1892, ordered

to prepare the natural-history material for the British case

before the tribunal; and it would be difficult to find a more

misleading piece of work than their report. Sham scientific facts

were supplied for the purposes of the British counsel at Paris.

While I cannot believe that the authorities in London ordered or

connived at this, it is simple justice to state, as a matter of

fact, that, as afterward in the Venezuela case,[1] so in this,

British agents were guilty of the sharpest of sharp practices.

The Russian fur-seal islands having also suffered to a

considerable extent from similar marauders, a British commission

visited the Russian islands and took testimony of the Russian

commandant in a manner grossly unfair. This commandant was an

honest man, with good powers of observation and with considerable

insight into the superficial facts of seal life, but without

adequate scientific training; his knowledge of English was very

imperfect, and the commission apparently led him to say and sign

just what they wanted. He was somehow made to say just the things

which were needed to help the British case, and not to say

anything which could hurt it. So absurd were the misstatements to

which he had thus been led to attach his name that the Russian

Government ordered him to come all the way from the Russian

islands on the coast of Siberia to St. Petersburg, there to be

reexamined. It was an enormous journey--from the islands to

Japan, from Japan to San Francisco, from San Francisco to New

York, and thence to St. Petersburg. There, with the aid of a

Russian expert, I had the satisfaction of putting questions to

him; and, having found the larger part of his previous alleged

testimony to be completely in conflict with his knowledge and

opinions, I forwarded this new testimony to those in charge of

the American case before the Paris tribunal, in the hope that it

would place the whole matter in its true light. With it was also

presented the concurring testimony taken by the American experts

who had been sent to the Behring Sea. Those experts were Drs.

Mendenhall and Merriam, scientists of the highest character, and

their reports were, in every essential particular, afterward

confirmed by another man of science, after study of the whole

question in the islands and on the adjacent seas--Dr. Jordan,

president of Stanford University, probably the highest authority

in the United States--and, perhaps, in the world--regarding the

questions at issue: a pupil and friend of Agassiz, a man utterly

incapable of making a statement regarding any point in science

which he did not fully believe, no matter what its political

bearing might be.





[1] See my chapter on the Venezuela Commission for the trick

attempted by British agents in the first British Blue Book on

that subject.





And now to another feature of the case. Before leaving Washington

for St. Petersburg, I had consulted with the Secretary of State

and the leading persons in charge of our case, and on my way had

talked with Count Shuvaloff, the Russian ambassador at Berlin;

and all agreed that the interests of the United States and Russia

in the matter of protecting the seals were identical. The only

wonder was that, this fact being so clear, the Russian Foreign

Office constantly held back from showing any active sympathy with

the United States in our efforts to right this wrong done to both

nations.



At my first presentation to the Emperor I found him, as already

stated, of the same opinion as the Washington cabinet and Count

Shuvaloff. He was thoroughly with us, was bitter against the

Canadian marauders, agreed in the most straightforward and

earnest manner that the interests of Russia and the United States

in this question were identical, and referred severely to the

British encroachments upon both the nations in the northern

seas.[2]





[2] See detailed account of this conversation previously given in

this chapter.





All went smoothly until I took up the subject at the Russian

Foreign Office. There I found difficulties, though at first I did

not fully understand them. The Emperor Alexander III was dying at

Livadia in the Crimea; M. de Giers, the minister of foreign

affairs, a man of high character, was dying at Tzarskoye Selo;

and in charge of his department was an under-secretary who had

formerly, for a short time, represented Russia at Washington and

had not been especially successful there. Associated with him was

another under-secretary, who was in charge of the Asiatic

division at the Russian Foreign Office. My case was strong, and I

was quite willing to meet Sir Robert Morier in any fair argument

regarding it. I had taken his measure on one or two occasions

when he had discussed various questions in my presence; and had

not the slightest fear that, in a fair presentation of the

matter, he could carry his point against me. At various times we

met pleasantly enough in the anterooms of the Foreign Office; but

at that period our representative at the Russian court was simply

a minister plenipotentiary and the British representative an

ambassador, and as such he, of course, had precedence over me,

with some adventitious advantages which I saw then, and others

which I realized afterward. It was not long before it became

clear that Sir Robert Morier had enormous "influence" with the

above-named persons in charge of the Foreign Office, and, indeed,

with Russian officials in general. They seemed not only to stand

in awe of him, but to look toward him as "the eyes of a maiden to

the hand of her mistress." I now began to understand the fact

which had so long puzzled our State Department--namely, that

Russia did not make common cause with us, though we were fighting

her battles at the same time with our own. But I struggled on,

seeing the officials frequently and doing the best that was

possible.



Meantime, the arbitration tribunal was holding its sessions at

Paris, and the American counsel were doing their best to secure

justice for our country. The facts were on our side, and there

seemed every reason to hope for a decision in our favor. A vital

question was as to how extensive the closed zone for the seals

about our islands should be. The United States showed that the

nursing seals were killed by the Canadian poachers at a distance

of from one to two hundred miles from the islands, and that

killing ought not to be allowed within a zone of that radius;

but, on the other hand, the effort of the British counsel was to

make this zone as small as possible. They had even contended for

a zone of only ten miles radius. But just at the nick of time Sir

Robert Morier intervened at St. Petersburg. No one but himself

and the temporary authorities of the Russian Foreign Office had,

or could have had, any knowledge of his manoeuver. By the means

which his government gave him power to exercise, he in some way

secured privately, from the underlings above referred to as in

temporary charge of the Foreign Office, an agreement with Great

Britain which practically recognized a closed zone of only thirty

miles radius about the Russian islands. This fact was telegraphed

just at the proper moment to the British representatives before

the tribunal; and, as one of the judges afterward told me, it

came into the case like a bomb. It came so late that any adequate

explanation of Russia's course was impossible, and its

introduction at that time was strenuously objected to by our

counsel; but the British lawyers thus got the fact fully before

the tribunal, and the tribunal naturally felt that in granting us

a sixty-mile radius--double that which Russia had asked of Great

Britain for a similar purpose--it was making a generous

provision. The conditions were practically the same at the

American and Russian seal islands; yet the Russian officials in

charge of the matter seemed entirely regardless of this fact,

and, indeed, of Russian interests. After secret negotiation with

Sir Robert, without the slightest hint to the American minister

of their intended sacrifice of their "identical interest with the

United States," they allowed this treachery to be sprung upon us.

The sixty-mile limit was established by the tribunal, and it has

proved utterly delusive. The result of this decision of the

tribunal was that this great industry of ours was undermined, if

not utterly destroyed; and that the United States were also

mulcted to the amount of several hundred thousand dollars,

besides the very great expense attending the presentation of her

case to the tribunal.



I now come back to the main point which has caused me to bring up

this matter in these reminiscences. How was it that Great Britain

obtained this victory? To what was it due? The answer is simple:

it was due to the fact that the whole matter at St. Petersburg

was sure to be decided, not by argument, but by "influence." Sir

Robert Morier had what in the Tammany vernacular is called a

"pull." His government had given him, as its representative, all

the means necessary to have his way in this and all other

questions like it; whereas the American Government had never

given its representative any such means or opportunities. The

British representative was an AMBASSADOR, and had a spacious,

suitable, and well-furnished house in which he could entertain

fitly and largely, and to which the highest Russian officials

thought it an honor to be invited. The American representatives

were simply MINISTERS; from time immemorial had never had such a

house; had generally no adequate place for entertaining; had to

live in apartments such as they might happen to find vacant in

various parts of the town--sometimes in very poor quarters,

sometimes in better; were obliged to furnish them at their own

expense; had, therefore, never been able to obtain a tithe of

that social influence, so powerful in Russia, which was exercised

by the British Embassy.



More than this, the British ambassador had adequate means

furnished him for exercising political influence. The American

representatives had not; they had been stinted in every way. The

British ambassador had a large staff of thoroughly trained

secretaries and attaches, the very best of their kind,--well

educated to begin with, thoroughly trained afterward,--serving as

antennae for Great Britain in Russian society; and as the first

secretary of his embassy he had no less a personage than Henry

Howard, now Sir Henry Howard, minister at The Hague, one of the

brightest, best-trained, and most experienced diplomatists in

Europe. The American representative was at that time provided

with only one secretary of legation, and he, though engaging and

brilliant, a casual appointment who remained in the country only

a few months. I had, indeed, secured a handsome and comfortable

apartment, and entertained at dinner and otherwise the leading

members of the Russian ministry and of the diplomatic corps, at a

cost of more than double my salary; but the influence thus

exercised was, of course, as nothing compared to that exercised

by a diplomatist like Sir Robert Morier, who had every sort of

resource at his command, who had been for perhaps forty years

steadily in the service of his country, and had learned by long

experience to know the men with whom he had to deal and the ways

of getting at them. His power in St. Petersburg was felt in a

multitude of ways: all officials at the Russian Foreign Office,

from the highest to the lowest, naturally desired to be on good

terms with him. They knew that his influence had become very

great and that it was best to have his friendship; they loved

especially to be invited to his dinners, and their families loved

to be invited to his balls. He was a POWER. The question above

referred to, of such importance to the United States, was not

decided by argument, but simply by the weight of social and other

influence, which counts so enormously in matters of this kind at

all European capitals, and especially in Russia. This condition

of things has since been modified by the change of the legation

into an embassy; but, as no house has been provided, the old

difficulty remains. The United States has not the least chance of

success, and under her present shabby system never will have, in

closely contested cases, with any of the great powers of the

earth. They provide fitly for their representatives; the United

States does not. The representatives of other powers, being thus

provided for, are glad to remain at their posts and to devote

themselves to getting a thorough mastery of everything connected

with diplomatic business; American representatives, obliged, as a

rule, to take up with uncomfortable quarters, finding their

position not what it ought to be as compared with that of the

representatives of other great powers, and obliged to expend much

more than their salaries, are generally glad to resign after a

brief term. Especially has this been the case in St. Petersburg.

The terms of our representatives there have generally been very

short. A few have stayed three or four years, but most have

stayed much shorter terms. In one case a representative of the

United States remained only three or four months, and in another

only six weeks. So marked was this tendency that the Emperor once

referred to it in a conversation with one of our representatives,

saying that he hoped that this American diplomatist would remain

longer than his predecessors had generally done.



The action of the Russian authorities in the Behring Sea

question, which is directly traceable to the superior policy of

Great Britain in maintaining a preponderating diplomatic,

political, and social influence at the Russian capital, cost our

government a sum which would have bought suitable houses in

several capitals, and would have given to each American

representative a proper staff of assistants. I have presented

this matter with reluctance, though I feel not the slightest

responsibility for my part in it. I do not think that any

right-minded man can blame me for it, any more than, in the

recent South African War, he could have blamed Lord Roberts, the

British general, if the latter had been sent to the Transvaal

with insufficient means, inadequate equipment, and an army far

inferior in numbers to that of his enemy.



I am not at all in this matter "a man with a grievance"; for I

knew what American representatives had to expect, and was not

disappointed. My feeling is simply that of an American citizen

whose official life is past, and who can look back

dispassionately and tell the truth plainly.



This case is presented simply in the hope that it will do

something to arouse thinking men in public life, and especially

in the Congress of the United States, to provide at least a

suitable house or apartment for the American representative in

each of the more important capitals of the world, as all other

great powers and many of the lesser nations have done. If I can

aid in bringing about this result, I care nothing for any

personal criticism which may be brought upon me.







CHAPTER XXXIV



INTERCOURSE WITH RUSSIAN STATESMEN--1892-1894



To return to Sir Robert Morier. There had been some friction

between his family and that of one of my predecessors, and this

had for some time almost ended social intercourse between his

embassy and our legation; but on my arrival I ignored this, and

we established very satisfactory personal relations. He had held

important positions in various parts of Europe, and had been

closely associated with many of the most distinguished men of his

own and other countries. Reading Grant Duff's "Memoirs," I find

that Morier's bosom friend, of all men in the world, was Jowett,

the late head of Oriel College at Oxford. But Sir Robert was at

the close of his career; his triumph in the Behring Sea matter

was his last. I met him shortly afterward at his last visit to

the Winter Palace: with great effort he mounted the staircase,

took his position at the head of the diplomatic circle, and,

immediately after his conversation with the Emperor, excused

himself and went home. This was the last time I ever saw him; he

returned soon afterward to England and died. His successor, Sir

Frank Lascelles, more recently my colleague at Berlin, is a very

different character. His manner is winning, his experience large

and interesting, his first post having been at Paris during the

Commune, and his latest at Teheran. Our relations became, and

have ever since remained, all that I could desire. He, too, in

every post, is provided with all that is necessary for

accomplishing the purposes of Great Britain, and will doubtless

win great success for his country, though not in exactly the same

way as his predecessor.



The French ambassador was the Comte de Montebello, evidently a

man of ability, but with perhaps less of the engaging qualities

than one generally expects in a French diplomatic representative.

The Turkish ambassador, Husny Pasha, like most Turkish

representatives whom I have met, had learned to make himself very

agreeable; but his position was rather trying: he had fought in

the Russo-Turkish War and had seen his country saved from the

most abject humiliation, if not destruction, only at the last

moment, by the Berlin Conference. His main vexation in St.

Petersburg arose from the religious feeling of the Emperor. Every

great official ceremony in Russia is prefaced, as a rule, by a

church service; hence Husny was excluded, since he felt bound to

wear the fez, and this the Emperor would not tolerate; though

there was really no more harm in his wearing this simple

head-gear in church than in a woman wearing her bonnet or a

soldier wearing his helmet.



Interesting, too, was the Italian ambassador, Marochetti, son of

the eminent sculptor, some of whose artistic ability he had

inherited. He was fond of exercising this talent; but it was

generally understood that his recall was finally due to the fact

that his diplomatic work had suffered in consequence.



The Austrian ambassador, Count Wolkenstein, was, in many things,

the most trustworthy of counselors; more than once, under trying

circumstances, I found his advice precious; for he knew,

apparently, in every court of Europe, the right man to approach,

and the right way to approach him, on every conceivable subject.



Of the ministers plenipotentiary the Dutch representative, Van

Stoetwegen, was the best counselor I found. He was shrewd, keen,

and kindly; but his tongue was sharp--so much so that it finally

brought about his recall. He made a remark one day which

especially impressed me. I had said to him, "I have just sent a

despatch to my government declaring my skepticism as to the

probability of any war in Europe for a considerable time to come.

When I arrived in Berlin eleven years ago all the knowing people

said that a general European war must break out within a few

months: in the spring they said it must come in the autumn; and

in the autumn they said it must come in the spring. All these

years have passed and there is still no sign of war. We hear the

same prophecies daily, but I learned long since not to believe in

them. War may come, but it seems to me more and more unlikely."

He answered, "I think you are right. I advise my own government

in the same sense. The fact is that war in these days is not what

it once was; it is infinitely more dangerous from every point of

view, and it becomes more and more so every day. Formerly a

crowned head, when he thought himself aggrieved, or felt that he

would enjoy a campaign, plunged into war gaily. If he succeeded,

all was well; if not, he hauled off to repair damages,--very much

as a pugilist would do after receiving a black eye in a fist

fight,--and in a short time the losses were repaired and all went

on as before. In these days the case is different: it is no

longer a simple contest in the open, with the possibility of a

black eye or, at most, of a severe bruise; it has become a matter

of life and death to whole nations. Instead of being like a fist

fight, it is like a combat between a lot of champions armed with

poisoned daggers, and in a dark room; if once the struggle

begins, no one knows how many will be drawn into it or who will

be alive at the end of it; the probabilities are that all will be

injured terribly and several fatally. War in these days means the

cropping up of a multitude of questions dangerous not only to

statesmen but to monarchs, and even to society itself. Monarchs

and statesmen know this well; and, no matter how truculent they

may at times appear, they really dread war above all things."



One of my colleagues at St. Petersburg was interesting in a very

different way from any of the others. This was Pasitch, the

Servian minister. He was a man of fine presence and, judging from

his conversation, of acute mind. He had some years before been

sentenced to death for treason, but since that had been prime

minister. Later he was again put on trial for his life at

Belgrade, charged with being a partner in the conspiracy which

resulted in the second attempt against the life of King Milan.

His speech before his judges, recently published, was an effort

worthy of a statesman, and carried the conviction to my mind that

he was not guilty.[3]





[3] He was found guilty, but escaped death by a bitter

humiliation: it was left for others to bring about Milan's

assassination.





The representatives of the extreme Orient were both interesting

personages, but the same difference prevailed there as elsewhere:

the Chinese was a mandarin, able to speak only through an

interpreter; the Japanese was trained in Western science, and

able to speak fluently both Russian and French. His successor,

whom I met at the Peace Conference of The Hague, spoke English

admirably.



Among the secretaries and attaches, several were very

interesting; and of these was the first British secretary Henry

Howard, now Sir Henry Howard, minister at The Hague. He and his

American wife were among the most delightful of associates.

Another in this category was the Bavarian secretary, Baron

Guttenberg, whom I often met later at Berlin. When I spoke to him

about a visit I had made to Wurzburg, and the desecration of the

magnificent old Romanesque cathedral there by plastering its

whole interior over with nude angels, and substituting for the

splendid old mediaeval carving Louis Quinze woodwork in white and

gold, he said: "Yes; you are right; and it was a bishop of my

family who did it."



As to Russian statesmen, I had the benefit of the fairly friendly

spirit which has usually been shown toward the American

representative in Russia by all in authority from the Emperor

down. I do not mean by this that the contentions of the American

Embassy are always met by speedy concessions, for among the most

trying of all things in diplomatic dealings with that country are

the long delays in all business; but a spirit is shown which, in

the long run, serves the purpose of our representative as regards

most questions.



It seems necessary here to give a special warning against putting

any trust in the epigram which has long done duty as a piece of

politico-ethnological wisdom: "Scratch a Russian and you will

find a Tartar." It would be quite as correct to say, "Scratch an

American and you will find an Indian." The simple fact is that

the Russian officials with whom foreigners have to do are men of

experience, and, as a rule, much like those whom one finds in

similar positions in other parts of Europe. A foreign

representative has to meet on business, not merely the Russian

minister of foreign affairs and the heads of departments in the

Foreign Office, but various other members of the imperial

cabinet, especially the ministers of finance, of war, of the

navy, of the interior, of justice, as well as the chief municipal

authorities of St. Petersburg; and I can say that many of these

gentlemen, both as men and as officials, are the peers of men in

similar positions in most other countries which I have known.

Though they were at times tenacious in questions between their

own people and ours, and though they held political doctrines

very different from those we cherish, I am bound to say that most

of them did so in a way which disarmed criticism. At the same

time I must confess a conviction which has more and more grown

upon me, that the popular view regarding the power, vigor, and

foresight of Russian statesmen is ill-founded. And it must be

added that Russian officials and their families are very

susceptible to social influences: a foreign representative who

entertains them frequently and well can secure far more for his

country than one who trusts to argument alone. In no part of the

world will a diplomatist more surely realize the truth embedded

in Oxenstiern's famous utterance, "Go forth, my son, and see with

how little wisdom the world is governed." When one sees what

really strong men might do in Russia, what vast possibilities

there are which year after year are utterly neglected, one cannot

but think that the popular impression regarding the superiority

of Russian statesmen is badly based. As a matter of fact, there

has not been a statesman of the first class, of Russian birth,

since Catherine the Great, and none of the second class unless

Nesselrode and the Emperor Nicholas are to be excepted. To

consider Prince Gortchakoff a great chancellor on account of his

elaborate despatches is absurd. The noted epigram regarding him

is doubtless just: "C'est un Narcisse qui se mire dans son

encrier."



To call him a great statesman in the time of Cavour Bismarck,

Lincoln, and Seward is preposterous. Whatever growth in

civilization Russia has made in the last forty years has been

mainly in spite of the men who have posed as her statesmen; the

atmosphere of Russian autocracy is fatal to greatness in any

form.



The emancipation of the serfs was due to a policy advocated by

the first Nicholas and carried out under Alexander II; but it was

made possible mainly by Miloutine, Samarine, Tcherkassky, and

other subordinates, who never were allowed to approach the first

rank as state servants. This is my own judgment, founded on

observation and reading during half a century, and it is the

quiet judgment of many who have had occasion to observe Russia

longer and more carefully.



Next, as to the Foreign Office. Nearly a hundred years ago

Napoleon compared Alexander I and those about him to "Greeks of

the Lower Empire." That saying was repelled as a slander; but,

ever since it was uttered, the Russian Foreign Office seems to

have been laboring to deserve it. There are chancelleries in the

world which, when they give promises, are believed and trusted.

Who, in the light of the last fifty years, would claim that the

Russian Foreign Office is among these? Its main reputation is for

astuteness finally brought to naught; it has constantly been "too

clever by half."



Take the loudly trumpeted peace proposals to the world made by

Nicholas II. When the nations got together at The Hague to carry

out the Czar's supposed purpose, it was found that all was

haphazard; that no adequate studies had been made, no project

prepared; in fact, that the Emperor's government had virtually

done nothing showing any real intention to set a proper example.

Nothing but the high character and abilities of M. de Martens and

one or two of his associates saved the prestige of the Russian

Foreign Office at that time. Had there been a man of real power

in the chancellorship or in the ministry of foreign affairs, he

would certainly have advised the Emperor to dismiss to useful

employments, say, two hundred to two hundred and fifty thousand

troops, which he could have done without the slightest

danger--thus showing that he was in earnest, crippling the war

clique, and making the beginning of a great reform which all

Europe would certainly have been glad to follow. But there was

neither the wisdom nor the strength required to advise and carry

through such a measure. Deference to the "military party" and

petty fear of a loss of military prestige were all-controlling.



Take the army and the navy departments. In these, if anywhere,

Russia has been thought strong. The main occupation of leading

Russians for a hundred years has been, not the steady uplifting

of the people in intellect and morals, not the vigorous

development of natural resources, but preparations for war on

land and sea. This has been virtually the one business of the

main men of light and leading from the emperors and grand dukes

down. Drill and parade have been apparently everything: the

strengthening of the empire by the education of the people, and

the building of industrial prosperity as a basis for a great army

and navy, seem to have been virtually nothing. The results are

now before the world for the third time since 1815.



An objector may remind me of the emancipation of the serfs. I do

not deny the greatness and nobleness of Alexander II and the

services of the men he then called to his aid; but I lived in

Russia both before and since that reform, and feel obliged to

testify that, thus far, its main purpose has been so thwarted by

reactionaries that there is, as yet, little, if any, practical

difference between the condition of the Russian peasant before

and since obtaining his freedom.



Take the dealings with Finland. The whole thing is monstrous. It

is both comedy and tragedy. Finland is by far the best-developed

part of the empire; it stands on a higher plane than do the other

provinces as regards every element of civilization; it has

steadily been the most loyal of all the realms of the Czar.

Nihilism and anarchism have never gained the slightest foothold;

yet to-day there is nobody in the whole empire strong enough to

prevent sundry bigots--military and ecclesiastical--leading the

Emperor to violate his coronation oath; to make the simple

presentation of a petition to him treasonable; to trample Finland

under his feet; to wrong grievously and insult grossly its whole

people; to banish and confiscate the property of its best men; to

muzzle its press; to gag its legislators; and thus to lower the

whole country to the level of the remainder of Russia.



During my stay in Russia at the time of the Crimean War, I had

been interested in the Finnish peasants whom I saw serving on the

gunboats. There was a sturdiness, heartiness, and loyalty about

them which could not fail to elicit good-will; but during this

second stay in Russia my sympathies with them were more

especially enlisted. During the hot weather of the first summer

my family were at the Finnish capital, Helsingfors, at the point

where the Gulf of Finland opens into the Baltic. The whole people

deeply interested me. Here was one of the most important

universities of Europe, a noble public library, beautiful

buildings, and throughout the whole town an atmosphere of

cleanliness and civilization far superior to that which one finds

in any Russian city. Having been added to Russia by Alexander I

under his most solemn pledges that it should retain its own

constitutional government, it had done so up to the time of my

stay; and the results were evident throughout the entire grand

duchy. While in Russia there had been from time immemorial a

debased currency, the currency of Finland was as good as gold;

while in Russia all public matters bore the marks of arbitrary

repression, in Finland one could see the results of enlightened

discussion; while in Russia the peasant is but little, if any,

above Asiatic barbarism, the Finnish peasant--simple, genuine--is

clearly far better developed both morally and religiously. It is

a grief to me in these latter days to see that the measures which

were then feared have since been taken. There seems a

determination to grind down Finland to a level with Russia in

general. We heard, not long since, much sympathy expressed for

the Boers in South Africa in their struggle against England; but

infinitely more pathetic is the case of Finland. The little grand

duchy has done what it could to save itself, but it recognizes

the fact that its two millions of people are utterly powerless

against the brute force of the one hundred and twenty millions of

the Russian Empire. The struggle in South Africa meant, after

all, that if worst came to worst, the Boers would, within a

generation or two, enjoy a higher type of constitutional liberty

than they ever could have developed under any republic they could

have established; but Finland is now forced to give up her

constitutional government and to come under the rule of brutal

Russian satraps. These have already begun their work. All is to

be "Russified": the constitutional bodies are to be virtually

abolished; the university is to be brought down to the level of

Dorpat--once so noted as a German university, now so worthless as

a Russian university; for the simple Protestantism of the people

is to be substituted the fetishism of the Russo-Greek Church. It

is the saddest spectacle of our time. Previous emperors, however

much they wished to do so, did not dare break their oaths to

Finland; but the present weakling sovereign, in his indifference,

carelessness, and absolute unfitness to rule, has allowed the

dominant reactionary clique about him to accomplish its own good

pleasure. I put on record here the prophecy that his dynasty, if

not himself, will be punished for it. All history shows that no

such crime has gone unpunished. It is a far greater crime than

the partition of Poland; for Poland had brought her fate on

herself, while Finland has been the most loyal part of the

empire. Not even Moscow herself has been more thoroughly devoted

to Russia and the reigning dynasty. The young monarch whose

weakness has led to this fearful result will bring retribution

upon himself and those who follow him. The Romanoffs will yet

find that "there is a Power in the universe, not ourselves, which

makes for righteousness." The house of Hapsburg and its

satellites found this in the humiliating end of their reign in

Italy; the house of Valois found it, after the massacre of St.

Bartholomew, in their own destruction; the Bourbons found it,

after the driving out of the Huguenots and the useless wars of

Louis XIV and XV, in the French Revolution which ended their

dynasty. Both the Napoleons met their punishment after violating

the rights of human nature. The people of the United States,

after the Fugitive Slave Law, found their punishment in the Civil

War, which cost nearly a million of lives and, when all is

reckoned, ten thousand millions of treasure.



When I talked with this youth before he came to the throne, and

saw how little he knew of his own empire,--how absolutely unaware

he was that the famine was continuing for a second year in

various important districts, there resounded in my ears, as so

often at other times, the famous words of Oxenstiern to his son,

"Go forth, my son, and see with how little wisdom the world is

governed."



Pity to say it, the European sovereign to whom Nicholas II can be

most fully compared is Charles IX of France, under the influence

of his family and men and women courtiers and priests,

authorizing the massacre of St. Bartholomew. The punishment to be

meted out to him and his house is sure.[4]





[4] The above was written before the Russian war with Japan and

the assassinations of Bobrikoff, Plehve, and others were dreamed

of. My prophecy seems likely to be realized far earlier than I

had thought possible.







As I revise these lines, we see another exhibition of the same

weakness and folly. The question between Russia and Japan could

have been easily and satisfactorily settled in a morning talk by

any two business men of average ability; but the dominant clique

has forced on one of the most terrible wars in history, which

bids fair to result in the greatest humiliation Russia has ever

known.



The same thing may be said regarding Russia's dealings with the

Baltic provinces. The "Russification" which has been going on

there for some years is equally absurd, equally wicked, and sure

to be equally disastrous.



The first Russian statesman with whom I had to do was the

minister of foreign affairs, M. de Giers; but he was dying. I saw

him twice in retirement at Tzarskoye Selo, and came to respect

him much. He spoke at length regarding the entente between Russia

and France, and insisted that it was not in the interest of war

but of peace. "Tell your government," he said, "that the closer

the lines are drawn which bind Russia and France, the more

strongly will Russian influence be used to hold back the French

from war."



At another time he discoursed on the folly of war, and especially

regarding the recent conflict between Russia and Turkey. He spoke

of its wretched results, of the ingratitude which Russia had

experienced from the peoples she had saved from the Turks, and

finally, with extreme bitterness, of the vast sums of money

wasted in it which could have been used in raising the condition

of the Russian peasantry. He spoke with the conviction of a dying

man, and I felt that he was sincere. At the same time I felt it a

pity that under the Russian system there is no chance for such a

man really to enforce his ideas. For one day he may be in the

ascendancy with the autocrat; and the next, through the influence

of grand dukes, women, priests, or courtiers, the very opposite

ideas may become dominant.



The men with whom I had more directly to do at the Foreign Office

were the acting minister, Shishkin, who had formerly been at

Washington, and the head of the Asiatic department, Count

Kapnist. They were agreeable in manner; but it soon became clear

that, regarding the question of the Behring seal-fisheries, they

were pursuing a policy of their own, totally distinct from the

interests of the empire. Peter the Great would have beheaded both

of them.



The strongest man among the Czar's immediate advisers was

understood to be the finance minister, De Witte. There always

seemed in him a certain sullen force. The story usually told of

his rise in the world is curious. It is, in effect, that when the

Emperor Alexander II and his family were wrecked in their special

train at Borki, many of their attendants were killed; and the

world generally, including the immediate survivors of the

catastrophe, believed for some time that it was the result of a

nihilist plot. There was, therefore, a general sweeping into

prison of subordinat'e railway officials; and among these was De

Witte, then in charge of a railway station. During the

examinations which ensued he showed himself so clear-headed and

straightforward that he attracted attention was promoted, put

into the finance ministry, and finally advanced to the first

place in it. His dealings with Russian finances have since shown

great capacity: he has brought the empire out of the slough of

depreciated currency and placed it firmly on a gold basis. I came

especially to know him when he offered, through me, to the United

States a loan of gold to enable us to tide over our difficulties

with the currency question. He informed me that Russia had in her

treasury many millions of rubles in American gold eagles, and

that the Russian gold reserve then in the treasury was about six

hundred millions of rubles.



The only result was that I was instructed to convey the thanks of

the President to him, there being no law enabling us to take

advantage of his offer. What he wished to do was to make a call

loan, whereas our Washington Government could obtain gold only by

issuing bonds.



I also met him in a very interesting way when I presented to him

Rabbi Krauskopf of Philadelphia, who discussed the question of

allowing sundry Israelites who were crowded into the western

districts of the empire to be transferred to some of the less

congested districts, on condition that funds for that purpose be

furnished from their coreligionists in America. De Witte's

discussion of the whole subject was liberal and statesmanlike.

Unfortunately, there was, as I believe, a fundamental error in

his general theory, which is the old Russian idea at the bottom

of the autocracy--namely, that the State should own everything.

More and more he went on extending government ownership to the

railways, until the whole direction and management of them

virtually centered in his office.



On this point he differed widely from his predecessor in the

finance ministry, Wischniegradsky. I had met the latter years

before, at the Paris Exposition, when he was at the head of the

great technical school in Moscow, and found him instructive and

interesting. Now I met him after his retirement from the finance

ministry. Calling on him one day, I said: "You will probably

build your trans-Siberian railway at a much less cost than we

were able to build our first trans-continental railway; you will

do it directly, by government funds, and so will probably not

have to make so many rich men as we did." His answer impressed me

strongly. He said: "As to a government building a railway more

cheaply than private individuals, I decidedly doubt; but I would

favor private individuals building it, even if the cost were

greater. I like to see rich men made; they are what Russia most

needs at this moment. What can capitalists do with their money?

They can't eat it or drink it: they have to invest it in other

enterprises; and such enterprises, to be remunerative, must meet

the needs of the people. Capitalists are far more likely to

invest their money in useful enterprises, and to manage these

investments well, than any finance minister can be, no matter how

gifted."



That he was right the history of Russia is showing more and more

every day. To return to M. de Witte, it seemed strange to most

onlookers that the present Emperor threw him out of the finance

ministry, in which he had so greatly distinguished himself, and

shelved him in one of those bodies, such as the council of state

or the senate, which exist mainly as harbors or shelters for

dismissed functionaries. But really there was nothing singular

about it. As regards the main body at court, from the grand

dukes, the women, etc., down, he had committed the sin of which

Turgot and Necker were guilty when they sought to save France but

found that the women, princes, and favorites of poor Louis XVI's

family were determined to dip their hands into the state

treasury, and were too strong to be controlled. Ruin followed the

dismissal of Turgot and Necker then, and seems to be following

the dismissal of De Witte now: though as I revise this chapter

word comes that the Emperor has recalled him.



No doubt Prince Khilkoff, who has come in as minister of internal

communications since my departure from Russia, is also a strong

man; but no functionary can take the place of a great body of

individuals who invest their own money in public works throughout

an entire nation.



There was also another statesman in a very different field whom I

found exceedingly interesting,--a statesman who had gained a

power in the empire second to no other save the Emperor himself,

and had centered in himself more hatred than any other Russian of

recent times,--the former Emperor's tutor and virtual minister as

regards ecclesiastical affairs, Pobedonostzeff. His theories are

the most reactionary of all developed in modern times; and his

hand was then felt, and is still felt, in every part of the

empire, enforcing those theories. Whatever may be thought of his

wisdom, his patriotism is not to be doubted. Though I differ from

him almost totally, few men have so greatly interested me, and

one of the following chapters will be devoted to him.



But there were some other so-called statesmen toward whom I had a

very different feeling. One of these was the minister of the

interior. Nothing could be more delusive than his manner. He

always seemed about to accede to the ideas of his interlocutor,

but he had one fundamental idea of his own, and only one; and

that was, evidently, never to do anything which he could possibly

avoid. He always seemed to me a sort of great jellyfish, looking

as if he had a mission to accomplish, but, on closer examination,

proving to be without consistency, and slippery. His theory

apparently was, "No act, no responsibility"; and throughout the

Russian Empire this principle of action, or, rather, of inaction,

appears to be very widely diffused.



I had one experience with this functionary, who, I am happy to

say, has since been relieved of his position and shelved among

the do-nothings of the Russian senate, which showed me what he

was. Two American ladies of the best breeding and culture, and

bearing the most satisfactory letters of introduction, had been

staying in St. Petersburg, and had met, at my table and

elsewhere, some of the most interesting people in Russian

society. From St. Petersburg they had gone to Moscow; and, after

a pleasant stay there, had left for Vienna by way of Warsaw.

Returning home late at night, about a week afterward, I found an

agonizing telegram from them, stating that they had been stopped

at the Austrian frontier and sent back fifty miles to a dirty

little Russian village; that their baggage had all gone on to

Vienna; that, there being no banker in the little hamlet where

they were, their letter of credit was good for nothing; that all

this was due to the want of the most trivial of formalities in a

passport; that they had obtained all the vises supposed to be

needed at St. Petersburg and at Moscow; and that, though the

American consul at Warsaw had declared these to be sufficient to

take them out of the empire, they had been stopped by a petty

Russian official because they had no vise from the Warsaw police.



Early next morning I went to the minister of the interior,

presented the case to him, told him all about these

ladies,--their high standing, the letters they had brought, the

people they had met,--assured him that nothing could be further

from possibility than the slightest tendency on their part toward

any interference with the Russian Government, and asked him to

send a telegram authorizing their departure. He was most profuse

in his declarations of his willingness to help. Nothing in the

world, apparently, would give him more pleasure; and, though

there was a kind of atmosphere enveloping his talk which I did

not quite like, I believed that the proper order would be given.

But precious time went on, and again came telegrams from the

ladies that nothing was done. Again I went to the minister to

urge the matter upon his attention; again he assumed the same

jellyfish condition, pleasing but evasive. Then I realized the

situation; went at once to the prefect of St. Petersburg, General

von Wahl, although it was not strictly within his domain; and he,

a man of character and vigor, took the necessary measures and the

ladies were released.



Like so many other persons whom I have known who came into Russia

and were delighted with it during their whole stay, these ladies

returned to America most bitter haters of the empire and of

everything within it.



As to Von Wahl, who seemed to me one of the very best Russian

officials I met, he has since met reward for his qualities: from

the Czar a transfer to a provincial governorship, and from the

anarchists a bullet which, though intended to kill him, only

wounded him.



Many were the sufferers from this feature in Russian

administration--this shirking of labor and responsibility. Among

these was a gentleman belonging to one of the most honored

Russian families, who was greatly devoted to fruit-culture, and

sought to bring the products of his large estates in the south of

Russia into Moscow and St. Petersburg. He told me that he had

tried again and again, but the officials shrugged their shoulders

and would not take the trouble; that finally he had induced them

to give him a freight-car and to bring a load of fruit to St.

Petersburg as soon as possible; but, though the journey ought to

have taken only three or four days, it actually took several

weeks; and, of course, all the fruit was spoiled. As I told him

of the fruit-trains which bring the products of California across

our continent and distribute them to the Atlantic ports, even

enabling them to be found fresh in the markets of London, he

almost shed tears. This was another result of state control of

railways. As a matter of fact, there is far more and better fruit

to be seen on the tables of artisans in most American towns,

however small, than in the lordliest houses of Moscow and St.

Petersburg; and this solely because in our country energetic men

conduct transportation with some little ambition to win public

approval and patronage, while in Russia a horde of state

officials shirk labor and care as much as possible.



Still another sufferer was a very energetic man who had held

sundry high positions, but was evidently much discouraged. He

showed me specimens of various rich ores from different parts of

the empire, but lamented that there was no one to take hold of

the work of bringing out these riches. It was perfectly clear

that with the minister of the interior at that time, as in sundry

other departments, the great question was "how not to do it."

Evidently this minister and functionaries like him felt that if

great enterprises and industries were encouraged, they would

become so large as to be difficult to manage; hence, that it

would be more comfortable to keep things within as moderate

compass as possible.



To this easy-going view of public duty there were a few notable

exceptions. While De Witte was the most eminent of these, there

was one who has since become sadly renowned, and who, as I revise

these lines, has just perished by the hand of an assassin. This

official was De Plehve, who, during my acquaintance with him, was

only an undersecretary in the interior department, but was

taking, apparently, all the important duties from his superior,

M. Dournovo. At various times I met him to discuss the status of

sundry American insurance companies in Russia, and was favorably

impressed by his insight, vigor, and courtesy. It was, therefore,

a surprise to me when, on becoming a full minister, he bloomed

out as a most bitter, cruel, and evidently short-sighted

reactionary. The world stood amazed at the murderous cruelties

against the Jews at Kishineff, which he might easily have

prevented; and nothing more cruel or short-sighted than his

dealings with Finland has been known since Louis XIV revoked the

Edict of Nantes. I can only explain his course by supposing that

he sought to win the favor of the reactionary faction which, up

to the present time, has controlled the Czar, and thus to fight

his way toward the highest power. He made of the most loyal and

happy part of the empire the most disloyal and wretched; he

pitted himself against the patriotism, the sense of justice, and

all the highest interests and sentiments of the Finnish people;

and he met his death at the hands of an avenger, who, in

destroying the enemy of his country, has struck a fearful blow at

his country's happiness.



While a thoughtful American must condemn much which he sees in

Russia, there is one thing which he cannot but admire and

contrast to the disadvantage of his own country; and this is the

fact that Russia sets a high value upon its citizenship. Its

value, whatever it may be, is the result of centuries of

struggles, of long outpourings of blood and treasure; and

Russians believe that it has been bought at too great a price and

is in every way too precious to be lavished and hawked about as a

thing of no value. On the other hand, when one sees how the

citizenship of the United States, which ought to be a millionfold

more precious than that of Russia, is conferred loosely upon tens

of thousands of men absolutely unfit to exercise it,--whose

exercise of it seems, at times, likely to destroy republican

government; when one sees the power of conferring it granted to

the least respectable class of officials at the behest of ward

politicians, without proper safeguards and at times without any

regard to the laws; when one sees it prostituted by men of the

most unfit class,--and, indeed, of the predatory class,--who have

left Europe just long enough to obtain it, and then left America

in order to escape the duties both of their native and their

adopted country, and to avail themselves of the privileges of

both citizenships without one thought of the duties of either,

using them often in careers of scoundrelism,--one feels that

Russia is nearer the true ideal in this respect than we are.



As a matter of fact, there is with us no petty joint-stock

company in which an interest is not virtually held to be superior

to this citizenship of ours for which such sacrifices have been

made, and for which so many of our best men have laid down their

lives. No stockholder in the pettiest manufacturing company

dreams of admitting men to share in it unless they show their

real fitness to be thus admitted; but admission to American

citizenship is surrounded by no such safeguards: it has been

cheapened and prostituted until many who formerly revered it have

come to scoff at it. From this evil, at least, Russia is free.







CHAPTER XXXV



"ALL SORTS AND CONDITIONS OF MEN" IN RUSSIA--1892-1894



Still another department which interested me was that known as

the "Ministry of Public Enlightenment," its head being Count

Delyanoff. He was certainly a man of culture; but the title of

his department was a misnomer, for its duty was clearly to

prevent enlightenment in the public at large. The Russian theory

is, evidently, that a certain small number should be educated up

to a certain point for the discharge of their special duties; but

that, beyond this, anything like the general education of the

people is to be discouraged; hence the Russian peasant is the

most ignorant and helpless in Christendom.



There was evidently a disposition among very many of the most

ardent Russians to make a merit of this imperfect civilization,

and to cultivate hatred for any people whom they clearly saw

possessing anything better: hence it came that, just as so many

Frenchmen hate Great Britain, and so many in the backward,

slipshod regions of our country hate New England, it was quite

the fashion among large classes of Russians to hate everything

German, and especially to detest the Baltic provinces.



One evening during my stay a young Russian at a social gathering

of military and other officials voiced this feeling by saying, "I

hope the time will soon come when we shall have cleared out all

these Germans from the Russian service; they are the curse of the

country." Thereupon a young American present, who was especially

noted for his plain speaking, immediately answered, "How are you

going to do it? I notice that, as a rule, you rarely give a

position which really involves high responsibility to a Russian;

you generally give it to a German. When the Emperor goes to the

manoeuvers, does he dare trust his immediate surroundings to a

Russian? Never; he intrusts them to General Richter, who is a

Baltic-Province German. And when his Majesty is here in town does

he dare trust his personal safety to a Russian? Not at all; he

relies on Von Wahl, prefect of St. Petersburg, another German."

And so this plain-spoken American youth went on with a full

catalogue of leading Baltic-Province Germans in positions of the

highest responsibility, finally saying, "You know as well as I

that if the salvation of the Emperor depended on any one of you,

and you should catch sight of a pretty woman, you would instantly

forget your sovereign and run after her."



Richter and Von Wahl I knew, and they were certainly men whom one

could respect,--thoughtful, earnest, devoted to duty. Whenever

one saw the Emperor at a review, Richter was close at hand;

whenever their Majesties were at the opera, or in any public

place, there was Von Wahl with his eyes fastened upon them.



The young American might now add that when a man was needed to

defend Port Arthur another German was chosen--Stoessel, whose

heroism the whole world is now applauding, as it once applauded

Todleben, the general of German birth who carried off the Russian

laurels of the Crimean War.



One Russian official for whom there seemed to be deep and wide

respect was Count Woronzoff-Daschkoff; and I think that our

irrepressible American would have made an exception in his favor.

Calling upon him one day regarding the distribution of American

relief to famine-stricken peasants, I was much impressed by his

straightforward honesty: he was generally credited with stopping

the time-honored pilfering and plundering at the Winter Palace.



One of the most interesting of all the Russians I met was General

Annenkoff. His brother-in-law, Struve, Russian minister at

Washington, having given me a letter to him, our relations became

somewhat close. He had greatly distinguished himself by building

the trans-Caucasian railway, but his main feat had been the

annexation of Bokhara. The story, as told me by a member of his

family, is curious. While superintending his great force of men

and pushing on the laying of the rails through the desert, his

attention was suddenly called to some horsemen in the distance,

riding toward him with all their might. On their arrival their

leader was discovered to be a son of the Ameer of Bokhara. That

potentate having just died, the other sons were trying to make

their way to the throne by cutting each other's throats, but this

one had thought it wise to flee to the Russians for safety.

Annenkoff saw the point at once: with a large body of his cavalry

he started immediately for Bokhara, his guest by his side; pushed

his way through all obstacles; seated the young prince on the

throne; and so made him a Russian satrap. I shall speak later of

the visit of this prince to St. Petersburg. It was evident that

Annenkoff, during my stay, was not in favor. It was said that he

had been intrusted with large irrigation-works in order to give

employment to peasants during the famine, and that he had not

managed them well; but it was clear that this was not the main

difficulty: he was evidently thought too progressive and liberal,

and in that seething caldron of intrigue which centers at the

Winter Palace his ambitions had come to grief.



Another Russian who interested me was Glalkin Wraskoy. He was

devoted, night and day, to improving the Russian prison system.

That there was much need of such work was certain; but the fact

that this personage in government employ was so devoted to

improvements, and had called together in Russia a convention of

men interested in the amelioration of prison systems, led me to

think that the Russian Government is not so utterly and wilfully

cruel in its prison arrangements as the Western world has been

led to think.



Another interesting Russian was Count Orloff Davidoff; and on my

meeting him, just after his return from the Chicago Exposition,

at General Annenkoff's table, he entertained me with his

experiences. On my asking him what was the most amusing thing he

had seen in America, he answered that it was a "sacred concert,"

on Sunday, at a church in Colorado Springs, in which the music of

Strauss's waltzes and Offenbach's comic songs were leading

features, the audience taking them all very solemnly.



In the literary direction I found Prince John Galitzin's readings

from French dramas delightful. As to historical studies, the most

interesting man I found was Professor Demetrieff, who was brought

to my house by Pobedonostzeff. I had been reading Billbassoff's

"Life of the Empress Catherine"; and, on my asking some questions

regarding it, the professor said that at the death of the

Empress, her son, the Emperor Paul, intrusted the examination of

her papers to Rostopchine, who, on going through them, found a

casket containing letters and the like, which she had evidently

considered especially precious, and among these a letter from

Orloff, giving the details of the murder of her husband, Peter

III, at Ropscha. The letter, in substance, stated that Orloff and

his associates, having attempted to seize Peter, who was

evidently on his way to St. Petersburg to imprison the Empress

Catherine,--if not to put her to death,--the Emperor had

resisted; and that finally, in the struggle, he had been killed.

Professor Demetrieff then said that the Emperor Paul showed these

papers to his sons Alexander and Nicholas, who afterward

succeeded him on the throne, and expressed his devout

thankfulness that the killing of Peter III was not intentional,

and therefore that their grandmother was not a murderess.



This reminds me that, at my first visit to St. Petersburg, I

often passed, during my walks, the old palace of Paul, and that

there was one series of windows carefully barred: these belonging

to the rooms in which the Emperor Paul himself was assassinated

in order to protect the life of his son Alexander and of the

family generally.



Another Russian, Prince Serge Wolkonsky, was certainly the most

versatile man I have ever known: a playwright, an actor, an

essayist, an orator, a lecturer, and admirable in each of these

capacities. At a dinner given me, just before my departure from

St. Petersburg, by the Russians who had taken part in the Chicago

Exposition, I was somewhat troubled by the fact that the speeches

of the various officials were in Russian, and that, as I so

imperfectly understood them, I could not know what line to take

when my own speech came; but presently the chairman, Minister

Delyanoff, called upon young Prince Serge, who came forward very

modestly and, in admirable English, gave a summary of the whole

series of Russian speeches for my benefit, concluding with an

excellent speech of his own. His speeches and addresses at

Chicago were really remarkable; and, when he revisited America,

his lectures on Russian literature at Cornell University, at

Washington, and elsewhere, were worthy of the College de France.

This young man could speak fluently and idiomatically, not only

his own language, but English, French, German, Italian, and I

know not how many other tongues.



To meet scientific men of note my wont was to visit the Latin

Quarter; and there, at the house of Professor Woeikoff of St.

Petersburg University, I met, at various times, a considerable

body of those best worth knowing. One of those who made an

especially strong impression upon me was Admiral Makharoff.

Recently has come news of his death while commanding the Russian

fleet at Port Arthur--his flag-ship, with nearly all on board,

sunk by a torpedo. At court, in the university quarter, and later

at Washington, I met him often, and rated him among the

half-dozen best Russians I ever knew. Having won fame as a

vigorous and skilful commander in the Turkish war, he was

devoting himself to the scientific side of his profession. He had

made a success of his colossal ice-breaker in various northern

waters, and was now giving his main thoughts to the mapping out,

on an immense scale, of all the oceans, as regards winds and

currents. As explained by him, with quiet enthusiasm, it seemed

likely to be one of the greatest triumphs of the inductive method

since Lord Bacon. With Senator Semenoff and Prince Gregory

Galitzin I had very interesting talks on their Asiatic travels,

and was greatly impressed by the simplicity and strength of

Mendeleieff, who is certainly to-day one of two or three foremost

living authorities in chemistry. Although men of science, unless

they hold high official positions, are not to be seen at court, I

was glad to find that there were some Russian nobles who

appreciated them; and an admirable example of this was once shown

at my own house. It was at a dinner, when there was present a

young Russian of very high lineage; and I was in great doubt as

to the question of precedence, this being a matter of grave

import under the circumstances. At last my wife went to the

nobleman himself and asked him frankly regarding it. His answer

did him credit: he said, "I should be ashamed to take precedence

here of a man like Mendeleieff, who is an honor to Russia in the

eyes of the whole world; and I earnestly hope that he may be

given the first place."



There were also various interesting women in St. Petersburg

society, the reception afternoons of two of them being especially

attractive: they were, indeed, in the nature of the French salons

under the old regime.



One of these ladies--the Princess Wolkonsky--seemed to interest

all men not absorbed in futilities; and the result was that one

heard at her house the best men in St. Petersburg discussing the

most interesting questions.



The other was the Austrian ambassadress, Countess Wolkenstein,

whom I had slightly known, years before, as Countess Schleinitz,

wife of the minister of the royal household at Berlin. On her

afternoons one heard the best talk by the most interesting men;

and it was at the salons of these two ladies that there took

place the conversations which I have recorded in my "History of

the Warfare of Science," showing the development of a legend

regarding the miraculous cure of the Archbishop of St. Petersburg

by Father Ivan of Cronstadt.



Another place which especially attracted me was the house of

General Ignatieff, formerly ambassador at Constantinople, where,

on account of his alleged want of scruples in bringing on the war

with Russia, he received the nickname "Mentir Pasha." His wife

was the daughter of Koutousoff, the main Russian opponent of

Napoleon in 1812; and her accounts of Russia in her earlier days

and of her life in Constantinople were at times fascinating.



I remember meeting at her house, on one occasion, the Princess

Ourousoff, who told me that the Emperor Alexander had said to

her, "I wish that every one could see Sardou's play 'Thermidor'

and discover what revolution really is"; and that she had

answered, "Revolutions are prepared long before they break out."

That struck me as a very salutary bit of philosophy, which every

Russian monarch would do well to ponder.



The young Princess Radzivill was also especially attractive. In

one of her rooms hung a portrait of Balzac, taken just after

death, and it was most striking. This led her to give me very

interesting accounts of her aunt, Madame de Hanska, to whom

Balzac wrote his famous letters, and whom he finally married. I

met at her house another lady of high degree, to whom my original

introduction had been somewhat curious. Dropping in one afternoon

at the house of Henry Howard, the British first secretary, I met

in the crowd a large lady, simply dressed, whom I had never seen

before. Being presented to her, and not happening to catch her

name, I still talked on, and found that she had traveled, first

in Australia, then in California, thence across our continent to

New York; and her accounts of what she had seen interested me

greatly. But some little time afterward I met her again at the

house of Princess Radzivill, and then found that she was the

English Duchess of Buckingham. One day I had been talking with

the Princess and her guest on the treasures of the Imperial

Library, and especially the wonderful collection of autographs,

among them the copy-book of Louis XIV when a child, which showed

the pains taken to make him understand, even in his boyhood, that

he was an irresponsible autocrat. On one of its pages the line to

be copied ran as follows:



L'hommage est du aux Roys, ils font ce qu'il leur plaist.--LOUIS.



Under this the budding monarch had written the same words six

times, with childish care to keep the strokes straight and the

spaces regular. My account of this having led the princess to ask

me to take her and her friend to the library and to show them

some of these things, I gladly agreed, wrote the director,

secured an appointment for a certain afternoon, and when the time

came called for the ladies. But a curious contretemps arose. I

had met, the day before, two bright American ladies, and on their

asking me about the things best worth seeing, I had especially

recommended them to visit the Imperial Library. On arriving at

the door with the princess and the duchess, I was surprised to

find that no preparations had been made to meet us,--in fact,

that our coming seemed to be a matter of surprise; and a

considerable time elapsed before the director and other officials

came to us. Then I learned what the difficulty was. The two

American ladies, in perfectly good faith, had visited the library

a few hours before; and, on their saying that the American

minister had recommended them to come, it had been taken for

granted at once that THEY were the princess and the duchess, and

they had been shown everything with almost regal honors, the

officials never discovering the mistake until our arrival.



The American colony at St. Petersburg was very small. Interesting

compatriots came from time to time on various errands, and I was

glad to see them; but one whose visits were most heartily

welcomed was a former consul, Mr. Prince, an original, shrewd

"down-easter," and his reminiscences of some of my predecessors

were full of interest to me.



One especially dwells in my mind. It had reference to a former

senator of the United States who, about the year 1840, was sent

to Russia as minister. There were various evidences in the

archives of the legation that sobriety was not this gentleman's

especial virtue, and among them very many copies of notes in

which the minister, through the secretary of legation, excused

himself from keeping engagements at the Foreign Office on the

ground of "sudden indisposition."



Mr. Prince told me that one day this minister's valet, who was an

Irishman, came to the consulate and said: "Oi 'll not stay wid

his igsillincy anny longer; Oi 've done wid him."



"What 's the trouble now?' said Mr. Prince.



"Well," said the man, "this morning Oi thought it was toime to

get his igsillincy out of bed, for he had been dhrunk about a

week and in bed most of the toime; and so Oi went to him, and

says Oi, gentle-loike, 'Would your igsillincy have a cup of

coffee?' whin he rose up and shtruck me in the face. On that Oi

took him by the collar, lifted him out of bed, took him acrass

the room, showed him his ugly face in the glass, and Oi said to

him, says Oi, 'Is thim the eyes of an invoy extraorr-rrdinarry

and ministher plinipotentiarry?' "



Among interesting reminders of my predecessors was a letter in

the archives, written about the year 1832 by Mr. Buchanan,

afterward senator, minister in London, Secretary of State, and

President of the United States. It was a friendly missive to an

official personage in our country, and went on somewhat as

follows: "I feel almost ashamed to tell you that your letters to

me, mine to you, and, indeed, everything that has come and gone

between us by mail, has been read by other eyes than ours. This

was true of your last letter to me, and, without doubt, it will

be true of this letter. Can you imagine it? Think of the moral

turpitude of a creature employed to break open private letters

and to read them! Can you imagine work more degrading? What a

dirty dog he must be! how despicable, indeed, he must seem to

himself!" And so Mr. Buchanan went on until he wound up as

follows: "Not only does this person read private letters, but he

is a forger: he forges seals, and I regret to say that his

imitation of the eagle on our legation seal is a VERY SORRY

BIRD." Whether this dose had any salutary effect on the official

concerned I never learned.



The troubles of an American representative at St. Petersburg are

many, and they generally begin with the search for an apartment.

It is very difficult indeed in that capital to find a properly

furnished suite of rooms for a minister, and since the American

representative has been made an ambassador this difficulty is

greater than ever. In my own case, by especial luck and large

outlay, I was able to surmount it; but many others had not been

so fortunate, and the result had generally been that, whereas

nearly every other power owned or held on long lease a house or

apartment for its representative,--simple, decent, dignified, and

known to the entire city,--the American representative had lived

wherever circumstances compelled him:--sometimes on the

ground-floor and sometimes in a sky-parlor, with the natural

result that Russians could hardly regard the American Legation as

on the same footing with that of other countries.



As I write, word comes that the present ambassador has been

unable to find suitable quarters save at a rent higher than his

entire salary; that the proprietors have combined, and agreed to

stand by each other in holding their apartments at an enormous

figure, their understanding being that Americans are rich and can

be made to pay any price demanded. Nothing can be more

short-sighted than the policy of our government in this respect,

and I shall touch upon it again.



The diplomatic questions between the United States and Russia

were many and troublesome; for, in addition to that regarding the

Behring Sea fisheries, there were required additional

interpretations of the Buchanan treaty as to the rights of

Americans to hold real estate and to do business in Russia;

arrangements for the participation of Russians in the Chicago

Exposition; the protection of various American citizens of

Russian birth, and especially of Israelites who had returned to

Russia; care for the great American life-insurance interests in

the empire; the adjustment of questions arising out of Russian

religious relations with Alaska and the islands of the Northern

Pacific; and last, but not least, the completion of the

extradition treaty between the two nations by the incorporation

of safeguards which would prevent its use against purely

political offenders.



Especial attention to Israelite cases was also required. Some of

these excited my deep sympathy; and, having made a very careful

study of the subject, I wrote to Secretary Gresham a despatch

upon it in obedience to his special request. It was the longest

despatch I have ever written; and, in my apology to the secretary

for its length I stated that it was prepared with no expectation

that he would find time to read it, but with the idea that it

might be of use at the State Department for reference. In due

time I received a very kind answer stating that he had read every

word of it, and thanked me most heartily for--it. The whole

subject is exceedingly difficult; but it is clear that Russia has

made, and is making, a fearful mistake in her way of dealing with

it. There are more Israelites in Russia than in all the remainder

of the world; and they are crowded together, under most

exasperating regulations, in a narrow district just inside her

western frontier, mainly extending through what was formerly

Poland, with the result that fanaticism--Christian on one side

and Jewish on the other--has developed enormously. The Talmudic

rabbis are there at their worst; and the consequences are evil,

not only for Russia, but for our own country. The immigration

which comes to us from these regions is among the very worst that

we receive from any part of the world. It is, in fact, an

immigration of the unfittest; and, although noble efforts have

been made by patriotic Israelites in the United States to meet

the difficulty, the results have been far from satisfactory.



There were, of course, the usual adventurous Americans in

political difficulties, enterprising Americans in business

difficulties, and pretended Americans attempting to secure

immunity under the Stars and Stripes. The same ingenious efforts

to prostitute American citizenship which I had seen during my

former stay in Germany were just as constant in Russia. It was

the same old story. Emigrants from the Russian Empire, most of

them extremely undesirable, had gone to the United States; stayed

just long enough to secure naturalization,--had, indeed, in some

cases secured it fraudulently before they had stayed the full

time; and then, having returned to Russia, were trying to

exercise the rights and evade the duties of both countries.



Many of these cases were exceedingly vexatious; and so, indeed,

were some which were better founded. The great difficulty of a

representative of the United States in Russia is, first, that the

law of the empire is so complicated that,--to use the words of

King James regarding Bacon's "Novum Organum,"--"Like the Peace of

God, it passeth all understanding." It is made up of codes in

part obsolete or obsolescent; ukases and counter-ukases; imperial

directions and counter-directions; ministerial orders and

counter-orders; police regulations and counter-regulations; with

no end of suspensions, modifications, and exceptions.



The second difficulty is the fact that the Buchanan treaty of

1832, which guaranteed, apparently, everything desirable to

American citizens sojourning in the empire, has been gradually

construed away until its tattered remnants are practically

worthless. As the world has discovered, Russia's strong point is

not adherence to her treaty promises.



In this respect there is a great difference between Russia and

Germany. With the latter we have made careful treaties, the laws

are well known, and the American representative feels solid

ground beneath his feet; but in Russia there is practically

nothing of the kind, and the representative must rely on the main

principles of international law, common sense, and his own powers

of persuasion.



A peculiar duty during my last stay in St. Petersburg was to

watch the approach of cholera, especially on the Persian

frontier. Admirable precautions had been taken for securing

telegraphic information; and every day I received notices from

the Foreign Office as a result, which I communicated to

Washington. For ages Russia had relied on fetishes of various

kinds to preserve her from great epidemics; but at last her

leading officials had come to realize the necessity of applying

modern science to the problem, and they did this well. In the

city "sanitary columns" were established, made up of small squads

of officials representing the medical and engineering professions

and the police; these visited every nook and corner of the town,

and, having extraordinary powers for the emergency, compelled

even the most dirty people to keep their premises clean.

Excellent hospitals and laboratories were established, and of

these I learned much from a former Cornell student who held an

important position in one of them. Coming to town three or four

times a week from my summer cottage in Finland, I was struck by

the precautions on the Finnish and other railways: notices of

what was to be done to prevent cholera and to meet it were

posted, in six different languages; disinfectants were made

easily accessible; the seats and hangings in the railway-cars

were covered with leather cloth frequently washed with

disinfectants; and to the main trains a hospital-car was

attached, while a temporary hospital, well equipped, was

established at each main station. In spite of this, the number of

cholera patients at St. Petersburg in the middle of July rose to

a very high figure, and the number of deaths each day from

cholera was about one hundred.



Of these victims the most eminent was Tschaikovsky, the composer,

a man of genius and a most charming character, to whom Mr. Andrew

Carnegie had introduced me at New York. One evening at a

dinner-party he poured out a goblet of water from a decanter on

the table, drank it down, and next day was dead from Asiatic

cholera. But, with this exception, the patients were, so far as I

learned, almost entirely from the peasant class. Although boiled

water was supplied for drinking purposes, and some

public-spirited individuals went so far as to set out samovars

and the means of supplying hot tea to peasant workmen, the answer

of one of the muzhiks, when told that he ought to drink boiled

water, indicated the peasant view: "If God had wished us to drink

hot water, he would have heated the Neva."







CHAPTER XXXVI



MY RECOLLECTIONS OF POBEDONOSTZEFF--1892-1894



On arriving at St. Petersburg in 1892 to take charge of the

American legation, there was one Russian whom I more desired to

meet than any other--Constantine Pobedonostzeff. For some years

various English and American reviews had been charging him with

bigotry, cruelty, hypocrisy, and, indeed, with nearly every

hateful form of political crime; but the fact remained that under

Alexander III he was the most influential personage in the

empire, and that, though bearing the title of "procurator-general

of the Most Holy Synod," he was evidently no less powerful in

civil than in ecclesiastical affairs.



As to his history, it was understood to be as follows: When the

Grand Duke Nicholas, the eldest son of Alexander II,--a young man

of gentle characteristics, greatly resembling his father,--died

upon the Riviera, the next heir to the throne was his brother

Alexander, a stalwart, taciturn guardsman, respected by all who

knew him for honesty and directness, but who, having never looked

forward to the throne, had been brought up simply as a soldier,

with few of the gifts and graces traditional among the heirs of

the Russian monarchy since the days of Catherine.



Therefore it was that it became necessary to extemporize for this

soldier a training which should fit him for the duties of the

position so unexpectedly opened to him; and the man chosen as his

tutor was a professor at Moscow, distinguished as a jurist and

theologian,--a man of remarkable force of character, and devoted

to Russian ideas as distinguished from those of Western Europe:

Constantine Pobedonostzeff.



During the dark and stormy days toward the end of his career,

Alexander II had called in as his main adviser General

Loris-Melikoff, a man of Armenian descent, in whom was mingled

with the shrewd characteristics of his race a sincere desire to

give to Russia a policy and development in accordance with modern

ideas.



The result the world knows well. The Emperor, having taken the

advice of this and other councilors,--deeply patriotic men like

Miloutine, Samarine, and Tcherkassky,--had freed the serfs within

his empire (twenty millions in all); had sanctioned a vast scheme

by which they were to arrive at the possession of landed

property; had established local self-government in the various

provinces of his empire; had improved the courts of law; had

introduced Western ideas into legal procedure; had greatly

mitigated the severities formerly exercised toward the Jews; and

had made all ready to promulgate a constitution on his

approaching birthday.



But this did not satisfy the nihilistic sect. What more they

wanted it is hard to say. It is more than doubtful whether Russia

even then had arrived at a stage of civilization when the

institutions which Alexander II had already conceded could be

adopted with profit; but the leaders of the anarchic movement,

with their vague longings for fruit on the day the tree was

planted, decreed the Emperor's death--the assassination of the

greatest benefactor that Russia has ever known, one of the

greatest that humanity has known. It was, perhaps, the most

fearful crime ever committed against liberty and freedom; for it

blasted the hopes and aspirations of over a hundred millions of

people, and doubtless for many generations.



On this the sturdy young guardsman became the Emperor Alexander

III. It is related by men conversant with Russian affairs that,

at the first meeting of the imperial councilors, Loris-Melikoiff,

believing that the young sovereign would be led by filial

reverence to continue the liberal policy to which the father had

devoted his life, made a speech taking this for granted, and that

the majority of those present, including the Emperor, seemed in

accord with him; when suddenly there arose a tall, gaunt,

scholarly man, who at first very simply, but finally very

eloquently, presented a different view. According to the

chroniclers of the period, Pobedonostzeff told the Emperor that

all so-called liberal measures, including the constitution, were

a delusion; that, though such things might be suited to Western

Europe, they were not suited to Russia; that the constitution of

that empire had been, from time immemorial, the will of the

autocrat, directed by his own sense of responsibility to the

Almighty; that no other constitution was possible in Russia; that

this alone was fitted to the traditions, the laws, the ideas of

the hundred and twenty millions of various races under the

Russian scepter; that in other parts of the world constitutional

liberty, so called, had already shown itself an absurdity; that

socialism, anarchism, and nihilism, with their plots and bombs,

were appearing in all quarters; that murder was plotted against

rulers of nations everywhere, the best of presidents having been

assassinated in the very country where free institutions were

supposed to have taken the most complete hold; that the principle

of authority in human government was to be saved; and that this

principle existed as an effective force only in Russia.



This speech is said to have carried all before it. As its

immediate result came the retirement of Loris-Melikoff, followed

by his death not long afterward; the entrance of Pobedonostzeff

among the most cherished councilors of the Emperor; the

suppression of the constitution; the discouragement of every

liberal tendency; and that fanatical reaction which has been in

full force ever since.



This was the man whom I especially desired to see and to

understand; and therefore it was that I was very glad to receive

from the State Department instructions to consult with him

regarding some rather delicate matters needing adjustment between

the Greek Church and our authorities in Alaska, and also in

relation to the representation of Russia at the Chicago

Exposition.



I found him, as one of the great ministers of the crown, residing

in a ministerial palace, but still retaining, in large measure,

his old quality of professor. About him was a beautiful library,

with every evidence of a love for art and literature. I had gone

into his presence with many feelings of doubt. Against no one in

Russia had charges so bitter been made in my hearing: it was

universally insisted that he was responsible for the persecution

of the Roman Catholics in Poland, of the Lutherans in the Baltic

provinces and in Finland, of the Stundists in Central Russia, and

of the dissenting sects everywhere. He had been spoken of in the

English reviews as the "Torquemada of the nineteenth century,"

and this epithet seemed to be generally accepted as fitting.



I found him a scholarly, kindly man, ready to discuss the

business which I brought before him, and showing a wide interest

in public affairs. There were few, if any, doctrines, either

political or theological, which we held in common, but he seemed

inclined to meet the wishes of our government as fully and fairly

as he could; and thus was begun one of the most interesting

acquaintances I have ever made.



His usual time of receiving his friends was on Sunday evening

between nine and twelve; and very many such evenings I passed in

his study, discussing with him, over glasses of fragrant Russian

tea, every sort of question with the utmost freedom.



I soon found that his reasons for that course of action to which

the world so generally objects are not so superficial as they are

usually thought. The repressive policy which he has so earnestly

adopted is based not merely upon his views as a theologian, but

upon his convictions as a statesman. While, as a Russo-Greek

churchman, he regards the established church of the empire as the

form of Christianity most primitive and pure; and while he sees

in its ritual, in its art, and in all the characteristics of its

worship the nearest approach to his ideals, he looks at it also

from the point of view of a statesman--as the greatest cementing

power of the vast empire through which it is spread.



This being the case, he naturally opposes all other religious

bodies in Russia as not merely inflicting injury upon

Christianity, but as tending to the political disintegration of

the empire. Never, in any of our conversations, did I hear him

speak a harsh word of any other church or of any religious ideas

opposed to his own; but it was clear that he regarded Protestants

and dissident sects generally as but agents in the progress of

disintegration which, in Western Europe, seemed approaching a

crisis, and that he considered the Roman Catholic Church in

Poland as practically a political machine managed by a hierarchy

in deadly hostility to the Russian Empire and to Russian

influence everywhere.



In discussing his own church, he never hesitated to speak plainly

of its evident shortcomings. Unquestionably, one of the wishes

nearest his heart is to reform the abuses which have grown up

among its clergy, especially in their personal habits. Here, too,

is a reason for any repressive policy which he may have exercised

against other religious bodies. Everything that detracts from the

established Russo-Greek Church detracts from the revenues of its

clergy, and, as these are pitifully small, aids to keep the

priests and their families in the low condition from which he is

so earnestly endeavoring to raise them. As regards the severe

policy inaugurated by Alexander III against the Jews of the

empire, which Pobedonostzeff, more than any other man, is

supposed to have inspired, he seemed to have no harsh feelings

against Israelites as such; but his conduct seemed based upon a

theory which, in various conversations, he presented with much

force: namely, that Russia, having within its borders more Jews

than exist in all the world besides, and having suffered greatly

from these as from an organization really incapable of

assimilation with the body politic, must pursue a repressive

policy toward them and isolate them in order to protect its rural

population.



While he was very civil in his expressions regarding the United

States, he clearly considered all Western civilization a failure.

He seemed to anticipate, before long, a collapse in the systems

and institutions of Western Europe. To him socialism and

anarchism, with all they imply, were but symptoms of a

wide-spread political and social disease--indications of an

approaching catastrophe destined to end a civilization which,

having rejected orthodoxy, had cast aside authority, given the

force of law to the whimsies of illiterate majorities, and

accepted, as the voice of God, the voice of unthinking mobs,

blind to their own interests and utterly incapable of working out

their own good. It was evident that he regarded Russia as

representing among the nations the idea of Heaven-given and

church-anointed authority, as the empire destined to save the

principle of divine right and the rule of the fittest.



Revolutionary efforts in Russia he discussed calmly. Referring to

Loris-Melikoff, the representative of the principles most

strongly opposed to his own, no word of censure escaped him. The

only evidence of deep feeling on this subject he ever showed in

my presence was when he referred to the writings of a well-known

Russian refugee in London, and said, "He is a murderer."



As to public instruction, he evidently held to the idea so

thoroughly carried out in Russia: namely, that the upper class,

which is to conduct the business of the state, should be highly

educated, but that the mass of the people need no education

beyond what will keep them contented in the humble station to

which it has pleased God to call them. A very curious example of

his conservatism I noted in his remarks regarding the droshkies

of St. Petersburg. The droshky-drivers are Russian peasants,

simple and, as a rule, pious; rarely failing to make the sign of

the cross on passing a church or shrine, or at any other moment

which seems to them solemn. They are possibly picturesque, but

certainly dirty, in their clothing and in all their surroundings.

A conveyance more wretched than the ordinary street-droshky of a

Russian city could hardly be conceived, and measures had been

proposed for improving this system; but he could see no use in

them. The existing system was thoroughly Russian, and that was

enough. It appealed to his conservatism. The droshky-drivers,

with their Russian caps, their long hair and beards, their

picturesque caftans, and their deferential demeanor, satisfied

his esthetic sense.



What seemed to me a clash between his orthodox conservatism on

one side, and his Russian pride on the other, I discovered on my

return from a visit to Moscow, in which I had sundry walks and

talks with Tolstoi. On my alluding to this, he showed some

interest. It was clear that he was separated by a whole orb of

thought from the great novelist, yet it was none the less evident

that he took pride in him. He naturally considered Tolstoi as

hopelessly wrong in all his fundamental ideas, and yet was

himself too much of a man of letters not to recognize in his

brilliant countryman one of the glories of Russia.



But the most curious--indeed, the most amazing--revelation of the

man I found in his love for American literature. He is a wide

reader; and, in the whole breadth of his reading, American

authors were evidently among those he preferred. Of these his

favorites were Hawthorne, Lowell, and, above all, Emerson.

Curious, indeed, was it to learn that this "arch-persecutor,"

this "Torquemada of the nineteenth century," this man whose hand

is especially heavy upon Catholics and Protestants and dissenters

throughout the empire, whose name is spoken with abhorrence by

millions within the empire and without it, still reads, as his

favorite author, the philosopher of Concord. He told me that the

first book which he ever translated into Russian was Thomas a

Kempis's "Imitation of Christ"; and of that he gave me the Latin

original from which he made his translation, with a copy of the

translation itself. But he also told me that the next book he

translated was a volume of Emerson's "Essays," and he added that

for years there had always lain open upon his study table a

volume of Emerson's writings.



There is, thus clearly, a relation of his mind to the literature

of the Western world very foreign to his feelings regarding

Western religious ideas. This can be accounted for perhaps by his

own character as a man of letters. That he has a distinct

literary gift is certain. I have in my possession sundry articles

of his, and especially a poem in manuscript, which show real

poetic feeling and a marked power of expression. It is a curious

fact that, though so addicted to English and American literature,

he utterly refuses to converse in our language. His medium of

communication with foreigners is always French. On my asking him

why he would not use our language in conversation, he answered

that he had learned it from books, and that his pronunciation of

it would expose him to ridicule.



In various circles in St. Petersburg I heard him spoken of as a

hypocrite, but a simple sense of justice compels me to declare

this accusation unjust. He indeed retires into a convent for a

portion of every year to join the monks in their austerities; but

this practice is, I believe, the outgrowth of a deep religious

feeling. On returning from one of these visits, he brought to my

wife a large Easter egg of lacquered work, exquisitely

illuminated. I have examined, in various parts of Europe,

beautiful specimens of the best periods of mediaeval art; but in

no one of them have I found anything in the way of illumination

more perfect than this which he brought from his monkish

brethren. In nothing did he seem to unbend more than in his

unfeigned love for religious art as it exists in Russia. He

discussed with me one evening sundry photographs of the new

religious paintings in the cathedral of Kieff in a spirit which

revealed this feeling for religious art as one of the deepest

characteristics of his nature.



He was evidently equally sensitive to the beauties of religious

literature. Giving me various books containing the services of

the Orthodox Church, he dwelt upon the beauty of the Slavonic

version of the Psalms and upon the church hymnology.



The same esthetic side of his nature was evident at various great

church ceremonies. It has happened to me to see Pius IX celebrate

mass, both at the high altar of St. Peter's and in the Sistine

Chapel, and to witness the ceremonies of Holy Week and of Easter

at the Roman basilicas, and at the time it was hard to conceive

anything of the kind more impressive; but I have never seen any

church functions, on the whole, more imposing than the funeral

service of the Emperor Nicholas during my first visit to Russia,

and various imperial weddings, funerals, name-days, and the like,

during my second visit. On such occasions Pobedonostzeff

frequently came over from his position among the ministers of the

crown to explain to us the significance of this or that feature

in the ritual of music. It was plain that these things touched

what was deepest in him; it must be confessed that his attachment

to the church is sincere.



Nor were these impressions made upon me alone. It fell to my lot

to present to him one of the most eminent journalists our country

has produced--Charles A. Dana, a man who could discuss on even

terms with any European statesman all the leading modern

questions. Dana had been brought into close contact with many

great men; but it was plain to see--what he afterward

acknowledged to me--that he was very deeply impressed by this

eminent Russian. The talk of two such men threw new light upon

the characteristics of Pobedonostzeff, and strengthened my

impression of his intellectual sincerity.



In regard to the relation of the Russo-Greek Church to other

churches I spoke to him at various times, and found in him no

personal feeling of dislike to them. The nearest approach to such

a feeling appeared, greatly to my surprise, in sundry references

to the Greek Church as it exists in Greece. In these he showed a

spirit much like that which used to be common among High-church

Episcopalians in speaking of Low-church "Evangelicals." Mindful

of the earnest efforts made by the Anglican communion to come

into closer relations with the Russian branch of the Eastern

Church, I at various times broached that subject, and the

glimpses I obtained of his feeling regarding it surprised me.

Previously to these interviews I had supposed that the main

difficulty in the way to friendly relations between these two

branches of the church universal had its origin in the "filioque"

clause of the Nicene Creed. As is well known, the Eastern Church

adheres to that creed in its original form,--the form in which

the Holy Ghost is represented as "proceeding from the

Father,"--whereas the Western Church adopts the additional words,

"and from the Son." That the Russo-Greek Church is very tenacious

of its position in this respect, and considers the position of


the Western Church--Catholic and Protestant--as savoring of

blasphemy, is well known; and there was a curious evidence of

this during my second stay in Russia. Twice during that time I

heard the "Missa Solennis" of Beethoven. It was first given by a

splendid choir in the great hall of the University of

Helsingfors. That being in Finland, which is mainly Lutheran, the

Creed was sung in its Western form. Naturally, on going to hear

it given by a great choir at St. Petersburg, I was curious to

know how this famous clause would be dealt with. In various parts

of the audience were priests of the Russo-Greek faith, yet there

were very many Lutherans and Calvinists, and I watched with some

interest the approach of the passage containing the disputed

words; but when we reached this it was wholly omitted. Any

allusion to the "procession" was evidently forbidden. Great,

therefore, was my surprise when, on my asking Pobedonostzeff,[5]

as the representative of the Emperor in the Synod of the

empire,--the highest assemblage in the church, and he the most

influential man in it, really controlling archbishops and bishops

throughout the empire,--whether the "filioque" clause is an

insurmountable obstacle to union, he replied, "Not at all; that

is simply a question of dialectics. But with whom are we to

unite? Shall it be with the High-churchmen, the Broad-churchmen,

or the Low-churchmen? These are three different bodies of men

with distinctly different ideas of church order; indeed, with

distinctly different creeds. Which of these is the Orthodox

Church to regard as the representative of the Anglican

communion?" I endeavored to show him that the union, if it took

place at all, must be based on ideas and beliefs that underlie

all these distinctions; but he still returned to his original

proposition, which was that union is impossible until a more

distinct basis than any now attainable can be arrived at.





[5] I find, in a letter from Pobedonostzeff, that he spells his

name as here printed.





I suggested to him a visit to Great Britain and his making the

acquaintance of leading Englishmen; but to this he answered that

at his time of life he had no leisure for such a recreation; that

his duties absolutely forbade it.



In regard to relations with the Russo-Greek Church on our own

continent, he seemed to speak with great pleasure of the

treatment that sundry Russian bishops had received among us. He

read me letters from a member of the Russo-Greek hierarchy, full

of the kindliest expressions toward Americans, and especially

acknowledging their friendly reception of him and of his

ministrations. Both the archbishop in his letter, and

Pobedonostzeff in his talk, were very much amused over the fact

that the Americans, after extending various other courtesies to

the archbishop, offered him cigars.



He discussed the possibility of introducing the "Holy Orthodox

Church" into the United States, but always disclaimed all zeal in

religious propagandism, saying that the church authorities had

quite enough work to do in extending and fortifying the church

throughout the Russian Empire. He said that the pagan tribes of

the imperial dominions in Asia seemed more inclined to

Mohammedanism than to Christianity, and gave as the probable

reason the fact that the former faith is much the simpler of the

two. He was evidently unable to grasp the idea of the Congress of

Religions at the Chicago Exposition, and seemed inclined to take

a mildly humorous view of it as one of the droll inventions of

the time.



He appeared to hold our nation as a problem apart, and was,

perhaps, too civil in his conversations with me to include it in

the same condemnation with the nations of Western Europe which

had, in his opinion, gone hopelessly wrong. He also seemed drawn

to us by his admiration for Emerson, Hawthorne, and Lowell. When

Professor Norton's edition of Lowell's "Letters" came out, I at

once took it to him. It evidently gave him great

pleasure--perhaps because it revealed to him a very different

civilization, life, and personality from anything to which he had

been accustomed. Still, America seemed to be to him a sort of

dreamland. He constantly returned to Russian affairs as to the

great realities of the world. Discussing, as we often did, the

condition and future of the wild tribes and nations within the

Asiatic limits of the empire, he betrayed no desire either for

crusades or for intrigues to convert them; he simply spoke of the

legitimate influence of the church in civilizing them.



I recall a brilliant but denunciatory article, published in one

of the English reviews some time since by a well-known nihilist,

which contained, in the midst of various charges against the

Russian statesman, a description of his smile, which was

characterized as forbidding, and even ghastly. I watched for this

smile with much interest, but it never came. A smile upon his

face I have often seen; but it was a kindly smile, with no trace

of anything ghastly or cruel in it.



He seemed to take pleasure in the society of his old professorial

friends, and one of them he once brought to my table. This was a

professor of history, deeply conversant with the affairs of the

empire; and we discussed the character and career of Catherine

II. The two men together brought out a mass of curious

information, throwing a strange light into transactions which

only the most recent historians are beginning to understand,

among these the assassination of Czar Peter III, Catherine's

husband. On one occasion when Pobedonostzeff was visiting me I

tested his knowledge in regard to a matter of special interest,

and obtained a new side-light upon his theory of the universe.

There is at present on the island of Cronstadt, at the mouth of

the Neva, a Russo-Greek priest, Father Ivan, who enjoys

throughout the empire a vast reputation as a saintly worker of

miracles. This priest has a very spiritual and kindly face; is

known to receive vast sums for the poor, which he distributes

among them while he himself remains in poverty; and is supposed

not merely by members of the Russo-Greek Church, but by those of

other religious bodies, to work frequent miracles of healing. I

was assured by persons of the highest character--and those not

only Russo-Greek churchmen, but Roman Catholics and

Anglicans--that there could be no doubt as to the reality of

these miracles, and various examples were given me. So great is

Father Ivan's reputation in this respect that he is in constant

demand in all parts of the empire, and was even summoned to

Livadia during the last illness of the late Emperor. Whenever he

appears in public great crowds surround him, seeking to touch the

hem of his garment. His picture is to be seen with the portraits

of the saints in vast numbers of Russian homes, from the palaces

of the highest nobles to the cottages of the humblest peasants.



It happened to me on one occasion to have an experience which I

have related elsewhere, but which is repeated here as throwing

light on the ideas of the Russian statesman.



On my arrival in St. Petersburg my attention was at once aroused

by the portraits of Father Ivan. They ranged from photographs

absolutely true to life, which revealed a plain, shrewd, kindly

face, to those which were idealized until they bore a near

resemblance to the conventional representations of Jesus of

Nazareth.



One day, in one of the most brilliant reception-rooms of the

Northern capital, the subject of Father Ivan's miracles having

been introduced, a gentleman in very high social position, and

entirely trustworthy, spoke as follows: "There is something very

surprising about these miracles. I am slow to believe in them;

but there is one of them which is overwhelming and absolutely

true. The late Metropolitan of St. Petersburg, Archbishop

Isidore, loved quiet, and was very averse to anything which could

possibly cause scandal. Hearing of the wonders wrought by Father

Ivan, he summoned him to his presence and sternly commanded him

to abstain from all the things which had given rise to these

reported miracles, as sure to create scandal, and with this

injunction dismissed him. Hardly had the priest left the room

when the archbishop was struck with blindness, and he remained in

this condition until the priest returned and restored his sight

by intercessory prayer." When I asked the gentleman giving this

account if he directly knew these facts, he replied that he was,

of course, not present when the miracle was wrought; but that he

had the facts immediately from persons who knew all the parties

concerned, as well as all the circumstances of the case; and,

indeed, that these circumstances were matter of general

knowledge.



Sometime afterward, being at an afternoon reception in one of the

greater embassies, I brought up the same subject, when an eminent

general spoke as follows: "I am not inclined to believe in

miracles,--in fact, am rather skeptical; but the proofs of those

wrought by Father Ivan are overwhelming." He then went on to say

that the late metropolitan archbishop was a man who loved quiet

and disliked scandal; that on this account he had summoned Father

Ivan to his palace, and ordered him to put an end to the conduct

which had caused the reports concerning his miraculous powers;

and then, with a wave of his arm, had dismissed him. The priest

left the room, and from that moment the archbishop's arm was

paralyzed; and it remained so until the penitent prelate summoned

the priest again, by whose prayers the arm was restored to its

former usefulness. There was present at the time another person

besides myself who had heard the previous statement as to the

blindness of the archbishop; and, on our both asking the general

if he was sure that the archbishop's arm was paralyzed as stated,

he declared that he could not doubt it, as he had the account

directly from persons entirely trustworthy who were cognizant of

all the facts.



Sometime later, meeting Pobedonostzeff, I asked him which of

these stories was correct. He answered immediately, "Neither: in

the discharge of my duties I saw the Archbishop Isidore

constantly down to the last hours of his life, and no such event

ever occurred. He was never paralyzed and never blind." But the

great statesman and churchman then went on to say that, although

this story was untrue, there were a multitude of others quite as

remarkable in which he believed; and he gave me a number of

legends showing that Father Ivan possessed supernatural knowledge

and miraculous powers. These he unfolded to me with much detail,

and with such an accent of conviction that we seemed surrounded

by a mediaeval atmosphere in which signs and wonders were the

most natural things in the world.



As to his action on politics since my leaving Russia, the power

which he exercised over Alexander III has evidently been

continued during the reign of the young Nicholas II. In spite of

his eighty years, he seems to be, to-day, the leader of the

reactionary party.



During the early weeks of The Hague Conference, Count Munster, in

his frequent diatribes against its whole purpose, and especially

against arbitration, was wont to insist that the whole thing was

a scheme prepared by Pobedonostzeff to embarrass Germany; that,

as Russia was always wretchedly unready with her army, The Hague

Conference was simply a trick for gaining time against her rivals

who kept up better military preparations. There may have been

truth in part of this assertion; but the motive of the great

Russian statesman in favoring the conference was probably not so

much to gain time for the army as to gain money for the church.

With his intense desire to increase the stipends of the Russian

orthodox clergy, and thus to raise them somewhat above their

present low condition, he must have groaned over the enormous

sums spent by his government in the frequent changes in almost

every item of expenditure for its vast army--changes made in

times of profound peace, simply to show that Russia was keeping

her army abreast of those of her sister nations. Hence came the

expressed Russian desire to "keep people from inventing things."

It has always seemed to me that, while the idea underlying the

Peace Conference came originally from Jean de Bloch, there must

have been powerful aid from Pobedonostzeff. So much of good--and,

indeed, of great good --we may attribute to him as highly

probable, if not certain.



But, on the other hand, there would seem to be equal reason for

attributing to him, in these latter days, a fearful mass of evil.

To say nothing of the policy of Russia in Poland and elsewhere,

her dealings with Finland thus far form one of the blackest spots

on the history of the empire. Whether he originated this iniquity

or not is uncertain; but when, in 1892, I first saw the new

Russian cathedral rising on the heights above Helsingfors,--a

structure vastly more imposing than any warranted by the small

number of the "orthodox" in Finland,--with its architecture of

the old Muscovite type, symbolical of fetishism, I could not but

recognize his hand in it. It seemed clear to me that here was the

beginning of religious aggression on the Lutheran Finlanders,

which must logically be followed by political and military

aggression; and, in view of his agency in this as in everything

reactionary, I did not wonder at the attempt to assassinate him

not long afterward.



During my recent stay in Germany he visited me at the Berlin

Embassy. He was, as of old, apparently gentle, kindly, interested

in literature, not interested to any great extent in current

Western politics. This gentle, kindly manner of his brought back

forcibly to my mind a remark of one of the most cultivated women

I met in Russia, a princess of ancient lineage, who ardently

desired reasonable reforms, and who, when I mentioned to her a

report that Pobedonostzeff was weary of political life, and was

about to retire from office in order to devote himself to

literary pursuits, said: "Don't, I beg of you, tell me that; for

I have always noticed that whenever such a report is circulated,

it is followed by some new scheme of his, even more infernal than

those preceding it."



So much for the man who, during the present reign, seems one of

the main agents in holding Russian policy on the road to ruin. He

is indeed a study. The descriptive epithet which clings to

him--"the Torquemada of the nineteenth century"--he once

discussed with me in no unkindly spirit; indeed, in as gentle a

spirit as can well be conceived. His life furnishes a most

interesting study in churchmanship, in statesmanship, and in

human nature, and shows how some of the men most severely

condemned by modern historians--great persecutors, inquisitors,

and the like--may have based their actions on theories the world

has little understood, and may have had as little conscious

ferocity as their more tolerant neighbors.







CHAPTER XXXVII



WALKS AND TALES WITH TOLSTOI--MARCH, 1894



Revisiting Moscow after an absence of thirty-five years, the most

surprising thing to me was that there had been so little change.

With the exception of the new gallery of Russian art, and the

bazaar opposite the sacred gate of the Kremlin, things seemed as

I had left them just after the accession of Alexander II. There

were the same unkempt streets; the same peasantry clad in

sheepskins; the same troops of beggars, sturdy and dirty; the

same squalid crowds crossing themselves before the images at the

street corners; the same throngs of worshipers knocking their

heads against the pavements of churches; and above all loomed,

now as then, the tower of Ivan and the domes of St. Basil,

gloomy, gaudy, and barbaric. Only one change had taken place

which interested me: for the first time in the history of Russia,

a man of world-wide fame in literature and thought was abiding

there--Count Leo Tolstoi.



On the evening of my arrival I went with my secretary to his

weekly reception. As we entered his house on the outskirts of the

city, two servants in evening dress came forward, removed our fur

coats, and opened the doors into the reception-room of the

master. Then came a surprise. His living-room seemed the cabin of

a Russian peasant. It was wainscoted almost rudely and furnished

very simply; and there approached us a tall, gaunt Russian,

unmistakably born to command, yet clad as a peasant, his hair

thrown back over his ears on either side, his flowing blouse kept

together by a leathern girdle, his high jack-boots completing the

costume. This was Tolstoi.



Nothing could be more kindly than his greeting. While his dress

was that of a peasant, his bearing was the very opposite; for,

instead of the depressed, demure, hangdog expression of the

average muzhik, his manner, though cordial, was dignified and

impressive. Having given us a hearty welcome, he made us

acquainted with various other guests. It was a singular

assemblage. There were foreigners in evening dress, Moscow

professors in any dress they liked, and a certain number of

youth, evidently disciples, who, though clearly not of the

peasant class, wore the peasant costume. I observed these with

interest but certainly as long as they were under the spell of

the master they communicated nothing worth preserving; they

seemed to show "the contortions of the sibyl without the

inspiration."



The professors were much more engaging. The University of Moscow

has in its teaching body several strong men, and some of these

were present. One of them, whose department was philosophy,

especially interested and encouraged me by assurances that the

movement of Russian philosophy is "back to Kant." In the strange

welter of whims and dreams which one finds in Russia, this was to

me an unexpected evidence of healthful thought.



Naturally, I soon asked to be presented to the lady of the house,

and the count escorted us through a series of rooms to a salon

furnished much like any handsome apartment in Paris or St.

Petersburg, where the countess, with other ladies, all in full

evening dress, received us cordially. This sudden transition from

the peasant cabin of the master to these sumptuous rooms of the

mistress was startling; it seemed like scene-shifting at a

theater.



After some friendly talk, all returned to the rooms of the master

of the house, where tea was served at a long table from the

bubbling brazen urn--the samovar; and though there were some

twenty or thirty guests, nothing could be more informal. All was

simple, kindly, and unrestrained.



My first question was upon the condition of the people. Our

American legation had corresponded with Count Tolstoi and his

family as to distributing a portion of the famine fund sent from

the United States, hence this subject naturally arose at the

outset. He said that the condition of the peasants was still very

bad; that they had very generally eaten their draught-animals,

burned portions of their buildings to keep life in their bodies,

and reduced themselves to hopeless want. On my suggesting that

the new commercial treaty with Germany might help matters, he

thought that it would have but little effect, since only a small

portion of the total product of Russian agriculture is consumed

abroad. This led him to speak of some Americans and Englishmen

who had visited the famine-stricken districts, and, while he

referred kindly to them all, he seemed especially attracted by

the Quaker John Bellows of Gloucester, England, the author of the

wonderful little French dictionary. This led him to say that he

sympathized with the Quakers in everything save their belief in

property; that in this they were utterly illogical; that property

presupposes force to protect it. I remarked that most American

Quakers knew nothing of such force; that none of them had ever

seen an American soldier, save during our Civil War, and that

probably not one in hundreds of them had ever seen a soldier at

all. He answered, "But you forget the policeman." He evidently

put policemen and soldiers in the same category--as using force

to protect property, and therefore to be alike abhorred.



I found that to his disbelief in any right of ownership literary

property formed no exception. He told me that, in his view, he

had no right to receive money for the permission to print a book.

To this I naturally answered that by carrying out this doctrine

he would simply lavish large sums upon publishers in every

country of Europe and America, many of them rich and some of them

piratical; and that in my opinion he would do a much better thing

by taking the full value of his copyrights and bestowing the

proceeds upon the peasantry starving about him. To which he

answered that it was a question of duty. To this I agreed, but

remarked that beneath this lay the question what this duty really

was. It was a pleasure to learn from another source that the

countess took a different view of it, and that she had in some

way secured the proceeds of his copyrights for their very large

and interesting family. Light was thus thrown on Tolstoi's

remark, made afterward, that women are not so self-sacrificing as

men; that a man would sometimes sacrifice his family for an idea,

but that a woman would not.



He then went on to express an interest in the Shakers, and

especially in Frederick Evans. He had evidently formed an idea of

them very unlike the reality; in fact, the Shaker his imagination

had developed was as different from a Lebanon Shaker as an eagle

from a duck, and his notion of their influence on American

society was comical.



He spoke at some length regarding religion in Russia, evidently

believing that its present dominant form is soon to pass away. I

asked him how then he could account for the fact that while in

other countries women are greatly in the majority at church

services, in every Russian church the majority are men; and that

during the thirty-five years since my last visit to Moscow this

tendency had apparently increased. He answered, "All this is on

the surface; there is much deeper thought below, and the great

want of Russia is liberty to utter it." He then gave some

examples to show this, among them the case of a gentleman and

lady in St. Petersburg, whose children had been taken from them

and given to Princess ----, their grandmother, because the latter

is of the Orthodox Church and the former are not. I answered that

I had seen the children; that their grandmother had told me that

their mother was a screaming atheist with nihilistic tendencies,

who had left her husband and was bringing up the children in a

scandalous way,--teaching them to abjure God and curse the Czar;

that their father had thought it his duty to give all his

property away and work as a laborer; that therefore she--the

grandmother--had secured an order from the Emperor empowering her

to take charge of the children; that I had seen the children at

their grandmother's house, and that they had seemed very happy.

Tolstoi insisted that this statement by the grandmother was

simply made to cover the fact that the children were taken from

the mother because her belief was not of the orthodox pattern. My

opinion is that Tolstoi was mistaken, at least as to the father;

and that the father had been led to give away his property and

work with his hands in obedience to the ideas so eloquently

advocated by Tolstoi himself. Unlike his master, this gentleman

appears not to have had the advantage of a wife who mitigated his

ideas.



Tolstoi also referred to the difficulties which translators had

found in securing publishers for his most recent book--"The

Kingdom of God." On my assuring him that American publishers of

high standing would certainly be glad to take it, he said that he

had supposed the ideas in it so contrary to opinions dominant in

America as to prevent its publication there.



Returning to the subject of religion in Russia, he referred to

some curious incongruities; as, for example, the portrait of

Socrates forming part of a religious picture in the Annunciation

Church at the Kremlin. He said that evidently some monk, who had

dipped into Plato, had thus placed Socrates among the precursors

of Christ. I cited the reason assigned by Melanchthon for

Christ's descent into hell--namely, the desire of the Redeemer to

make himself known to Socrates, Plato, and the best of the

ancient philosophers; and I compared this with Luther's idea, so

characteristic of him, that Christ descended into hell in order

to have a hand-to-hand grapple and wrestle with Satan. This led

Tolstoi to give me a Russian legend of the descent into hell,

which was that, when Christ arrived there, he found Satan forging

chains, but that, at the approach of the Saviour, the walls of

hell collapsed, and Satan found himself entangled in his own

chains, and remained so for a thousand years.



In regard to the Jews, he said that he sympathized with them, but

that the statements regarding the persecution of them were

somewhat exaggerated. Kennan's statements regarding the treatment

of prisoners in Siberia he thought overdrawn at times, but

substantially true. He expressed his surprise that certain

leading men in the empire, whom he named, could believe that

persecution and the forcible repression of thought would have any

permanent effect at the end of the nineteenth century.



He then dwelt upon sundry evil conditions in Russia, on which my

comment was that every country, of course, had its own grievous

shortcomings; and I cited, as to America, the proverb: "No one

knows so well where the shoe pinches as he who wears it." At this

he asked me about lynch law in the United States, and expressed

his horror of it. I showed him that it was the inevitable result

of a wretched laxity and sham humanity in the administration of

our criminal law, which had led great bodies of people, more

especially in the Southern and extreme Western parts of the

country, to revert to natural justice and take the law into their

own hands; and I cited Goldwin Smith's profound remark that "some

American lynchings are proofs not so much of lawlessness as of a

respect for law."



He asked me where, besides this, the shoe pinched in the United

States. I told him that it pinched in various places, but that

perhaps the worst pinch arises from the premature admission to

full political rights of men who have been so benumbed and

stunted intellectually and morally in other countries that their

exercise of political rights in America is frequently an injury,

not only to others, but to themselves. In proof of this I cited

the case of the crowds whom I had seen some years before huddled

together in New York tenement-houses, preyed upon by their

liquor-selling landlords, their families perishing of typhoid and

smallpox on account of the negligence and maladministration of

the local politicians, but who, as a rule, were almost if not

quite ready to mob and murder those of us who brought in a new

health board and a better order of things; showing him that for

years the very class of people who suffered most from the old,

vile state of things did their best by their votes to keep in

power the men who maintained it.



We then passed to the subject of the trans-Siberian Railway. In

this he seemed interested, but in a vague way which added nothing

to my knowledge.



Asking me regarding my former visit to Moscow, and learning that

it was during the Crimean War, he said, "At that time I was in

Sebastopol, and continued there as a soldier during the siege."



As to his relations with the imperial government at present, he

said that he had been recently elected to a learned society in

Moscow, but that the St. Petersburg government had interfered to

stop the election; and he added that every morning, when he

awoke, he wondered that he was not on his way to Siberia.



On my leaving him, both he and the countess invited me to meet

them next day at the Tretiakof Museum of Russian Pictures; and

accordingly, on the following afternoon, I met them at that

greatest of all galleries devoted purely to Russian art. They

were accompanied by several friends, among them a little knot of

disciples--young men clad in simple peasant costume like that

worn by the master. It was evident that he was an acknowledged

lion at the old Russian capital, for as he led me about to see

the pictures which he liked best, he was followed and stared at

by many.



Pointing out to me some modern religious pictures in Byzantine

style painted for the Cathedral of Kieff, he said, "They

represent an effort as futile as trying to persuade chickens to

reenter the egg-shells from which they have escaped." He next

showed me two religious pictures; the first representing the

meeting of Jesus and Pilate, when the latter asked, "What is

truth?" Pilate was depicted as a rotund, jocose, cynical man of

the world; Jesus, as a street preacher in sordid garments, with

unkempt hair flowing over his haggard face,--a peasant fanatic

brought in by the police. Tolstoi showed an especial interest in

this picture; it seemed to reveal to him the real secret of that

famous question and its answer; the question coming from the

mighty of the earth, and the answer from the poor and oppressed.



The other picture represented the Crucifixion. It was painted in

the most realistic manner possible; nothing was idealized; it was

even more vividly realistic than Gebhardt's picture of the Lord's

Supper, at Berlin; so that it at first repelled me, though it

afterward exercised a certain fascination. That Tolstoi was

deeply interested was clear. He stood for a time in silence, as

if musing upon all that the sacrifice on Calvary had brought to

the world. Other representations of similar scenes, in the

conventional style of the older masters, he had passed without a

glance; but this spectacle of the young Galilean peasant, with

unattractive features, sordid garb, poverty-stricken companions,

and repulsive surroundings, tortured to death for preaching the

"kingdom of God" to the poor and down-trodden, seemed to hold him

fast, and as he pointed out various features in the picture it

became even more clear to me that sympathy with the peasant

class, and a yearning to enter into their cares and sorrows, form

the real groundwork of his life.



He then took me to a small picture of Jesus and his disciples

leaving the upper room at Jerusalem after the Last Supper. This,

too, was painted in the most realistic manner. The disciples,

simple-minded fishermen, rude in features and dress, were

plodding homeward, while Christ himself gazed at the stars and

drew the attention of his nearest companions to some of the

brightest. Tolstoi expressed especial admiration for this

picture, saying that at times it affected him like beautiful

music,--like music which draws tears, one can hardly tell why. It

was more and more evident, as he lingered before this and other

pictures embodying similar ideas, that sympathy for those

struggling through poverty and want toward a better life is his

master passion.



Among the pictures, not to be classed as religious, before which

he thus lingered were those representing the arrest of a nihilist

and the return of an exile from Siberia. Both were well painted,

and both revealed the same characteristic--sympathy with the

poor, even with criminals.



Some of the more famous historical pictures in the collection he

thought exaggerated; especially those representing the fury of

the Grand Duchess Sophia in her monastery prison, and the remorse

of Ivan the Terrible after murdering his son.



To my surprise, he agreed with me, and even went beyond me, in

rating landscape infinitely below religious and historical

painting, saying that he cared for landscape-painting only as

accessory to pictures revealing human life.



Among genre pictures, we halted before one representing a peasant

family grouped about the mother, who, with a sacred picture laid

upon her breast, after the Russian manner, was dying of famine.

This also seemed deeply to impress him.



We stopped next before a picture of a lady of high birth brought

before the authorities in order to be sent, evidently against her

will, to a convent. I cited the similar story from Manzoni's

"Promessi Sposi"; but, to my surprise, he seemed to know little

of that most fascinating of historical romances. This led to a

discussion in which he said he had once liked Walter Scott, but

had not read anything of his for many years; and he seemed

interested in my statement that although always an especial

admirer of Scott, I had found it almost impossible to induce the

younger generation to read him.



Stopping before a picture of Peter the Great's fatal conference

with his son Alexis, in reply to my remark upon the marvel that a

prince of such genius as Peter should have appeared at Moscow in

the seventeenth century, he said that he did not admire Peter,

that he was too cruel,--administering torture and death at times

with his own hands.



We next halted before a picture representing the horrible

execution of the Strelitzes. I said that "such pictures prove

that the world does, after all, progress slowly, in spite of what

pessimists say, and that in order to refute pessimists one has

only to refer to the improvements in criminal law." To this he

agreed cordially, and declared the abolition of torture in

procedure and penalty to be one great gain, at any rate.



We spoke of the present condition of things in Europe, and I told

him that at St. Petersburg the opinion very general among the

more thoughtful members of the diplomatic corps was that war was

not imminent; that the Czar, having himself seen the cruelties of

war during the late struggle in the Balkans, had acquired an

invincible repugnance to it. He acquiesced in this, but said that

it seemed monstrous to him that the peace of the empire and of

Europe should depend upon so slender a thread as the will of any

one man.



Our next walk was taken across the river Moskwa, on the ice, to

and through the Kremlin, and as we walked the conversation fell

upon literature. As to French literature, he thought Maupassant

the man of greatest talent, by far, in recent days, but that he

was depraved and centered all his fiction in women. For Balzac,

Tolstoi evidently preserved admiration, but he cared little,

apparently, for Daudet, Zola, and their compeers.



As to American literature, he said that Tourgueneff had once told

him that there was nothing in it worth reading; nothing new or

original; that it was simply a copy of English literature. To

this I replied that such criticism seemed to me very shallow;

that American literature was, of course, largely a growth out of

the parent stock of English literature, and must mainly be judged

as such; that to ask in the highest American literature something

absolutely different from English literature in general was like

looking for oranges upon an apple-tree; that there had come new

varieties in this growth, many of them original, and some

beautiful; but that there was the same sap, the same life-current

running through it all; and I compared the treatment of woman in

all Anglo-Saxon literature, whether on one side of the Atlantic

or the other, from Chaucer to Mark Twain, with the treatment of

the same subject by French writers from Rabelais to Zola. To this

he answered that in his opinion the strength of American

literature arises from the inherent Anglo-Saxon religious

sentiment. He expressed a liking for Emerson, Hawthorne, and

Whittier, but he seemed to have read at random, not knowing at

all some of the best things. He spoke with admiration of Theodore

Parker's writings, and seemed interested in my reminiscences of

Parker and of his acquaintance with Russian affairs. He also

revered and admired the character and work of William Lloyd

Garrison. He had read Longfellow somewhat, but was evidently

uncertain regarding Lowell,--confusing him, apparently, with some

other author. Among contemporary writers he knew some of

Howells's novels and liked them, but said: "Literature in the

United States at present seems to be in the lowest trough of the

sea between high waves." He dwelt on the flippant tone of

American newspapers, and told me of an interviewer who came to

him in behalf of an American journal, and wanted simply to know

at what time he went to bed and rose, what he ate, and the like.

He thought that people who cared to read such trivialities must

be very feeble-minded, but he said that the European press is, on

the whole, just as futile. On my attempting to draw from him some

statement as to what part of American literature pleased him

most, he said that he had read some publications of the New York

and Brooklyn Society for Ethical Culture, and that he knew and

liked the writings of Felix Adler. I then asked who, in the whole

range of American literature, he thought the foremost. To this he

made an answer which amazed me, as it would have astonished my

countrymen. Indeed, did the eternal salvation of all our eighty

millions depend upon some one of them guessing the person he

named, we should all go to perdition together. That greatest of

American writers was--Adin Ballou! Evidently, some of the

philanthropic writings of that excellent Massachusetts country

clergyman and religious communist had pleased him, and hence came

the answer.



The next day he came over to my hotel and we went out for a

stroll. As we passed along the streets I noticed especially what

I had remarked during our previous walks, that Tolstoi had a

large quantity of small Russian coins in his pockets; that this

was evidently known to the swarms of beggars who infest the

Kremlin and the public places generally; and that he always gave

to them.



On my speaking of this, he said he thought that any one, when

asked for money, ought to give it. Arguing against this doctrine,

I said that in the United States there are virtually no beggars,

and I might have gone on to discuss the subject from the

politico-economical point of view, showing how such

indiscriminate almsgiving in perpetual driblets is sure to create

the absurd and immoral system which one sees throughout

Russia,--hordes of men and women who are able to take care of

themselves, and who ought to be far above beggary, cringing and

whining to the passers-by for alms; but I had come to know the

man well enough to feel sure that a politico-economical argument

would slide off him like water from a duck's back, so I attempted

to take him upon another side, and said: "In the United States

there are virtually no beggars, though my countrymen are, I

really believe, among the most charitable in the world." To this

last statement he assented, referring in a general way to our

shipments of provisions to aid the famine-stricken in Russia.

"But," I added, "it is not our custom to give to beggars save in

special emergencies." I then gave him an account of certain

American church organizations which had established piles of

fire-wood and therefore enabled any able-bodied tramp, by sawing

or cutting some of it, to earn a good breakfast, a good dinner,

and, if needed, a good bed, and showed him that Americans

considered beggary not only a great source of pauperism, but as

absolutely debasing to the beggar himself, in that it puts him in

the attitude of a suppliant for that which, if he works as he

ought, he can claim as his right; that to me the spectacle of

Count Tolstoi virtually posing as a superior being, while his

fellow-Russians came crouching and whining to him, was not at all

edifying. To this view of the case he listened very civilly.



Incidentally I expressed wonder that he had not traveled more. He

then spoke with some disapprobation of travel. He had lived

abroad for a time, he said, and in St. Petersburg a few years,

but the rest of his life had been spent mainly in Moscow and the

interior of Russia. The more we talked together, the more it

became clear that this last statement explained some of his main

defects. Of all distinguished men that I have ever met, Tolstoi

seems to me most in need of that enlargement of view and

healthful modification of opinion which come from meeting men and

comparing views with them in different lands and under different

conditions. This need is all the greater because in Russia there

is no opportunity to discuss really important questions. Among

the whole one hundred and twenty millions of people there is no

public body in which the discussion of large public questions is

allowed; the press affords no real opportunity for discussion;

indeed, it is more than doubtful whether such discussion would be

allowed to any effective extent even in private correspondence or

at one's own fireside.



I remember well that during my former stay in St. Petersburg,

people who could talk English at their tables generally did so in

order that they might not betray themselves to any spy who might

happen to be among their servants.



Still worse, no one, unless a member of the diplomatic corps or

specially privileged, is allowed to read such books or newspapers

as he chooses, so that even this access to the thoughts of others

is denied to the very men who most need it.



Like so many other men of genius in Russia, then,--and Russia is

fertile in such,--Tolstoi has had little opportunity to take part

in any real discussion of leading topics; and the result is that

his opinions have been developed without modification by any

rational interchange of thought with other men. Under such

circumstances any man, no matter how noble or gifted, having

given birth to striking ideas, coddles and pets them until they

become the full-grown, spoiled children of his brain. He can at

last see neither spot nor blemish in them, and comes virtually to

believe himself infallible. This characteristic I found in

several other Russians of marked ability. Each had developed his

theories for himself until he had become infatuated with them,

and despised everything differing from them.



This is a main cause why sundry ghastly creeds, doctrines, and

sects--religious, social, political, and philosophic--have been

developed in Russia. One of these religious creeds favors the

murder of new-born children in order to save their souls; another

enjoins ghastly bodily mutilations for a similar purpose; others

still would plunge the world in flames and blood for the

difference of a phrase in a creed, or a vowel in a name, or a

finger more or less in making the sign of the cross, or for this

garment in a ritual, or that gesture in a ceremony.



In social creeds they have developed nihilism, which virtually

assumes the right of an individual to sit in judgment upon the

whole human race and condemn to death every other human being who

may differ in opinion or position from this self-constituted

judge.



In political creeds they have conceived the monarch as the

all-powerful and irresponsible vicegerent of God, and all the

world outside Russia as given over to Satan, for the reason that

it has "rejected the divine principle of authority."



In various branches of philosophy they have developed doctrines

which involve the rejection of the best to which man has attained

in science, literature, and art, and a return to barbarism.



In the theory of life and duty they have devised a pessimistic

process under which the human race would cease to exist.



Every one of these theories is the outcome of some original mind

of more or less strength, discouraged, disheartened, and

overwhelmed by the sorrows of Russian life; developing its ideas

logically and without any possibility of adequate discussion with

other men. This alone explains a fact which struck me

forcibly--the fact that all Tolstoi's love of humanity, real

though it certainly is, seems accompanied by a depreciation of

the ideas, statements, and proposals of almost every other human

being, and by virtual intolerance of all thought which seems in

the slightest degree different from his own.



Arriving in the Kremlin, he took me to the Church of the

Annunciation to see the portrait of Socrates in the religious

picture of which he had spoken; but we were too late to enter,

and so went to the Palace of the Synod, where we looked at the

picture of the Trinity, which, by a device frequently used in

street signs, represents, when looked at from one side, the

suffering Christ, from the other the Holy Ghost in the form of a

dove, and from the front the Almighty as an old man with a white

beard. What Tolstoi thought of the doctrine thus illustrated came

out in a subsequent conversation.



The next day he came again to my rooms and at once began speaking

upon religion. He said that every man is religious and has in him

a religion of his own; that religion results from the conception

which a man forms of his relations to his fellow-men, and to the

principle which in his opinion controls the universe; that there

are three stages in religious development: first, the childhood

of nations, when man thinks of the whole universe as created for

him and centering in him; secondly, the maturity of nations, the

time of national religions, when each nation believes that all

true religion centers in it,--the Jews and the English, he said,

being striking examples; and, finally, the perfected conception

of nations, when man has the idea of fulfilling the will of the

Supreme Power and considers himself an instrument for that

purpose. He went on to say that in every religion there are two

main elements, one of deception and one of devotion, and he asked

me about the Mormons, some of whose books had interested him. He

thought two thirds of their religion deception, but said that on

the whole he preferred a religion which professed to have dug its

sacred books out of the earth to one which pretended that they

were let down from heaven. On learning that I had visited Salt

Lake City two years before, he spoke of the good reputation of

the Mormons for chastity, and asked me to explain the hold of

their religion upon women. I answered that Mormonism could hardly

be judged by its results at present; that, as a whole, the

Mormons are, no doubt, the most laborious and decent people in

the State of Utah; but that this is their heroic period, when

outside pressure keeps them firmly together and arouses their

devotion; that the true test will come later, when there is less

pressure and more knowledge, and when the young men who are now

arising begin to ask questions, quarrel with each other, and

split the whole body into sects and parties.



This led to questions in regard to American women generally, and

he wished to know something of their condition and prospects. I

explained some features of woman's condition among us, showing

its evolution, first through the betterment of her legal status,

and next through provision for her advanced education; but told

him that so far as political rights are concerned, there had been

very little practical advance in the entire East and South of the

country during the last fifty years, and that even in the extreme

Western States, where women have been given political rights and

duties to some extent, the concessions have been wavering and

doubtful.



At this, he took up his parable and said that women ought to have

all other rights except political; that they are unfit to

discharge political duties; that, indeed, one of the great

difficulties of the world at present lies in their possession of

far more consideration and control than they ought to have. "Go

into the streets and bazaars," he said, "and you will see the

vast majority of shops devoted to their necessities. In France

everything centers in women, and women have complete control of

life: all contemporary French literature shows this. Woman is not

man's equal in the highest qualities; she is not so

self-sacrificing as man. Men will, at times, sacrifice their

families for an idea; women will not." On my demurring to this

latter statement, he asked me if I ever knew a woman who loved

other people's children as much as her own. I gladly answered in

the negative, but cited Florence Nightingale, Sister Dora, and

others, expressing my surprise at his assertion that women are

incapable of making as complete sacrifices for any good cause as

men. I pointed to the persecutions in the early church, when

women showed themselves superior to men in suffering torture,

degradation, and death in behalf of the new religion, and added

similar instances from the history of witchcraft. To this he

answered that in spite of all such history, women will not make

sacrifices of their own interest for a good cause which does not

strikingly appeal to their feelings, while men will do so; that

he had known but two or three really self-sacrificing women in

his life; and that these were unmarried. On my saying that

observation had led me to a very different conclusion, his

indictment took another form. He insisted that woman hangs upon

the past; that public opinion progresses, but that women are

prone to act on the opinion of yesterday or of last year; that

women and womanish men take naturally to old absurdities, among

which he mentioned the doctrines of the Trinity, "spiritism," and

homeopathy. At this I expressed a belief that if, instead of

educating women, as Bishop Dupanloup expressed it, "in the lap of

the church (sur les genoux de l'eglise)," we educate them in the

highest sense, in universities, they will develop more and more

intellectually, and so become a controlling element in the

formation of a better race; that, as strong men generally have

strong mothers, the better education of woman physically,

intellectually, and morally is the true way of bettering the race

in general. In this idea he expressed his disbelief, and said

that education would not change women; that women are illogical

by nature. At this I cited an example showing that women can be

exceedingly logical and close in argument, but he still adhered

to his opinion. On my mentioning the name of George Eliot, he

expressed a liking for her.



On our next walk, he took me to the funeral of one of his

friends. He said that to look upon the dead should rather give

pleasure than pain; that memento mori is a wise maxim, and

looking upon the faces of the dead a good way of putting it in

practice. I asked him if he had formed a theory as to a future

life, and he said in substance that he had not; but that, as we

came at birth from beyond the forms of space and time, so at

death we returned whence we came. I said, "You use the word

'forms' in the Kantian sense?" "Yes," he said, "space and time

have no reality."



We arrived just too late at the house of mourning. The dead man

had been taken away; but many of those who had come to do him

honor still lingered, and were evidently enjoying the "funeral

baked meats." There were clear signs of a carousal. The friends

who came out to meet us had, most of them, flushed faces, and one

young man in military uniform, coming down the stairs, staggered

and seemed likely to break his neck.



Tolstoi refused to go in, and, as we turned away, expressed

disgust at the whole system, saying, as well he might, that it

was utterly barbarous. He seemed despondent over it, and I tried

to cheer him by showing how the same custom of drinking strong

liquors at funerals had, only a few generations since, prevailed

in large districts of England and America, but that better ideas

of living had swept it away.



On our way through the street, we passed a shrine at which a mob

of peasants were adoring a sacred picture. He dwelt on the

fetishism involved in this, and said that Jesus Christ would be

infinitely surprised and pained were he to return to earth and

see what men were worshiping in his name. He added a story of a

converted pagan who, being asked how many gods he worshiped,

said: "One, and I ate him this morning." At this I cited

Browning's lines put into the mouth of the bishop who wished,

from his tomb,



          "To hear the blessed mutter of the mass,

           And see God made and eaten all day long."





I reminded him of his definition of religion given me on one of

our previous walks, and he repeated it, declaring religion to be

the feeling which man has regarding his relation to the universe,

including his fellow-men, and to the power which governs all.



The afternoon was closed with a visit to a Raskolnik, or Old

Believer, and of all our experiences this turned out to be the

most curious. The Raskolniks, or Old Believers, compose that

wide-spread sect which broke off from the main body of the

Russian Church when the patriarch of Moscow, Nikon, in the

seventeenth century attempted to remove various textual errors

from the Bible and ceremonial books. These books had been copied

and recopied during centuries until their condition had become

monstrous. Through a mistake of some careless transcriber, even

the name of Jesus had been travestied and had come to be spelled

with two e's; the crudest absurdities had been copied into the

test; important parts had become unintelligible; and the time had

evidently arrived for a revision. Nikon saw this, and in good

faith summoned scholars from Constantinople to prepare more

correct editions; but these revised works met the fate which

attends such revisions generally. The great body of the people

were attached to the old forms; they preferred them, just as in

these days the great body of English-speaking Protestants prefer

the King James Bible to the Revised Version, even though the

latter may convey to the reader more correctly what was dictated

by the Holy Spirit. The feeling of the monks, especially, against

Nikon's new version became virulent. They raised so strong an

opposition among the people that an army had to be sent against

them; at the siege of the Solovetsk Monastery the conflict was

long and bloody, and as a result a large body of people and

clergy broke off from the church. Of course the more these

dissenters thought upon what Nikon had done, the more utterly

evil he seemed; but this was not all. A large part of Russian

religious duty, so far as the people are concerned, consists in

making the sign of the cross on all occasions. Before Nikon's

time this had been done rather carelessly, but, hoping to impress

a religious lesson, he ordered it to be made with three extended

fingers, thus reminding the faithful of the Trinity. At this the

Raskolniks insisted that the sign of the cross ought to be made

with two fingers, and out of this difference arose more

bitterness than from all other causes put together. From that day

to this the dissenters have insisted on enjoying the privilege of

reading the old version with all its absurdities, of spelling the

word Jesus with two e's, of crossing themselves with two fingers,

and of cursing Nikon.



This particular Raskolnik, or Old Believer, to whom Tolstoi took

me, was a Muscovite merchant of great wealth, living in a superb

villa on the outskirts of the city, with a large park about it;

the apartments, for size and beauty of decoration, fit for a

royal palace--the ceilings covered with beautiful frescos, and

the rooms full of statues and pictures by eminent artists, mainly

Russian and French. He was a man of some education, possessed a

large library, loved to entertain scientific men and to aid

scientific effort, and managed to keep on good terms with his

more fanatical coreligionists on one side and with the government

on the other, so that in emergencies he was an efficient

peacemaker between them. We found him a kindly, gentle old man,

with long, white hair and beard, and he showed us with evident

pleasure the principal statues and pictures, several of the

former being by Antokolski, the greatest contemporary Russian

sculptor. In the sumptuous dining-room, in which perhaps a

hundred persons could sit at table, he drew our attention to some

fine pictures of Italian scenes by Smieradsky, and, after passing

through the other rooms, took us into a cabinet furnished with

the rarest things to be found in the Oriental bazaars. Finally,

he conducted us into his private chapel, where, on the

iconostas,--the screen which, in accordance with the Greek

ritual, stands before the altar,--the sacred images of the

Saviour and various saints were represented somewhat differently

from those in the Russo-Greek Church, especially in that they

extended two fingers instead of three. To this difference I

called his attention, and he at once began explaining it. Soon he

grew warm, and finally fervid. Said he: "Why do we make the sign

of the cross? We do it to commemorate the crucifixion of our

blessed Lord. What is commemorated at the crucifixion? The

sacrifice of his two natures--the divine and the human. How do we

make the sign? We make it with two fingers, thus"--accompanied by

a gesture. "What does this represent? It represents what really

occurred: the sacrifice of the divine and the human nature of our

Lord. How do the Orthodox make it?" Here his voice began to rise.

"They make it with three fingers"--and now his indignation burst

all bounds, and with a tremendous gesture and almost a scream of

wrath he declared: "and every time they make it they crucify

afresh every one of the three persons of the holy and undivided

Trinity."



The old man's voice, so gentle at first, had steadily risen

during this catechism of his, in which he propounded the

questions and recited the answers, until this last utterance came

with an outcry of horror. The beginning of this catechism was

given much after the manner of a boy reciting mechanically the

pons asinorum, but the end was like the testimony of an ancient

prophet against the sins which doomed Israel.



This last burst was evidently too much for Tolstoi. He said not a

word in reply, but seemed wrapped in overpowering thought, and

anxious to break away. We walked out with the old Raskolnik, and

at the door I thanked him for his kindness; but even there, and

all the way down the long walk through the park, Tolstoi remained

silent. As we came into the road he suddenly turned to me and

said almost fiercely, "That man is a hypocrite; he can't believe

that; he is a shrewd, long-headed man; how can he believe such

trash? Impossible!" At this I reminded him of Theodore Parker's

distinction between men who believe and men who "believe that

they believe," and said that possibly our Raskolnik was one of

the latter. This changed the subject. He said that he had read

Parker's biography, and liked it all save one thing, which was

that he gave a pistol to a fugitive slave and advised him to

defend himself. This Tolstoi condemned on the ground that we are

not to resist evil. I told him of the advice I had given to

Dobroluboff, a very winning Russian student at Cornell

University, when he was returning to Russia to practise his

profession as an engineer. That advice was that he should bear in

mind Buckle's idea as to the agency of railways and telegraphs in

extending better civilization, and devote himself to his

profession of engineering, with the certainty that its ultimate

result would be to aid in the enlightenment of the empire; but

never, on any account, to conspire against the government;

telling him that he might be sure that he could do far more for

the advancement of Russian thought by building railways than by

entering into any conspiracies whatever. Tolstoi said the advice

was good, but that he would also have advised the young man to

speak out his ideas, whatever they might be. He said that only in

this way could any advance ever be made; that one main obstacle

in human progress is the suppression of the real thoughts of men.

I answered that all this had a fine sound; that it might do for

Count Tolstoi; but that a young, scholarly engineer following it

would soon find himself in a place where he could not promulgate

his ideas,--guarded by Cossacks in some remote Siberian mine.



He spoke of young professors in the universities, of their

difficulties, and of the risk to their positions if they spoke

out at all. I asked him if there was any liberality or breadth of

thought in the Russo-Greek Church. He answered that occasionally

a priest had tried to unite broader thought with orthodox dogma,

but that every such attempt had proved futile.



From Parker we passed to Lowell, and I again tried to find if he

really knew anything of Lowell's writings. He evidently knew very

little, and asked me what Lowell had written. He then said that

he had no liking for verse, and he acquiesced in Carlyle's saying

that nobody had ever said anything in verse which could not have

been better said in prose.



A day or two later, on another of our walks, I asked him how and

when, in his opinion, a decided advance in Russian liberty and

civilization would be made. He answered that he thought it would

come soon, and with great power. On my expressing the opinion

that such progress would be the result of a long evolutionary

process, with a series of actions and reactions, as heretofore in

Russian history, he dissented, and said that the change for the

better would come soon, suddenly, and with great force.



As we passed along the streets he was, as during our previous

walks, approached by many beggars, to each of whom he gave as

long as his money lasted. He said that he was accustomed to take

a provision of copper money with him for this purpose on his

walks, since he regarded it as a duty to give when asked, and he

went on to say that he carried the idea so far that even if he

knew the man wanted the money to buy brandy he would give it to

him; but he added that he would do all in his power to induce the

man to work and to cease drinking. I demurred strongly to all

this, and extended the argument which I had made during our

previous walk, telling him that by such giving he did two wrongs:

first, to the beggar himself, since it led him to cringe and lie

in order to obtain as a favor that which, if he did his duty in

working, he could claim as a right; and, secondly, to society by

encouraging such a multitude to prey upon it who might be giving

it aid and strength; and I again called his attention to the

hordes of sturdy beggars in Moscow. He answered that the results

of our actions in such cases are not the main thing, but the

cultivation of proper feelings in the giver is first to be

considered.



I then asked him about his manual labor. He said that his habit

was to rise early and read or write until noon, then to take his

luncheon and a short sleep, and after that to work in his garden

or fields. He thought this good for him on every account, and

herein we fully agreed.



On our return through the Kremlin, passing the heaps and rows of

cannon taken from the French in 1812, I asked him if he still

adhered to the low opinion of Napoleon expressed in "War and

Peace." He said that he did, and more than ever since he had

recently read a book on Napoleon's relations to women which

showed that he took the lowest possible view of womankind. I then

asked him if he still denied Napoleon's military genius. He

answered that he certainly did; that he did not believe in the

existence of any such thing as military genius; that he had never

been able to understand what is meant by the term. I asked, "How

then do you account for the amazing series of Napoleon's

successes?" He answered, "By circumstances." I rejoined that such

an explanation had the merit, at least, of being short and easy.



He then went on to say that battles are won by force of

circumstances, by chance, by luck; and he quoted Suvaroff to this

effect. He liked Lanfrey's "History of Napoleon" and Taine's book

on the Empire, evidently because both are denunciatory of men and

things he dislikes, but said that he did not believe in Thiers.



We came finally under the shade of the great tower and into the

gateway through which Napoleon entered the Kremlin; and there we

parted with a hearty good-bye.



The question has been asked me, at various times since, whether,

in my opinion, Tolstoi is really sincere; and allusion has been

made to a book published by a lady who claims to have been in

close relations with his family, which would seem to reveal a

theatrical element in his whole life. To this my answer has

always been, and still is, that I believe him to be one of the

most sincere and devoted men alive, a man of great genius and, at

the same time, of very deep sympathy with his fellow-creatures.



Out of this character of his come his theories of art and

literature; and, despite their faults, they seem to me more

profound and far-reaching than any put forth by any other man in

our time.



There is in them, for the current cant regarding art and

literature, a sound, sturdy, hearty contempt which braces and

strengthens one who reads or listens to him. It does one good to

hear his quiet sarcasms against the whole fin-de-siecle

business--the "impressionism," the "sensationalism," the vague

futilities of every sort, the "great poets" wallowing in the mud

of Paris, the "great musicians" making night hideous in German

concert-halls, the "great painters" of various countries mixing

their colors with as much filth as the police will allow. His

keen thrusts at these incarnations of folly and obscenity in the

last quarter of the nineteenth century, and especially at those

who seek to hide the poverty of their ideas in the obscurity of

their phrases, encourage one to think that in the next generation

the day of such pretenders will be done. His prophesying against

"art for art's sake"; his denunciation of art which simply

ministers to sensual pleasure; his ridicule of art which can be

discerned only by "people of culture"; his love for art which has

a sense, not only of its power, but of its obligations, which

puts itself at the service of great and worthy ideas, which

appeals to men as men--in this he is one of the best teachers of

his time and of future times.



Yet here come in his unfortunate limitations. From his

substitutions of assertion for inference, and from the inadequacy

of his view regarding sundry growths in art, literature, and

science, arises endless confusion.



For who will not be skeptical as to the value of any criticism by

a man who pours contempt over the pictures of Puvis de Chavannes,

stigmatizes one of Beethoven's purest creations as "corrupting,"

and calls Shakspere a "scribbler"!



Nothing can be more genuine than his manner: there is no posing,

no orating, no phrase-making; a quiet earnestness pervades all

his utterances. The great defect in him arises, as I have already

said, from a peculiarity in the development of his opinions:

namely, that during so large a part of his life he has been wont

to discuss subjects with himself and not with other men; that he

has, therefore, come to worship idols of his own creation, and

often very unsubstantial idols, and to look with misgiving and

distrust on the ideas of others. Very rarely during our

conversations did I hear him speak with any real enthusiasm

regarding any human being: his nearest approach to it was with

reference to the writings of the Rev. Adin Ballou, when he

declared him the foremost literary character that America has

produced. A result of all this is that when he is driven into a

corner his logic becomes so subtle as to be imperceptible, and he

is very likely to take refuge in paradoxes.



At times, as we walked together, he would pour forth a stream of

reasoning so lucid, out of depths so profound and reach

conclusions so cogent, that he seemed fairly inspired. At other

times he would develop a line of argument so outworn, and arrive

at conclusions so inane, that I could not but look into his face

closely to see if he could be really in earnest; but it always

bore that same expression--forbidding the slightest suspicion

that he was uttering anything save that which he believed, at

least for the time being.



As to the moral side, the stream of his thought was usually

limpid, but at times it became turbid and his better ideas seemed

to float on the surface as iridescent bubbles.



Had he lived in any other country, he would have been a power

mighty and permanent in influencing its thought and in directing

its policy; as it is, his thought will pass mainly as the

confused, incoherent wail and cry of a giant struggling against

the heavy adverse currents in that vast ocean of Russian life:



          "The cry of some strong swimmer in his agony."





The evolution of Tolstoi's ideas has evidently been mainly

determined by his environment. During two centuries Russia has

been coming slowly out of the middle ages--indeed, out of perhaps

the most cruel phases of mediaeval life. Her history is, in its

details, discouraging; her daily life disheartening. Even the

aspects of nature are to the last degree depressing: no

mountains; no hills; no horizon; no variety in forests; a soil

during a large part of the year frozen or parched; a people whose

upper classes are mainly given up to pleasure and whose lower

classes are sunk in fetishism; all their poetry and music in the

minor key; old oppressions of every sort still lingering; no help

in sight; and, to use their own cry, "God so high and the Czar so

distant."



When, then, a great man arises in Russia, if he gives himself

wholly to some well-defined purpose, looking to one high aim and

rigidly excluding sight or thought of the ocean of sorrow about

him, he may do great things. If he be Suvaroff or Skobeleff or

Gourko he may win great battles; if he be Mendeleieff he may

reach some epoch-making discovery in science; if he be Derjavine

he may write a poem like the "Ode to God"; if he be Antokolsky he

may carve statues like "Ivan the Terrible"; if he be Nesselrode

he may hold all Europe enchained to the ideas of the autocrat; if

he be Miloutine or Samarine or Tcherkassky he may devise vast

plans like those which enabled Alexander II to free twenty

millions of serfs and to secure means of subsistence for each of

them; if he be Prince Khilkoff he may push railway systems over

Europe to the extremes of Asia; if he be De Witte he may reform a

vast financial system.



But when a strong genius in Russia throws himself into

philanthropic speculations of an abstract sort, with no chance of

discussing his theories until they are full-grown and have taken

fast hold upon him,--if he be a man of science like Prince

Kropotkin, one of the most gifted scientific thinkers of our

time,--the result may be a wild revolt, not only against the

whole system of his own country, but against civilization itself,

and finally the adoption of the theory and practice of anarchism,

which logically results in the destruction of the entire human

race. Or, if he be an accomplished statesman and theologian like

Pobedonostzeff, he may reason himself back into mediaeval

methods, and endeavor to fetter all free thought and to crush out

all forms of Christianity except the Russo-Greek creed and

ritual. Or, if he be a man of the highest genius in literature,

like Tolstoi, whose native kindliness holds him back from the

extremes of nihilism, he may rear a fabric heaven-high, in which

truths, errors, and paradoxes are piled up together until we have

a new Tower of Babel. Then we may see this man of genius

denouncing all science and commending what he calls "faith";

urging a return to a state of nature, which is simply Rousseau

modified by misreadings of the New Testament; repudiating

marriage, yet himself most happily married and the father of

sixteen children; holding that aeschylus and Dante and Shakspere

were not great in literature, and making Adin Ballou a literary

idol; holding that Michelangelo and Raphael were not great in

sculpture and painting, yet insisting on the greatness of sundry

unknown artists who have painted brutally; holding that

Beethoven, Handel, Mozart, Haydn, and Wagner were not great in

music, but that some unknown performer outside any healthful

musical evolution has given us the music of the future; declaring

Napoleon to have had no genius, but presenting Koutousoff as a

military ideal; loathing science--that organized knowledge which

has done more than all else to bring us out of mediaeval cruelty

into a better world--and extolling a "faith" which has always

been the most effective pretext for bloodshed and oppression.



The long, slow, every-day work of developing a better future for

his countrymen is to be done by others far less gifted than

Tolstoi. His paradoxes will be forgotten; but his devoted life,

his noble thoughts, and his lofty ideals will, as centuries roll

on, more and more give life and light to the new Russia.







CHAPTER XXXVIII



OFFICIAL LIFE IN ST. PETERSBURG-1892-1894



The difficulties of a stranger seeking information in Russia seem

at times insurmountable. First of these is the government policy

of suppressing news. Foreign journals come to ordinary

subscribers with paragraphs and articles rubbed out with pumice

or blotted out with ink; consequently our Russian friends were

wont to visit the legation, seeking to read in our papers what

had been erased in their own, and making the most amusing

discoveries as to the stupidity of the official censorship:

paragraphs perfectly harmless being frequently blotted out, and

really serious attacks on the government unnoticed.



Very striking, as showing control over the newspaper press, was

an occurrence during my first summer at Helsingfors. One day our

family doctor came in, and reported a rumor that an iron-clad

monitor had sunk, the night before, on its way across the gulf

from Reval. Soon the story was found to be true. A squadron of

three ships had started; had encountered a squall; and in the

morning one of them--an old-fashioned iron-clad monitor--was

nowhere to be seen. She had sunk with all on board. Considerable

speculation concerning the matter arose, and sundry very guarded

remarks were ventured to the effect that the authorities at

Cronstadt would have been wiser had they not allowed the ship to

go out in such a condition that the first squall would send her

to the bottom. This discussion continued for about a week, when

suddenly the proper authorities served notice upon the press that

nothing more must be said on the subject.



This mandate was obeyed; the matter was instantly dropped;

nothing more was said; and, a year or two afterward, on my

inquiring of Admiral Makharoff whether anything had ever been

discovered regarding the lost ship and its crew, he answered in

the negative.



But more serious efforts than these were made to control thought.

The censorship of books was even more strongly, and, if possible,

more foolishly, exercised. At any of the great bookshops one

could obtain, at once, the worst publications of the Paris press;

but the really substantial and thoughtful books were carefully

held back. The average Russian, in order to read most of these

better works, must be specially authorized to do so.



I had a practical opportunity to see the system in operation.

Being engaged on the final chapters of my book, and needing

sundry scientific, philosophical, and religious treatises, such

as can be bought freely in every city of Western Europe, I went

to the principal bookseller in St. Petersburg, and was told that,

by virtue of my diplomatic position, I could have them; but that,

in order to do so, I must write an application, signing it with

my own name, and that then he would sell them to me within a few

days. This took place several times.



Still another difficulty is that, owing to lack of publicity, the

truth can rarely be found as regards any burning question: in the

prevailing atmosphere of secrecy and repression the simplest

facts are often completely shut from the foreign observer.



Owing to the lack of public discussion, Russia is the classic

ground of myth and legend. One sees myths and legends growing day

by day. The legend regarding the cure of the Archbishop of St.

Petersburg by Father Ivan of Cronstadt, which I have given in a

previous chapter, is an example. The same growth of legend is

seen with regard to every-day matters. For example, one meets

half a dozen people at five-o'clock tea in a Russian house, and

one of them says: "How badly the Emperor looked at court last

night." Another says: "Yes; his liver is evidently out of order;

he ought to go to Carlsbad." Another says: "I think that special

pains ought to be taken with his food," etc., etc. People then

scatter from this tea-table, and in a day or two one hears that

sufficient precaution is not taken with the Emperor's food; that

it would not be strange if some nihilist should seek to poison

him. A day or two afterward one hears that a nihilist HAS

endeavored to poison the Emperor. The legend grows, details

appear here and there, and finally there come in the newspapers

of Western Europe full and careful particulars of a thwarted plot

to poison his Majesty.



Not the least of the embarrassments which beset an American

minister in Russia is one which arose at various times during my

stay, its source being the generous promptness of our people to

take as gospel any story regarding Russian infringement of human

rights. One or two cases will illustrate this.



During my second winter, despatches by mail and wire came to me

thick and fast regarding the alleged banishment of an American

citizen to Siberia for political reasons; and with these came

petitions and remonstrances signed by hundreds of Americans of

light and leading; also newspaper articles, many and bitter.



On making inquiries through the Russian departments of foreign

affairs and of justice, I found the fact to be that this injured

American had been, twenty years before, a Russian police agent in

Poland; that he had stolen funds intrusted to him and had taken

refuge in America; that, relying on the amnesty proclaimed at the

accession of the late Emperor, he had returned to his old haunts;

that he had been seized, because the amnesty did not apply to the

category of criminals to which he belonged; that he had not been

sent to Siberia; that there was no thought of sending him there;

but that the authorities proposed to recover the money he had

stolen if they could. Another case was typical: One day an

excellent English clergyman came to me in great distress, stating

that an American citizen was imprisoned in the city. I

immediately had the man brought before a justice, heard his

testimony and questioned him, publicly and privately. He swore

before the court, and insisted to me in private, that he had

never before been in Russia; that he was an American citizen born

of a Swedish father and an Alaskan mother upon one of the Alaskan

islands; and he showed a passport which he had obtained at

Washington by making oath to that effect. On the other hand

appeared certain officers of the Russian navy, in excellent

standing, who swore that they knew the man perfectly to be a

former employee of their engineering department and a deserter

from a Russian ship of war in the port of St. Petersburg. It was

also a somewhat significant fact that he spoke Russian much

better than English, and that he seemed to have a knowledge of

Russian affairs very remarkable for a man who had never been in

Russia; but to account for this he insisted upon the statement as

to his birth in Alaska. Appearances were certainly very strongly

against him, and he was remanded to await more testimony in his

favor; but the next thing I heard was that he had escaped, had

arrived in New York, was posing as a martyr, had graciously

granted interviews to various representatives of the press, and

had thereby stimulated some very lurid editorials against the

Russian Government.



Another case was that of a Russian who, having reached the United

States, burdened the files of the State Department and of the

legation with complaints against the American minister because

that official did not send out the man's wife to him. The

minister had, indeed, forwarded the necessary passports, but the

difficulty was that the German authorities would not allow the

woman to enter Germany without showing herself to be in

possession of means sufficient to prevent her becoming a public

charge; and these her husband could not, or would not, send,

insisting that now that he was naturalized he had a right to have

his wife brought to America.



I have no apology to make for the Russian system--far from it;

but I would state, in the interest of international comity, that

it is best for Americans not to be too prompt in believing all

the stories of alleged sufferers from Russian despotism, and

especially of those who wish to use their American citizenship

simply in order to return to Russia and enjoy business advantages

superior to those of their neighbors.



That there are many meritorious refugees cannot be denied; but

any one who has looked over extradition papers, as I have been

obliged to do, and seen people posing as Russian martyrs who are

comfortably carrying on in New York the business of

counterfeiting bank-notes, and unctuously thanking God in their

letters for their success in the business, will be slow to join

in the outcries of refugees of doubtful standing claiming to be

suffering persecution on account of race, religion, or political

opinion.



Nor are Russian-Americans the only persons who weary an American

representative. One morning a card was brought in bearing an

undoubted American name, and presently there followed it a tall

raw-boned man with long flaxen hair, who began orating to me as

follows: "Sir, you are an ambassador from the President of the

United States; I am an ambassador from God Almighty. I am sent

here to save the Emperor. He is a good man; he is followed up by

bad men who seek his life; I can save him; I will be his

cup-bearer; I WILL DRIVE HIS TEAM." This latter conception of the

Emperor's means of locomotion struck me as naive, especially in

view of the fact that near my house was an immense structure

filled with magnificent horses for the Emperor and court--a

veritable equine palace. "Yes," said my visitor; "I will drive

the Emperor's team. I want you to introduce me to him

immediately." My answer was that it was not so easy to secure a

presentation to the Emperor, offhand; that considerable time

would be necessary in any case. To this my visitor answered: "I

must see him at once; I am invited to come by the Empress." On my

asking when he received this invitation, he said that it was

given him on board the steamer between New York and Hamburg, her

Majesty and her children being the only other passengers besides

himself in the second-class cabin. To this I said that there must

certainly be some mistake; that her Majesty rarely, if ever,

traveled on public lines of steamers; that if she had done so,

she certainly would not have been a passenger in the second

cabin. To this he answered that he was absolutely certain that it

was the Empress who had given him the invitation and urged him to

come and save the Emperor's life. On my asking him the date of

this invitation, he looked through his diary and found it. At

this, sending for a file of the official newspaper of St.

Petersburg, I showed him that on the day named her Majesty was

receiving certain officials at the palace in St. Petersburg;

whereat he made an answer which for the moment threw me

completely off my balance. He said, "Sir, I have lived long

enough not to believe everything I see in the newspapers."



I quieted him as best I could, but on returning to his hotel he

indulged in some very boisterous conduct, one of the minor

features of which was throwing water in the faces of the waiters;

so that, fearing lest actions like this and his loud utterances

regarding the Emperor and Empress might get him into trouble, I

wrote a friendly letter to the prefect of St. Petersburg, stating

the case, and asking that, if it was thought best to arrest the

man, he should be placed in some comfortable retreat for the

insane and be well cared for until I could communicate with his

friends in America. Accordingly, a day or two afterward, a

handsome carriage drove up to the door of his hotel, bearing two

kindly gentlemen, who invited him to accompany them. Taking it

for granted that he was to be escorted to the palace to meet his

Majesty, he went without making any objections, and soon found

himself in commodious rooms and most kindly treated.



It being discovered that he was an excellent pianist, a grand

piano was supplied him; and he was very happy in his musical

practice, and in the thought that he was lodged in the palace and

would soon communicate his message to the Emperor. At various

times I called upon him and found him convinced that his great

mission would soon be accomplished; but after a week or ten days

he began to have doubts, and said to me that he distrusted the

Russians and would prefer to go on and deliver a message with

which he was charged to the Emperor of China. On my showing him

sundry difficulties, he said that at any rate there was one place

where he would certainly be well received--Marlborough House in

London; that he was sure the Prince of Wales would welcome him

heartily. At last, means having been obtained from his friends, I

sought to forward him from St. Petersburg; but, as no steamers

thence would take a lunatic, I sent my private secretary with him

to Helsingfors, and thence secured his passage to America.



A very curious feature in the case, as told me afterward by a

gentleman who traveled in the same steamer, was that this

American delighted the company day after day with his music, and

that no one ever saw anything out of the way in his utterances or

conduct. He seemed to have forgotten all about his great missions

and to have become absorbed in his piano.



Among the things to which special and continued attention had to

be given by the legation was the Chicago Exposition. I was

naturally desirous to see it a success; indeed, it was my duty to

do everything possible to promote it. The magnificent plans which

the Chicago people had developed and were carrying out with such

wonderful energy interested thinking Russians. But presently came

endeavors which might easily have brought the whole enterprise

into disrepute; for some of the crankish persons who always hang

on the skirts of such enterprises had been allowed to use

official stationery, and they had begun writing letters, and even

instructions, to American diplomatic agents abroad.



The first of these which attracted my attention was one

requesting me to ask the Empress to write a book in the shape of

a "Report on Women's Work in Russia," careful instructions being

given as to how and at what length she must write it.



A letter also came from one of these quasi-officials at Chicago,

not requesting, but instructing, me to ask the Emperor to report

to his bureau on the condition of the empire; funnily enough,

this "instruction" was evidently one of several, and they had

been ground out so carelessly that the one which I was instructed

to deliver to the Emperor was addressed to the "King of Holland."

It was thus made clear that this important personage at Chicago,

who usurped the functions of the Secretary of State, had not even

taken the trouble to find out that there was no such person as a

"King of Holland," the personage whom he vaguely had in mind

being, no doubt, the Queen Regent of the Netherlands.



Soon there followed another of these quasi-instructions, showing

another type of crankishness. Beginning with the weighty

statement that "the school-boys of every country are the future

men of that country," it went on with a declaration that it had

been decided to hold a convention of the school-children of the

world at Chicago, in connection with the Exposition, and ended by

instructing me to invite to its deliberations the school-children

of Russia. Of course I took especial care not to communicate any

of these things to any Russian: to have done so would have made

the Exposition, instead of the admiration, the laughing-stock of

the empire; but I wrote a letter to the assistant secretary of

state, Mr. Quincy, who presently put an end to these vagaries.



One is greatly struck in Russia by the number of able and gifted

men and women scattered through Russian society, and at the

remarkable originality of some of them. The causes of this

originality I touch in my chapter on Tolstoi.



It was a duty as well as a pleasure for me to keep up my

acquaintance with persons worth knowing; and, while many of the

visits thus made were perfunctory and tedious, some were

especially gratifying. My rule was, after office hours in the

afternoon, to get into the open sledge; to make my visits; and as

a result, of course, to see and hear a vast deal of frivolity and

futility, but, from time to time, more important things.



The entertainments given by wealthy Russian nobles to the

diplomatic corps were by no means so frequent or so lavish as of

old. Two reasons were assigned for this, one being the abolition

of the serf system, which had impoverished the nobility, and the

other the fact that the Emperor Alexander III had set the fashion

of paying less attention to foreigners than had formerly been the

custom.



The main hospitalities, so far as the Emperor and Empress were

concerned, were the great festivities at the Winter Palace,

beginning on the Russian New Year's day, which was twelve days

later than ours. The scene was most brilliant. The vast halls

were filled with civil and military officials from all parts of

the empire, in the most gorgeous costumes, an especially striking

effect being produced by the caftans, or long coats, of the

various Cossack regiments, the armor and helmets of the Imperial

Guards, and the old Russian costumes of the ladies. All of the

latter, on this occasion, from the Empress down, wore these

costumes: there was great variety in these; but their main

features were the kakoshniks, or ornamental crowns, and the

tunics in bright colors.



The next of these great ceremonies at the Winter Palace was the

blessing of the waters upon the 8th of January. The diplomatic

corps and other guests were allowed to take their places at the

palace windows looking out over the Neva, and thence could see

the entire procession, which, having gone down the ambassadors'

staircase, appeared at a temple which had been erected over an

opening in the ice of the river. The Emperor, the grand dukes,

and the Archbishop of St. Petersburg, with his suffragan bishops,

all took part in this ceremonial; and the music, which was

selected from the anthems of Bortniansky, was very solemn and

impressive.



During the winter came court balls, and, above all, the "palm

balls." The latter were, in point of brilliancy, probably beyond

anything in any court of modern times. After a reception, during

which the Emperor and Empress passed along the diplomatic circle,

speaking to the various members, dancing began, and was continued

until about midnight; then the doors were flung open into other

vast halls, which had been changed into palm-groves. The palms

for this purpose are very large and beautiful, four series of

them being kept in the conservatories for this special purpose,

each series being used one winter and then allowed to rest for

three winters before it is brought out again. Under these palms

the supper-tables are placed, and from fifteen hundred to two

thousand people sit at these as the guests of the Czar and

Czarina. These entertainments seem carried to the extreme of

luxury, their only defect being their splendid monotony: only

civil, military, and diplomatic officials are present, and a

new-comer finds much difficulty in remembering their names. There

are said to be four hundred Princes Galitzin in the empire, and I

personally knew three Counts Tolstoi who did not know each other;

but the great drawback is the fact that all these entertainments

are exactly alike, always the same thing: merely civil and

military functionaries and their families; and for strangers no

occupation save to dance, play cards, talk futilities, or simply

stare.



The Berlin court, though by no means so brilliant at first sight

and far smaller,--since the most I ever saw in any gathering in

the Imperial Schloss at the German capital was about fifteen

hundred,--was really much more attractive, its greater interest

arising from the presence of persons distinguished in every

field. While at St. Petersburg one meets only civil and military

functionaries, at Berlin one meets not only these, but the most

prominent men in politics, science, literature, art, and the

higher ranges of agriculture, commerce, and manufacture. At St.

Petersburg, when I wished to meet such men, who added to the

peaceful glories of the empire, I went to their houses in the

university quarter; at Berlin I met them also at court.



As to court episodes during my stay, one especially dwells in my

memory. On arriving rather early one evening, I noticed a large,

portly man, wearing the broad red ribbon of the Legion of Honor,

and at once saw that he could be no other than Prince Victor

Napoleon, the Bonaparte heir to the crown of France. Though he

was far larger than the great Napoleon, and had the eyes of his

mother, Princess Clothilde, his likeness to his father, Prince

Napoleon ("Plon-Plon"), whom I had seen years before at Paris,

was very marked. Presently his brother, who had just arrived from

his regiment in the Caucasus, came up and began conversation with

him. Both seemed greatly vexed at something. On the arrival of

the Italian ambassador, he naturally went up and spoke to the

prince, who was the grandson of King Victor Emmanuel; but the

curious thing was that the French ambassador, Count de

Montebello, and the prince absolutely cut each other. Neither

seemed to have the remotest idea that the other was in the room,

and this in spite of the fact that the Montebellos are descended

from Jean Lannes, the stable-boy whom Napoleon made a marshal of

France and Duke of Montebello, thus founding the family to which

the French ambassador belonged. The show of coolness on the part

of the imperial family evidently vexed the French pretender. He

was, indeed, allowed to enter the room behind the imperial train;

but he was not permitted to sit at the imperial table, being

relegated to a distant and very modest seat. I was informed that,

though the Emperor could, and did, have the prince to dine with

him in private, he felt obliged, in view of the relations between

Russia and the French Republic, to carefully avoid any special

recognition of him in public.



A far more brilliant visitor was the Ameer of Bokhara. I have

already spoken of the way in which he was placed upon the throne

by General Annenkof. He now came to visit the Czar as his

suzerain, and with him came his eldest son and a number of his

great men. The satrap himself was a singular combination of

splendor and stoicism, wearing a gorgeous dress covered with

enormous jewels, and observing the brilliant scenes about him

with hardly ever a word. Even when he took his place at the table

beside the Empress he was very uncommunicative. Facing the

imperial table sat his great men; and their embarrassment was

evident, one special source of it being clearly their small

acquaintance with European table utensils. The Ameer brought to

St. Petersburg splendid presents of gold and jewels, after the

Oriental fashion, and also the heir to his throne, whom he left

as a sort of hostage to be educated at the capital.



An eminent Russian who was in very close relations with the Ameer

gave me some account of this young man. Although he was then

perhaps fourteen or fifteen years of age, he was, as regards

conduct, a mere baby, bursting out into loud boohooing the first

time he was presented to the Emperor, and showing himself very

immature in various ways. Curiously enough, when he was taken to

the cadet school he was found to be unable to walk for any

considerable distance. He had always been made to squat and be

carried, and the first thing to be done toward making him a

Russian officer was to train him in using his legs. He took an

especial fancy to bicycles: in the park attached to the cadet

school he became very proficient in the use of them; and,

returning to Bokhara at his first vacation, he took with him, not

only a bicycle for himself, but another for his brother. Shortly

after his home-coming, the Ameer and court being assembled, he

gave a display of his powers; but, to his great mortification,

the Ameer was disgusted: the idea that the heir to the throne

should be seen working his way in this fashion was contrary to

all the ideas of that potentate, and he ordered the bicycles to

be at once destroyed. But on the young man's return to St.

Petersburg he bought another; resumed his exercises upon it; and

will, no doubt, when he comes to the throne, introduce that form

of locomotion into the Mohammedan regions of Northern Asia.



Among the greater displays of my final year were a wedding and a

funeral. The former was that of the Emperor's eldest daughter,

the Grand Duchess Xenia, at Peterhof. It was very brilliant, and

was conducted after the usual Russian fashion, its most curious

features being the leading of the couple about the altar and

their drinking out of the same cup.



Coming from the ceremony in the chapel, we of the diplomatic

corps found ourselves, at the foot of the great staircase, in a

crush. But just at the side was a large door of plate-glass

opening upon an outer gallery communicating with other parts of

the palace; and standing guard at this door was one of the

"Nubians" whom I had noticed, from time to time, at the Winter

Palace--an enormous creature, very black, very glossy, with the

most brilliant costume possible. I had heard much of these

"Nubians," and had been given to understand that they had been

brought from Central Africa by special command. At great

assemblages in the imperial palaces, just before the doors were

flung open for the entrance of the Majesties and their cortege,

two great black hands were always to be seen put through the

doors, ready to open them in an instant--the hands of two of

these "Nubians." I had built up in my mind quite a structure of

romance regarding them, and now found myself in the crush at the

foot of the grand staircase near one of them. As I looked up at

him he said to me, with deferential compassion, "If you please,

sah, would n't you like to git out of de crowd, sah, through dis

yere doah?" By his dialect he was evidently one of my own

compatriots, and, though in a sort of daze at this discovery, I

mechanically accepted his invitation; whereupon he opened the

door, let us through, and kept back the crowd.



Splendid, too, in its way, was the funeral of the Grand Duchess

Catherine at the Fortress Church. It was very impressive, almost

as much so as the funeral of the Emperor Nicholas, which I had

attended at the same place nearly forty years before. The Emperor

Alexander III, with his brothers, had followed the hearse and

coffin on foot, and his Majesty was evidently greatly fatigued.

Soon he retired to take rest, and then it was that we began to

have the first suspicion of his fatal illness. Up to that time

there had been skepticism. Very few had thought it possible that

a man of such giant frame and strength could be seriously ill,

but now there could be no doubt of it. Standing near him, I

noticed his pallor and evident fatigue, and was not surprised

that he twice left the place, in order, evidently, to secure

rest. There was need of it. In the Russian Church the rule is

that all must stand, and all of us stood from about ten in the

morning until half-past one in the afternoon; but two high

officials covered with gold lace and orders, bearing tapers by

the side of the grand duchess's coffin, toppled over from

exhaustion and were removed.



As to other spectacles, one of the most splendid was the midnight

mass on Easter eve. At my former visit I had seen this at the

Kazan Church; now we went to the Cathedral of St. Isaac. The

ceremony was brilliant almost beyond conception, as in the old

days; the music was heavenly; and, as the clocks struck twelve,

the cannons of the fortress of Peter and Paul boomed forth, all

the bells of the city began chiming, and a light, appearing at

the extreme end of the church, seemed to run in all directions

through the vast assemblage, and presently all seemed ablaze.

Every person in the church was holding a taper, and within a few

moments all of these had been lighted.



Most beautiful of all was the music at another of these Easter

ceremonies, when the choristers, robed in white, came forth from

the sanctuary and sang hymns by the side of the empty sepulcher

under the dome.



The singing by the choirs in Russia is, in many respects, more

beautiful than similar music in any other part of the world, save

that of the cathedral choir of Berlin at its best. I have heard

the Sistine, Pauline, and Lateran choirs at Rome; and they are

certainly far inferior to these Russian singers. No instrumental

music is allowed and no voices of women. The choristers are men

and boys. There are several fine choirs in St. Petersburg, but

three are famous: that of the Emperor at the Winter Palace

Chapel, that of the Archbishop at the Cathedral of St. Isaac, and

that of the Nevski Monastery. Occasionally there were concerts

when all were combined, and nothing in its way could be more

perfect.



Operatic music also receives careful attention. Enormous

subsidies are given to secure the principal singers of Europe at

the Italian, French, and German theaters; but the most lavish

outlay is upon the national opera: it is considered a matter of

patriotism to maintain it at the highest point possible. The

Russian Opera House is an enormous structure, and the finest

piece which I saw given there was Glinka's "Life for the Czar."

Being written by a Russian, on a patriotic subject, and from an

ultra-loyal point of view, everything had been done to mount it

in the most superb way possible: never have I seen more wonderful

scenic effects, the whole culminating in the return of one of the

old fighting czars to the Kremlin after his struggle with the

Poles. The stage was enormous and the procession magnificent. The

personages in it were the counterparts, as regarded dress, of the

persons they represented, exact copies having been made of the

robes and ornaments of the old Muscovite boyards, as preserved in

the Kremlin Museum; and at the close of this procession came a

long line of horses, in the most superb trappings imaginable,

attended by guards and outriders in liveries of barbaric

splendor, and finally the imperial coach. We were enabled to

catch sight of the Cossack guards on the front of it, when, just

as the body of the coach was coming into view, down came the

curtain. This was the result of a curious prohibition, enforced

in all theaters in Russia: on no account is it permitted to

represent the sacred person of any emperor upon the stage.



As to other music, very good concerts were occasionally given,

the musicians being generally from Western Europe.



Very pleasant were sundry excursions, especially during the long

summer twilight; and among these were serenade parties given by

various members of the diplomatic corps. In a trim steam-yacht,

and carrying singers with us, we sailed among the islands in the

midnight hours, stopping, from time to time, to greet friends

occupying cottages there.



As to excursions in the empire, I have already given, in my

chapter on Tolstoi, some account of my second visit to Moscow;

and a more complete account is reserved for a chapter on "Sundry

Excursions and Experiences." The same may be said, also,

regarding an excursion taken, during one of my vacations, in

Sweden, Norway, and Denmark.



In 1893, a new administration having brought into power the party

opposed to my own, I tendered to President Cleveland my

resignation, and, in the full expectation that it would be

accepted, gave up my apartment; but as, instead of an acceptance,

there came a very kind indication of the President's confidence,

good-will, and preference for my continuance at my post, I

remained in the service a year longer, occupying my odds and ends

of time in finishing my book. Then, feeling the need of going

elsewhere to revise it, I wrote the President, thanking him for

his confidence and kindness, but making my resignation final, and

naming the date when it would be absolutely necessary for me to

leave Russia. A very kind letter from him was the result; the

time I had named was accepted; and on the 1st of November, 1894,

to my especial satisfaction, I was once more free from official

duty.







CHAPTER XXXIX



AS MEMBER OF THE VENEZUELA COMMISSION--1895-1896



Early one morning, just at the end of 1895, as I was at work

before the blazing fire in my library at the university, the

winter storms howling outside, a card was brought in bearing the

name of Mr. Hamlin, assistant secretary of the treasury of the

United States. While I was wondering what, at that time of the

year, could have brought a man from such important duties in

Washington to the bleak hills of central New York, he entered,

and soon made known his business, which was to tender me, on the

part of President Cleveland, a position upon the commission which

had been authorized by Congress to settle the boundary between

the republic of Venezuela and British Guiana.



The whole matter had attracted great attention, not only in the

United States, but throughout the world. The appointment of the

commission was the result of a chain of circumstances very

honorable to the President, to his Secretary of State, Mr. Olney,

and to Congress. For years the Venezuelan government had been

endeavoring to establish a frontier between its territory and

that of its powerful neighbor, but without result; and meantime

the British boundary seemed to be pushed more and more into the

territory of the little Spanish-American republic. For years,

too, Venezuela had appealed to the United States, and the United

States had appealed to Great Britain. American secretaries of

state and ambassadors at the Court of St. James had "trusted,"

and "regretted," and had "the honor to renew assurances of their

most distinguished consideration"; but all in vain. At last the

matter had been presented by Secretary Olney to the government of

Lord Salisbury; and now, to Mr. Olney's main despatch on the

subject, Lord Salisbury, after some months' delay, had returned

an answer declining arbitration, and adding that international

law did not recognize the Monroe Doctrine. This seemed even more

than cool; for, when one remembered that the Monroe Doctrine was

at first laid down with the approval of Great Britain, that it

was glorified in Parliament and in the British press of 1823 and

the years following, and that Great Britain had laid down

policies in various parts of the earth, especially in the

Mediterranean and in the far East, which she insisted that all

other powers should respect without reference to any sanction by

international law, this argument seemed almost insulting.



So it evidently seemed to Mr. Cleveland. Probably no man less

inclined to demagogism or to a policy of adventure ever existed;

but as he looked over the case his American instincts were

evidently aroused. He saw then, what is clear to everybody now,

that it was the time of all times for laying down, distinctly and

decisively, the American doctrine on the subject. He did so, and

in a message to Congress proposed that, since Great Britain would

not intrust the finding of a boundary to arbitration, the United

States should appoint commissioners to find what the proper

boundary was, and then, having ascertained it, should support its

sister American republic in maintaining it.



Of course the President was attacked from all sides most

bitterly; even those called "the better element" in the

Republican and Democratic parties, who had been his ardent

supporters, now became his bitter enemies. He was charged with

"demagogism" and "jingoism," but he kept sturdily on. Congress,

including the great body of the Republicans, supported him; the

people at large stood by him; and, as a result, a commission to

determine the boundary was appointed and began its work in

Washington, the commissioners being, in the order named by the

President, David J. Brewer of Kansas, a justice of the Supreme

Court of the United States; Chief Justice Alvey of the District

of Columbia; Andrew D. White of New York; F. R. Coudert, an

eminent member of the New York bar; and Daniel C. Gilman of

Maryland, President of Johns Hopkins University.



On our arrival in Washington there was much discouragement among

us. We found ourselves in a jungle of geographical and legal

questions, with no clue in sight leading anywhither. The rights

of Great Britain had been derived in 1815, from the Netherlands;

the rights of Venezuela had been derived, about 1820, from Spain;

but to find the boundary separating the two in that vast

territory, mainly unsettled, between the Orinoco and the

Essequibo rivers, seemed impossible.



The original rights of the Netherlands had been derived from

Spain by the treaty of Munster in 1648; and on examining that

enormous document, which settled weighty questions in various

parts of the world, after the life-and-death struggle, religious,

political, and military, which had gone on for nearly eighty

years, one little clause arrested our attention: that, namely, in

which the Spaniards, despite their bitter hatred of the Dutch,

agreed that the latter might carry on warlike operations against

"certain other people" with reference to territorial rights in

America. These "certain other people" were not precisely

indicated; and we hoped, by finding who they were, to get a clue

to the fundamental facts of the case. Straightway two of our

three lawyers, Mr. Justice Brewer and Mr. Coudert, grappled on

this question, one of them taking the ground that these "other

people" referred to were the Caribbean Indians who had lived just

south of the mouth of the Orinoco, and had been friendly to the

Dutch but implacable toward the Spaniards, and that their

territory was to be considered as virtually Dutch, and,

therefore, as having passed finally to England. But the other

disputant insisted that it referred to the Brazilians and had no

relation to the question with which we had to deal. During two

whole sessions this ground was fought over in a legal way by

these gentlemen, with great acumen, the rest of us hardly putting

in a word.



At the beginning of the third session I ventured a remonstrance,

saying that it was a historical, and not a legal, question; that

it could not possibly be settled by legal argument; that the

first thing to know was why the clause was inserted in the

treaty, and that the next thing was to find, from the whole

history leading up to it, who those "other persons" thus vaguely

referred to and left by the Spaniards to the tender mercies of

the Dutch might be; and I insisted that this, being a historical

question, must be solved by historical experts. The commission

acknowledged the justice of this; and on my nomination we called

to our aid Mr. George Lincoln Burr, professor of history in

Cornell University. It is not at all the very close friendship

which has existed for so many years between us which prompts the

assertion that, of all historical scholars I have ever known, he

is among the very foremost, by his powers of research, his

tenacity of memory, his almost preternatural accuracy, his

ability to keep the whole field of investigation in his mind, and

his fidelity to truth and justice. He was set at the problem, and

given access to the libraries of Congress and of the State

Department, as also to the large collections of books and maps

which had been placed at the disposal of the commission. Of these

the most important were those of Harvard University and the

University of Wisconsin. Curious as it may seem, this latter

institution, far in the interior of our country, possesses a

large and most valuable collection of maps relating to the

colonization history of South America. Within two weeks Professor

Burr reported, and never did a report give more satisfaction. He

had unraveled, historically, the whole mystery, and found that,

the government of Brazil having played false to both Spaniards

and Dutch, Spain had allowed the Netherlands to take vengeance

for the vexations of both. We also had the exceedingly valuable

services, as to maps and early colonization history, of Mr.

Justin Winsor, librarian of Harvard University, eminent both as

historian and geographer, and of Professor Jameson of Brown

University, who had also distinguished himself in these fields.

Besides these, Mr. Marcus Baker of the United States Coast Survey

aided us, from day to day, in mapping out any territories that we

wished especially to study.



All this work was indispensable. At the very beginning of our

sessions there had been laid before us the first of a series of

British Blue Books on the whole subject; and, with all my

admiration for the better things in British history, politics,

and life, candor compels me to say that it was anything but

creditable to the men immediately responsible for it. It made

several statements that were absolutely baseless, and sought to

rest them upon authorities which, when examined, were found not

to bear in the slightest degree the interpretation put upon them.

I must confess that nothing, save, perhaps, the conduct of

British "experts" regarding the Behring Sea question, has ever

come so near shaking my faith in "British fair play." Nor were

the American commissioners alone in judging this document

severely. Critics broke forth, even in the London "Times,"

denouncing it, until it was supplanted by another, which was fair

and just.



I, of course, impute nothing to the leading British statesmen who

had charge of the whole Venezuelan question. The culprits were,

undoubtedly, sundry underlings whose zeal outran their honesty.

They apparently thought that in the United States, which they

probably considered as new, raw, and too much engaged in

dollar-hunting to produce scholars, their citations from

authorities more or less difficult of access would fail to be

critically examined. But their conduct was soon exposed, and even

their principals joined in repudiating some of their fundamental

statements. Professor Burr was sent abroad, and at The Hague was

able to draw treasures from the library and archives regarding

the old Dutch occupation and to send a mass of important material

for our deliberations. In London also he soon showed his

qualities, and these were acknowledged even by some leading

British geographers. The latter had at first seemed inclined to

indulge in what a German might call "tendency" geography; but the

clearness, earnestness, and honesty of our agent soon gained

their respect, and, after that, the investigators of both sides

worked harmoniously together. While the distinguished lawyers

above named had main charge of the legal questions, President

Gilman, who had in his early life been professor of physical and

general geography at Yale, was given charge of the whole matter

of map-seeking and -making; and to me, with the others, was left

the duty of studying and reporting upon the material as brought

in. Taking up my residence at Washington, I applied myself

earnestly to reading through masses of books, correspondence, and

other documents, and studied maps until I felt as if I had lived

in the country concerned and was personally acquainted with the

Dutch governors on the Cuyuni and the Spanish monks on the

Orinoco. As a result lines more or less tentative were prepared

by each of us, Judge Brewer and myself agreeing very closely, and

the others not being very distant from us at any important point.

One former prime minister of Great Britain I learned, during this

investigation, to respect greatly,--Lord Aberdeen, whom I well

remembered as discredited and driven from power during my stay in

Russia at the time of the Crimean War. He was wise enough in

those days to disbelieve in war with Russia, and to desire a

solution of the Turkish problem by peace, but was overruled, and

the solution was attempted by a war most costly in blood and

treasure, which was apparently successful, but really a failure.

He was driven from his post with ignominy; and I well remembered

seeing a very successful cartoon in "Punch" at that period,

representing him, wearing coronet and mantle and fast asleep, at

the helm of the ship of state, which was rolling in the trough of

the sea and apparently about to founder.



Since that time his wisdom has, I think, been recognized; and I

am now glad to acknowledge the fact that, of all the many British

statesmen who dealt with the Venezuelan question, he was clearly

the most just. The line he drew seemed to me the fairest

possible. He did not attempt to grasp the mouth of the Orinoco,

nor did he meander about choice gold-fields or valuable strategic

points, seeking to include them. The Venezuelans themselves had

shown willingness to accept his proposal; but alleged, as their

reason for not doing so, that the British government had preached

to them regarding their internal policy so offensively that

self-respect forbade them to acquiesce in any part of it.



Toward this Aberdeen line we tended more and more; and in the

sequel we heard, with very great satisfaction, that the

Arbitration Tribunal at Paris had practically adopted this line,

which we of the commission had virtually agreed upon. It need

hardly be stated that, each side having at the beginning of the

arbitration claimed the whole vast territory between the Orinoco

and the Essequibo, neither was quite satisfied with the award.

But I believe it to be thoroughly just, and that it forms a most

striking testimony to the value of international arbitration in

such questions, as a means, not only of preserving international

peace, but of arriving at substantial justice.



Our deliberations and conclusions were, of course, kept secret.

It was of the utmost importance that nothing should get out

regarding them. Our sessions were delayed and greatly prolonged,

partly on account of the amount of work to be done in studying

the many questions involved, and partly because we hoped that,

more and more, British opinion would tend to the submission of

the whole question to the judgment of a proper international

tribunal; and that Lord Salisbury, the prime minister, who, in

his rather cynical, "Saturday-Review," high-Tory way, had scouted

the idea of arbitration, would at last be brought to it. Of

course, every thinking Englishman looked with uneasiness toward

the possibility that a line might be laid down by the United

States which it would feel obliged to maintain, and which would

necessitate its supporting Venezuela, at all hazards, against

Great Britain.



The statesmanship of Mr. Cleveland and Mr. Olney finally

triumphed. Most fortunately for both parties, Great Britain had

at Washington a most eminent diplomatist, whose acquaintance I

then made, but whom I afterward came to know, respect, and admire

even more during the Peace Conference at The Hague--Sir Julian,

afterward Lord, Pauncefote. His wise counsels prevailed; Lord

Salisbury receded from his position; Great Britain agreed to

arbitration; and the question entered into a new stage, which was

finally ended by the award of the Arbitration Tribunal at Paris,

presided over by M. de Martens of St. Petersburg, and having on

its bench the chief justices of the two nations and two of the

most eminent judges of their highest courts. It is with pride and

satisfaction that I find their award agreeing, substantially,

with the line which, after so much trouble, our own commission

had worked out. Arbitration having been decided upon, our

commission refrained from laying down a frontier-line, but

reported a mass of material, some fourteen volumes in all, with

an atlas containing about seventy-five maps, all of which formed

a most valuable contribution to the material laid before the

Court of Arbitration at Paris.



It was a happy solution of the whole question, and it was a

triumph of American diplomacy in the cause of right and justice.



I may mention, in passing, one little matter which throws light

upon a certain disgraceful system to which I have had occasion to

refer at various other times in these memoirs; and I do so now in

the hope of keeping people thinking upon one of the most wretched

abuses in the United States. I have said above that we were, of

course, obliged to maintain the strictest secrecy. To have

allowed our conclusions to get out would have thwarted the whole

purpose of the investigation; but a person who claimed to

represent one of the leading presses in Washington seemed to

think that consideration of no special importance, and came to

our rooms, virtually insisting on receiving information. Having

been told that it could not be given him, he took his revenge by

inserting a sensational paragraph in the papers regarding the

extravagance of the commission. He informed the world that we

were expending large sums of public money in costly furniture, in

rich carpets, and especially in splendid silverware. The fact was

that the rooms were furnished very simply, with plain office

furniture, with cheap carpets, and with a safe for locking up the

more precious documents intrusted to us and such papers as it was

important to keep secret. The "silverware" consisted of two very

plain plated jugs for ice-water; and I may add that after our

adjournment the furniture was so wisely sold that very nearly the

whole expenditure for it was returned into the treasury.



These details would be utterly trivial were it not that, with

others which I have given in other places, they indicate that

prostitution of the press to sensation-mongering which the

American people should realize and reprove.



While I have not gone into minor details of our work, I have

thought that thus much might be interesting. Of course, had these

reminiscences been written earlier, this sketch of the interior

history of the commission would have been omitted; but now, the

award of the Paris tribunal having been made, there is no reason

why secrecy should be longer maintained. Never, before that

award, did any of us, I am sure, indicate to any person what our

view as to the line between the possessions of Venezuela and

Great Britain was; but now we may do so, and I feel that all

concerned may be congratulated on the fact that two tribunals,

each seeking to do justice, united on the same line, and that

line virtually the same which one of the most just of British

statesmen had approved many years before.



During this Venezuela work in Washington I made acquaintance with

many leading men in politics; and among those who interested me

most was Mr. Carlisle of Kentucky, Secretary of the Treasury. He

had been member of Congress, Speaker of the House of

Representatives, and senator, and was justly respected and

admired. Perhaps the most peculiar tribute that I ever heard paid

to a public man was given him once in the House of

Representatives by my friend Mr. Hiscock, then representative,

and afterward senator, from the State of New York. Seated by his

side in the House, and noting the rulings of Mr. Carlisle as

Speaker, I asked, "What sort of man is this Speaker of yours?"

Mr. Hiscock answered, "As you know, he is one of the strongest of

Democrats, and I am one of the strongest of Republicans; yet I

will say this: that my imagination is not strong enough to

conceive of his making an unfair ruling or doing an unfair thing

against the party opposed to him in this House."



Mr. Carlisle's talents were of a very high order. His speeches

carried great weight; and in the campaign which came on later

between Mr. McKinley and Mr. Bryan, he, in my opinion, and indeed

in the opinion, I think, of every leading public man, did a most

honorable thing when he deliberately broke from his party,

sacrificed, apparently, all hopes of political preferment, and

opposed the regular Democratic candidate. His speech before the

working-men of Chicago on the issues of that period was certainly

one of the two most important delivered during the first McKinley

campaign, the other being that of Carl Schurz.



Another man whom I saw from time to time during this period was

the Vice-President, Mr. Stevenson. I first met him at a public

dinner in New York, where we sat side by side; but we merely

talked on generalities. But the next time I met him was at a

dinner given by the Secretary of War, and there I found that he

was one of the most admirable raconteurs I had ever met. After a

series of admirable stories, one of the party said to me: "He

could tell just as good stories as those for three weeks running

and never repeat himself."



One of these stories by the Vice-President, if true, threw a

curious light over the relations of President Lincoln with three

men very distinguished in American annals. It was as follows: One

day, shortly before the issue of the Emancipation Proclamation, a

visitor, finding Mr. Lincoln evidently in melancholy mood, said

to him, "Mr. President, I am sorry to find you not feeling so

well as at my last visit." Mr. Lincoln replied: "Yes, I am

troubled. One day the best of our friends from the border States

come in and insist that I shall not issue an Emancipation

Proclamation, and that, if I do so, the border States will

virtually cast in their lot with the Southern Confederacy.

Another day, Charles Sumner, Thad Stevens, and Ben Wade come in

and insist that if I do not issue such a proclamation the North

will be utterly discouraged and the Union wrecked,--and, by the

way, these three men are coming in this very afternoon." At this

moment his expression changed, his countenance lighted up, and he

said to the visitor, who was from the West, "Mr. ----, did you

ever go to a prairie school?" "No," said the visitor, "I never

did." "Well," said Mr. Lincoln, "I did, and it was a very poor

school, and we were very poor folks,--too poor to have regular

reading-books, and so we brought our Bibles and read from them.

One morning the chapter was from the Book of Daniel, and a little

boy who sat next me went all wrong in pronouncing the names of

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. The teacher had great difficulty

in setting him right, and before he succeeded was obliged to

scold the boy and cuff him for his stupidity. The nest verse came

to me, and so the chapter went along down the class. Presently it

started on its way back, and soon after I noticed that the little

fellow began crying. On this I asked him, 'What's the matter with

you?' and he answered, 'Don't you see? Them three miserable

cusses are coming back to me again.' "



I also at that period made the acquaintance of Senator Gray of

Delaware, who seemed to me ideally fitted for his position as a

member of the Upper House in Congress. Speaker Reed also made a

great impression upon me as a man of honesty, lucidity, and

force. The Secretary of State, Mr. Olney, I saw frequently, and

was always impressed by the sort of bulldog tenacity which had

gained his victory over Lord Salisbury in the arbitration matter.



But to give even the most hasty sketch of the members of the

Supreme Court, the cabinet, and of both houses of Congress whom I

met would require more time than is at my disposal.



This stay in Washington I enjoyed much. Our capital city is

becoming the seat of a refined hospitality which makes it more

and more attractive. Time was, and that not very long since, when

it was looked upon as a place of exile by diplomatists, and as

repulsive by many of our citizens; but all that is of the past:

the courtesy shown by its inhabitants is rapidly changing its

reputation.



Perhaps, of all the social enjoyments of that time, the most

attractive to me was an excursion of the American Geographical

Society to Monticello, the final residence of President

Jefferson. Years before, while visiting the University of

Virginia at Charlottesville, I had been intensely interested in

that creation of Mr. Jefferson and in the surroundings of his

home; but the present occupant of Monticello, having been greatly

annoyed by visitors, was understood to be reluctant to allow any

stranger to enter the mansion, and I would not intrude upon him.

But now house and grounds were freely thrown open, and upon a

delightful day. The house itself was a beautiful adaptation of

the architecture which had reached its best development at the

time of Jefferson's stay in France; and the decorations, like

those which I had noted years before in some of the rooms of the

university, were of an exquisite Louis Seize character.



Jefferson's peculiarities, also, came out in various parts of the

house. Perhaps the most singular was his bed, occupying the whole

space of an archway between two rooms, one of which, on the left,

served as a dressing-room for him, and the other, on the right,

for Mrs. Jefferson; and, there being no communication between

them save by a long circuit through various rooms, it was evident

that the ex-President had made up his mind that he would not have

his intimate belongings interfered with by any of the women of

the household, not even by his wife.



But most attractive of all was the view through the valleys and

over the neighboring hills as we sat at our picnic-tables on the

lawn. Having read with care every line of Jefferson's letters

ever published, and some writings of his which have never been

printed, my imagination was vivid. It enabled me to see him

walking through the rooms and over the estate, receiving

distinguished guests under the portico, discussing with them at

his dinner-table the great questions of the day, and promulgating

his theories, some of which were so beneficent and others so

noxious.



The only sad part of this visit was to note the destruction, by

the fire not long before, of the columns in front of the rotunda

of the university. I especially mourned over the calcined remains

of their capitals, for into these Jefferson had really wrought

his own heart. With a passion for the modern adaptation of

classic architecture, he had poured the very essence of his

artistic feelings into them. He longed to see every stroke which

his foreign sculptors made upon them. Daily, according to the

chronicle of the time, he rode over to see how they progressed,

and, between his visits, frequently observed them through his

telescope; and now all their work was but calcined limestone.

Fortunately, the burning of the old historical buildings aroused

public spirit; large sums of money were poured into the

university treasury; and the work was in process which, it is to

be hoped, will restore the former beauty of the colonnade and

largely increase the buildings and resources of the institution.



During my work upon the commission I learned to respect more and

more the calm, steady, imperturbable character of Mr. Cleveland.

Of course the sensational press howled continually, and the press

which was considered especially enlightened and which had

steadily supported him up to this period, was hardly less bitter;

but he persevered. During the period taken by the commission for

its work, both the American and British peoples had time for calm

thought. Lord Salisbury, especially, had time to think better of

it; and when he at last receded from his former haughty position

and accepted arbitration, Mr. Cleveland and the State Department

gained one of the most honorable victories in the history of

American diplomacy.







CHAPTER XL



AS AMBASSADOR TO GERMANY--1897-1903



On the 1st of April, 1897, President McKinley nominated me

ambassador to Berlin; and, the appointment having been duly

confirmed by the Senate, I visited Washington to obtain

instructions and make preparations. One of the most important of

these preparations was the securing of a second secretary for the

embassy. A long list of applicants for this position had

appeared, several with strong backing from party magnates,

cabinet officers, and senators; but, though all of them seemed

excellent young men, very few had as yet any experience likely to

be serviceable, and a look over the list suggested many

misgivings. There was especially needed just then at Berlin a

second secretary prepared to aid in disentangling sundry

important questions already before the embassy. The first

secretary, whom no person thought of displacing, was ideally

fitted for his place--in fact, was fitted for any post in the

diplomatic service; but a second secretary was needed to take, as

an expert, a mass of work on questions relating to commerce and

manufactures which were just then arising between the two nations

in shapes new and even threatening.



While the whole matter was under advisement, there appeared a

young man from Ohio, with no backing of any sort save his record.

He had distinguished himself at one of our universities as a

student in political economy and international law; had then

taken a fellowship in the same field at another university; and

had finally gone to Germany and there taken his degree, his

graduating thesis being on "The Commercial and Diplomatic

Relations between the United States and Germany." In preparing

this he had been allowed to work up a mass of material in our

embassy archives, and had afterward expanded his thesis into a

book which had gained him credit. As the most serious questions

between the two countries were commercial, he seemed a godsend;

and, going to the President, I stated the matter fully. Though

the young man was as far as possible from having any "pull" in

the State from which he came, was not at all known either to the

President or the Secretary of State or assistant secretary of

state, all of whom came from Ohio, and was equally unknown to

either of the Ohio senators or to any representative, and though

nothing whatever was known of his party affiliations, the

President, on hearing a statement of the case, ignored all

pressure in favor of rival candidates, sent in his nomination to

the Senate, and it was duly confirmed.



The next thing was the appointment of a military attache. The

position is by no means a sinecure. Our government must always

feel the importance of receiving the latest information as to the

armies and navies of the great powers of the world; and therefore

it is that, very wisely, it has attached military and naval

experts to various leading embassies. It is important that these

be not only thoroughly instructed and far-seeing, but gentlemen

in the truest sense of the word; and I therefore presented a

graduate of West Point who, having conducted an expedition in

Alaska and served with his regiment on the Western plains most

creditably, had done duty as military attache with me during my

mission at St. Petersburg, and had proved himself, in every

respect, admirable. Though he had no other supporter at the

national capital, the Secretary of War, Governor Alger, granted

my request, and he was appointed.



These matters, to many people apparently trivial, are here

alluded to because it is so often charged that political

considerations outweigh all others in such appointments, and

because this charge was frequently made against President

McKinley. The simple fact is that, with the multitude of

nominations to be made, the appointing power cannot have personal

knowledge of the applicants, and must ask the advice of persons

who have known them and can, to some extent, be held responsible

for them. In both the cases above referred to, political pressure

of the strongest in favor of other candidates went for nothing

against the ascertained interest of the public service



The Secretary of State at this time was Mr. John Sherman. I had

known him somewhat during his career as senator and Secretary of

the Treasury, and had for his character, abilities, and services

the most profound respect. I now saw him often. He had become

somewhat infirm, but his mind seemed still clear; whether at the

State Department or in social circles his reminiscences of public

men and affairs were always interesting, and one of these

confirmed an opinion I have expressed in another chapter. One

night, at a dinner-party, the discussion having fallen upon

President Andrew Johnson, and some slighting remarks having been

made regarding him by one of our company, Mr. Sherman, who had

been one of President Johnson's strongest opponents, declared him

a man of patriotic motives as well as of great ability, and

insisted that the Republican party had made a great mistake in

attempting to impeach him. In the course of the conversation one

of the foremost members of the House of Representatives, a man of

the highest standing and character, stated that he had himself,

when a young man, aided Mr. Johnson as secretary, and that he was

convinced that the ex-President could write very little more than

his signature. We had all heard the old story that after he had

become of age his newly wedded wife had taught him the alphabet,

but it was known to very few that he remained to the last so

imperfectly equipped.



Of conversations with many other leading men of that period at

Washington I remember that, at the house of my friend Dr. Hill,

afterward assistant secretary of state, mention being made of the

Blaine campaign, an eminent justice of the Supreme Court said

that Mr. Blaine always insisted to the end of his life that he

had lost the Presidency on account of the Rev. Dr. Burchard's

famous alliteration, "Rum, Romanism, and rebellion," and that the

whole was really a Democratic trick. Neither the judge nor any

other person present believed that Mr. Blaine's opinion in this

matter was well founded.



An important part of my business during this visit was to confer

with the proper persons at Washington, including the German

ambassador, Baron von Thielmann, regarding sundry troublesome

questions between the United States and Germany. The addition to

the American tariff of a duty against the sugar imports from

every other country equivalent to the sugar bounty allowed

manufactures in that country had led to special difficulties. It

had been claimed by Germany that this additional duty was

contrary to the most-favored-nation clause in our treaties; and,

unfortunately, the decisions on our side had been conflicting,

Mr. Gresham, Secretary of State under Mr. Cleveland, having

allowed that the German contention was right, and his successor,

Mr. Olney, having presented an elaborate argument to show that it

was wrong. On this point, conversations, not only with the

Secretary of State and the German ambassador, but with leading

members of the committees of Congress having the tariff in

charge, and especially with Mr. Allison and Mr. Aldrich of the

Senate and Governor Dingley of the House, showed me that the case

was complicated, the various interests somewhat excited against

each other, and that my work in dealing with them was to be

trying.



There were also several other questions no less difficult, those

relating to the exportation of American products to Germany and

the troubles already brewing in Samoa being especially prominent;

so that it was with anything but an easy feeling that, on the

29th of May, I sailed from New York.



On the 12th of June I presented the President's letter of

credence to the Emperor William II. The more important of my new

relations to the sovereign had given me no misgivings; for during

my stay in Berlin as minister, eighteen years before, I had found

him very courteous, he being then the heir apparent; but with the

ceremonial part it was otherwise, and to that I looked forward

almost with dismay.



For, since my stay in Berlin, the legation had been raised to an

embassy. It had been justly thought by various patriotic members

of Congress that it was incompatible, either with the dignity or

the interests of so great a nation as ours, to be represented

simply by a minister plenipotentiary, who, when calling at the

Foreign Office to transact business, might be obliged to wait for

hours, and even until the next day, while representatives from

much less important countries who ranked as ambassadors went in

at once. The change was good, but in making it Congress took no

thought of some things which ought to have been provided for. Of

these I shall speak later; but as regards the presentation, the

trying feature to me was that there was a great difference

between this and any ceremonial which I had previously

experienced, whether as commissioner at Santo Domingo and Paris,

or as minister at Berlin and St. Petersburg. At the presentation

of a minister plenipotentiary he goes in his own carriage to the

palace at the time appointed; is ushered into the presence of the

sovereign; delivers to him, with some simple speech, the

autograph letter from the President; and then, after a kindly

answer, all is finished. But an ambassador does not escape so

easily. Under a fiction of international law he is regarded as

the direct representative of the sovereign power of his country,

and is treated in some sense as such. Therefore it was that, at

the time appointed, a high personage of the court, in full

uniform, appeared at my hotel accompanied by various other

functionaries, with three court carriages, attendants, and

outriders, deputed to conduct me to the palace. Having been

escorted to the first of the carriages,--myself, in plain

citizen's dress, on the back seat; my escort, in gorgeous

uniform, facing me; and my secretaries and attaches in the other

carriages,--we took up our march in solemn procession--carriages,

outriders, and all--through the Wilhelmstrasse and Unter den

Linden. On either side was a gaping crowd; at the various corps

de garde bodies of troops came out and presented arms; and on our

arrival at the palace there was a presentation of arms and

beating of drums which, for the moment, somewhat abashed me. It

was an ordeal more picturesque than agreeable.



The reception by the Emperor was simple, courteous, and kindly.

Neither of us made any set speech, but we discussed various

questions, making reference to our former meeting and the changes

which had occurred since. Among these changes I referred to the

great improvement in Berlin, whereupon he said that he could not

think the enormous growth of modern cities an advantage. My

answer was that my reference was to the happy change in the

architecture of Berlin rather than to its growth in population;

that, during my first stay in the city, over forty years before,

nearly all the main buildings were of brick and stucco, whereas

there had now been a remarkable change from stucco to stone and

to a much nobler style of architecture. We also discussed the

standing of Germans in America and their relations to the United

States. On my remarking that it was just eighteen years and one

day since the first Emperor William had received me as minister

in that same palace, he spoke of various things in the history of

the intervening years; and then ensued an episode such as I had

hardly expected. For just before leaving New York my old friend

Frederick William Holls, after a dinner at his house on the

Hudson, had given his guests examples of the music written by

Frederick the Great, and one piece had especially interested us.

It was a duet in which Mr. Holls played one part upon the organ,

and his wife another upon the piano; and all of us were greatly

impressed by the dignity and beauty of the whole. It had been

brought to light and published by the present Emperor, and after

the performance some one of the party remarked, in a jocose way,

"You should express our thanks to his Majesty, when you meet him,

for the pleasure which this music has given us." I thought

nothing more of the subject until, just at the close of the

conversation above referred to, it came into my mind; and on my

mentioning it the Emperor showed at once a special interest,

discussing the music from various points of view; and on my

telling him that we were all surprised that it was not

amateurish, but really profound in its harmonies and beautiful in

its melodies, he dwelt upon the musical debt of Frederick the

Great to Bach and the special influence of Bach upon him. This

conversation recurred to me later, when the Emperor, in erecting

the statue to Frederick the Great on the Avenue of Victory,

placed on one side of it the bust of Marshal Schwerin, and on the

other that of Johann Sebastian Bach, thus honoring the two men

whom he considered most important during Frederick's reign.



After presenting my embassy secretaries and attaches, military

and naval, I was conducted with them into the presence of the

Empress, who won all our hearts by her kindly, unaffected

greeting. On my recalling her entrance into Berlin as a bride, in

her great glass coach, seventeen years before, on one of the

coldest days I ever knew, she gave amusing details of her stately

progress down the Linden on that occasion; and in response to my

congratulations upon her six fine boys and her really charming

little daughter, it was pleasant to see how



 "One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,"



her eyes lighting up with pride and joy, and her conversation

gladly turning to the children.



It may be added here that the present Empress seems to have

broken the unfortunate spell which for about half a century hung

over the queens and empresses of the house of Hohenzollern. I

remember well that, among the Germans whom I knew in my

Berlin-University days, all the sins of the period, political and

religious, seemed to be traced to the influence of Queen

Elizabeth, the consort of the reigning King Frederick William IV;

and that, during my first official stay in the same capital as

minister, a similar feeling was shown toward the Empress Augusta,

in spite of her most kindly qualities and her devotion to every

sort of charitable work; and that the crown princess, afterward

the Empress Frederick, in spite of all her endowments of head and

heart, was apparently more unpopular than either of her two

predecessors. But the present Empress seems to have changed all

this, and, doubtless, mainly by her devotion to her husband and

her children, which apparently excludes from her mind all care

for the great problems of the universe outside her family. So

strong is this feeling of kindness toward her that it was comical

to see, at one period during my stay, when she had been brought

perilously near a most unpopular course of action, that everybody

turned at once upon her agent in the matter, saying nothing about

her, but belaboring him unmercifully, though he was one of the

most attractive of men.



These presentations being finished, our return to the Kaiserhof

Hotel was made with the same ceremony as that with which we had

come to the palace, and happy was I when all was over.



Of the other official visits at this time, foremost in importance

was that to the chancellor of the empire, Prince Hohenlohe.

Although he was then nearly eighty years old and bent with age,

his mind in discussing public matters was entirely clear. Various

later conversations with him also come back to me--one,

especially, at a dinner he gave at the chancellor's palace to

President Harrison. On my recalling the fact that we were in the

room where I had first dined with Bismarck, Prince Hohenlohe gave

a series of reminiscences of his great predecessor, some of them

throwing a strong light upon his ideas and methods. On one

occasion, at my own table, he spoke very thoughtfully on German

characteristics, and one of his remarks surprised me: it was that

the besetting sin of the Germans is envy (Neid); in which remark

one may see a curious tribute to the tenacity of the race, since

Tacitus justified a similar opinion. He seemed rather melancholy;

but he had a way of saying pungent things very effectively, and

one of these attributed to him became widely known. He was

publicly advocating a hotly contested canal bill, when an

opponent said, "You will find a solid rock in the way of this

measure"; to which the chancellor rejoined, "We will then do with

the rock as Moses did: we will smite it and get water for our

canal."



As to the next visit of importance, I was especially glad to find

at the Foreign Office the newly appointed minister, Baron (now

Count) von Bulow. During the first part of my former stay, as

minister, I had done business at the Foreign Office with his

father, and found him in every respect a most congenial

representative of the German Government. It now appeared that

father and son were amazingly like each other, not only in

personal manner, but in their mode of dealing with public

affairs. With the multitude of trying questions which pressed

upon me as ambassador during nearly six years, it hardly seems

possible that I should be still alive were it not for the genial,

hearty intercourse, at the Foreign Office and elsewhere, with

Count von Bulow. Sundry German papers, indeed, attacked him as

yielding to much to me, and sundry American papers attacked me

for yielding too much to him; but both of us exerted ourselves to

do the best possible, each for his own country, and at the same

time to preserve peace and increase good feeling.



Interesting was it to me, from my first to my last days in

Berlin, to watch him in the discharge of his great duties,

especially in his dealings with hostile forces in Parliament. No

contrast could be more marked than that between his manner and

that of his great predecessor, the iron chancellor. To begin

with, no personalities could be more unlike. In the place of an

old man, big, rumbling, heavy, fiery, minatory, objurgatory,

there now stood a young man, quiet, self-possessed, easy in

speech, friendly in manner, "sweet reasonableness" apparently his

main characteristic, bubbling at times with humor, quick to turn

a laugh on a hostile bungler, but never cruel; prompt in

returning a serious thrust, but never venomous. Many of his

speeches were masterpieces in their way of handling opponents. An

attack which Bismarck would have met with a bludgeon, Bulow

parried with weapons infinitely lighter, but in some cases really

more effective. A very good example was on an occasion when the

old charge of "Byzantinism" was flung at the present regime, to

which he replied, not by a historical excursus or political

disquisition, but by humorously deprecating a comparison of the

good, kindly, steady-going, hard-working old privy councilors and

other state officials of Berlin with fanatics, conspirators, and

assassins who played leading parts at Constantinople during the

decline of the Eastern Empire. In the most stormy discussions I

never saw him other than serene; under real provocation he

remained kindly; more than one bitter opponent he disarmed with a

retort; but there were no poisoned wounds. The German Parliament,

left to itself, can hardly be a peaceful body. The lines of

cleavage between parties are many, and some of them are old

chasms of racial dislike and abysses of religious and social

hate; but the appearance of the young chancellor at his desk

seemed, even on the darkest days, to bring sunshine.



Occasionally, during my walks in the Thiergarten, I met him on

his way to Parliament; and, no matter how pressing public

business might be, he found time to extend his walk and prolong

our discussions. On one of these walks I alluded to a hot debate

of the day before and to his suavity under provocation, when he

answered: "Old ----, many years ago, gave me two counsels, and I

have always tried to mind them. These were: 'Never worry; never

lose your temper.' "



A pet phrase among his critics is that he is a diplomatist and

not a statesman. Like so many antitheses, this is misleading. It

may be just to say that his methods are, in general, those of a

diplomatist rather than of a statesman; but certain it is that in

various debates of my time he showed high statesmanlike

qualities, and notably at the beginning of the war with China and

in sundry later contests with the agrarians and socialists. Even

his much criticized remark during the imbroglio between Turkey

and Greece, picturing Germany as laying down her flute and

retiring from the "European Concert," which to many seemed mere

persiflage, was the humorous presentation of a policy dictated by

statesmanship. Nor were all his addresses merely light and

humorous; at times, when some deep sentiment had been stirred, he

was eloquent, rising to the height of great arguments and taking

broad views.



No one claims that he is a Richelieu, a William Pitt, or a

Cavour; but the work of such men is not what the German Empire

just now requires. The man needed at present is the one who can

keep things GOING, who can minimize differences, resist

extremists, turn aside marplots, soothe doctrinaires, and thus

give the good germs in the empire a chance to grow. For this work

it would be hard to imagine a better man than the present

chancellor. His selection and retention by the Emperor prove that

the present monarch has inherited two of the best qualities of

his illustrious grandfather: skill in recognizing the right man

and firmness in standing by him.



The next thing which an ambassador is expected to do, after

visiting the great representatives of the empire, is to become

acquainted with the official world in general.



But he must make acquaintance with these under his own roof. On

his arrival he is expected to visit the Emperor and the princes

of his family, the imperial chancellor, and the minister of

foreign affairs, but all others are expected to visit him; hence

the most pressing duty on my arrival was to secure a house, and,

during three months following, all the time that I could possibly

spare, and much that I ought not to have spared, was given to

excursions into all parts of the city to find it. No house, no

ambassador. A minister plenipotentiary can live during his first

year in a hotel or in a very modest apartment; an ambassador

cannot. He must have a spacious house fully furnished before he

can really begin his duties; for, as above stated, one of the

first of these duties is to make the acquaintance of the official

world,--the ministers of the crown, the diplomatic corps, the

members of the Imperial Parliament, the members of the Prussian

legislature, the foremost men in the army and navy, and the

leaders in public life generally,--and to this end he must give

three very large receptions, at which all those personages visit

him. This is a matter of which the court itself takes charge, so

far as inviting and presenting the guests is concerned, high

court officials being sent to stand by the side of the ambassador

and ambassadress and make the introductions to them; but, as

preliminary to all this, the first thing is to secure a residence

fit for such receptions and for entertainments in connection with

them.



Under the rules of European nations generally, these receptions

must be held at the ambassador's permanent residence; but,

unfortunately, such a thing as a large furnished apartment

suitable for a foreign representative is rarely to be found in

Berlin. In London and Paris such apartments are frequently

offered, but in Berlin hardly ever. Every other nation which

sends an ambassador to Berlin--and the same is true as regards

the other large capitals of Europe--owns a suitable house, or at

least holds a long lease of a commodious apartment; but, although

President Cleveland especially recommended provision for such

residence in one of his messages, nothing has yet been done by

the American Congress, and the consequence is that every

ambassador has to lose a great amount of valuable time, effort,

and money in securing proper quarters, while his country loses

much of its proper prestige and dignity by constant changes in

the location of its embassy, and by the fact that the American

representative is not infrequently obliged to take up his

residence in unfit apartments and in an unsuitable part of the

town.



After looking at dozens of houses, the choice was narrowed down

to two; but, as one was nearly three miles from the center of the

city, selection was made of the large apartment which I occupied

during nearly four years, and which was bought from under my feet

by one of the smallest governments in Europe as the residence for

its minister. Immediately after my lease was signed there began a

new series of troubles. Everything must be ready for the three

receptions by the eighth day of January; and, being at the mercy

of my landlord, I was at a great disadvantage. Though paying

large rent for the apartment, I was obliged, at my own expense,

to put it thoroughly in order, introducing electric light,

perfecting heating apparatus, getting walls and floors in order,

and doing a world of work which, under other circumstances, would

have been done by the proprietor himself. As to furnishing, a

peculiar difficulty arose. Berlin furnishers, as a rule, have

only samples in stock, and a long time is required for completing

sets. My former experience, when, as minister, I had been obliged

to go through a similar ordeal, had shown me that the Berlin

makers could never be relied upon to get the apartment furnished

in time; and therefore it was that, having secured what was

possible in Berlin, I was obliged to make large purchases at

Dresden, London, and Paris, and to have the furniture from the

last-named city hurried on to Berlin in special wadded cars, with

attendants to put it in place. It was a labor and care to which

no representative of the United States or of any other power

ought to be subjected. The vexations and difficulties seemed

unending; but at last carpenters, paper-hangers, electric-light

men, furniture men, carpet-layers, upholsterers, and the like

were driven from the house just five minutes before the

chancellor of the empire arrived to open the first of these three

official receptions. Happily they all went off well, and thereby

began my acquaintance with the leaders in various departments of

official life.



On my settling down to the business of the embassy, it appeared

that the changes in public sentiment since my former stay as

minister, eighteen years before, were great indeed. At that time

German feeling was decidedly friendly to the United States. The

Germans had sided with us in our Civil War, and we had come out

victorious; we had sided with them in their war of 1870-1871, and

they had come out victorious. But all this was now changed.

German feeling toward us had become generally adverse and, in

some parts of the empire, bitterly hostile. The main cause of

this was doubtless our protective policy. Our McKinley tariff,

which was considered almost ruinous to German manufactures, had

been succeeded by the Dingley tariff, which went still further;

and as Germany, in the last forty years, had developed an amazing

growth of manufactures, much bitterness resulted.



Besides this, our country was enabled, by its vast extent of

arable land, as well as by its cheap conveyance and skilful

handling of freights, to sweep into the German markets

agricultural products of various sorts, especially meats, and to

undersell the native German producers. This naturally vexed the

landed proprietors, so that we finally had against us two of the

great influential classes in the empire: the manufacturers and

the landowners.



But this was not all. These real difficulties were greatly

increased by fictitious causes of ill feeling. Sensational

articles, letters, telegrams, caricatures, and the like, sent

from America to Germany and from Germany to America, had become

more and more exasperating, until, at the time of my arrival,

there were in all Germany but two newspapers of real importance

friendly to the United States. These two journals courageously

stood up for fairness and justice, but all the others were more

or less hostile, and some bitterly so. The one which, on account

of its zeal in securing news, I read every morning was of the

worst. During the Spanish War it was especially virulent, being

full of statements and arguments to show that corruption was the

main characteristic of our government, cowardice of our army and

navy, and hypocrisy of our people. Very edifying were its

quasi-philosophical articles; and one of these, showing the

superiority of the Spanish women to their American sisters,

especially as regards education, was a work of genius. The love

of Spanish women for bull-fights was neatly glossed over, and

various absurd charges against American women were put in the

balance against it. A few sensational presses on our side were

perhaps worse. Various newspapers in America repaid Teutonic

hostility by copious insults directed at everything German, and

this aroused the Germans yet more. One journal, very influential

among the aristocratic and religious public of Northern Germany,

regularly published letters of considerable literary merit from

its American correspondent, in which every scandal which could be

raked out of the gutters of the cities, every crime in the

remotest villages, and all follies of individuals everywhere,

were kneaded together into statements showing that our country

was the lowest in the scale of human civilization. The tu-quoque

argument might have been used by an American with much effect;

for just about this period there were dragging along, in the

Berlin and other city journals, accounts of German trials for

fraud and worse, surpassing, in some respects, anything within my

memory of American tribunals. The quantity of fig-leaves required

in some of these trials was enormous; and, despite all

precautions, some details which escaped into the press might well

bring a blush to the most hardened American offender. It was both

vexatious and comical to see the smug, Pharisaical way in which

many journals ignored all these things, and held up their hands

in horror at American shortcomings. Some trials, too, which at

various times revealed the brutality of sundry military officers

toward soldiers, were heartrending; and especially one or two

duels, which occurred during my stay, presented features

calculated to shock the toughest American rough-rider. But all

this seemed not for a moment to withdraw the attention of our

Teutonic censors from American folly and wickedness. One of the

main charges constantly made was that in America there was a

"Deutschen Hetze." Very many German papers had really persuaded

themselves, and apparently had convinced a large part of the

German people, that throughout our country there existed a hate,

deep and acrid, of everything German and especially of

German-Americans. The ingenuity of some German papers in

supporting this thesis was wonderful. On one occasion a petty

squabble in a Roman Catholic theological school in the United

States between the more liberal element and a reactionary German

priest, in which the latter came to grief, was displayed as an

evidence that the American people were determined to drive out

all German professors and to abjure German science. The doings of

every scapegrace in an American university, of every silly woman

in Chicago, of every blackguard in New York, of every snob at

Newport, of every desperado in the Rocky Mountains, of every club

loafer anywhere, were served up as typical examples of American

life. The municipal governments of our country, and especially

that of New York, were an exhaustless quarry from which specimens

of every kind of scoundrelism were drawn and used in building up

an ideal structure of American life; corruption, lawlessness, and

barbarism being its most salient features.



Nor was this confined to the more ignorant. Men who stood high in

the universities, men of the greatest amiability, who in former

days had been the warmest friends of America, had now become our

bitter opponents, and some of their expressions seemed to point

to eventual war.



Yet I doubt whether we have any right to complain of such attacks

and misrepresentations. As a matter of fact, no nation washes so

much of its dirty linen in the face of the whole world as does

our own; and, what is worse, there is washed in our country, with

much noise and perversity, a great deal of linen which is not

dirty. Many demagogues and some "reformers" are always doing

this. There is in America a certain class of excellent people who

see nothing but the scum on the surface of the pot; nothing but

the worst things thrown to the surface in the ebullition of

American life. Or they may be compared to people who, with a

Persian carpet before them, persist in looking at its seamy side,

and finding nothing but odds and ends, imperfect joints,

unsatisfactory combinations of color; the real pattern entirely

escaping them. The shrill utterances of such men rise above the

low hum of steady good work, and are taken in Germany as exact

statements of the main facts in our national life.



Let me repeat here one example which I have given more than once

elsewhere. Several years since, an effort was made to impeach the

President of the United States. The current was strong, and most

party leaders thought it best to go with it. Three senators of

the United States sturdily refused, their leader being William

Pitt Fessenden of Maine, who, believing the impeachment an

attempt to introduce Spanish-American politics into our country,

resolutely opposed it. The State convention of his party called

upon him to vote for it, the national convention of the party

took the same ground, his relatives and friends besought him to

yield, but he stood firmly against the measure, and finally, by

his example and his vote, defeated it. It was an example of

Spartan fortitude, of Roman heroism, worthy to be chronicled by

Plutarch. How was it chronicled? I happened to be traveling in

Germany at the time, and naturally watched closely for the result

of the impeachment proceedings. One morning I took up a German

paper containing the news and read, "The impeachment has been

defeated; three senators were bribed," and at the head of the

list of bribed senators was the name of Fessenden! The time will

come when his statue will commemorate his great example; let us

hope that the time will also come when party spirit will not be

allowed to disgrace our country by sending out to the world such

monstrous calumnies.



As to attacks upon the United States, it is only fair to say that

German publicists and newspaper writers were under much

provocation. Some of the American correspondents then in Germany

showed wonderful skill in malignant invention. My predecessors in

the embassy had suffered much from this cause. One of them, whom

I had known from his young manhood as a gentleman of refined

tastes and quiet habits, utterly incapable of rudeness of any

sort, was accused, in a sensational letter published in various

American journals, of having become so noisy and boisterous at

court that the Emperor was obliged to rebuke him. Various hints

of a foul and scandalous character were sent over and published.

I escaped more easily, but there were two or three examples which

were both vexatious and amusing.



Shortly after my arrival at my post, letters and newspaper

articles began coming deploring the conduct of the Germans toward

me, expressing deep sympathy with me, exhorting me to "stand

firm," declaring that the American people were behind me, etc.,

etc., all of which puzzled me greatly until I found that some

correspondent had sent over a telegram to the effect that the

feeling against America had become so bitter that the Emperor

himself had been obliged to intervene and command the officials

of his empire to present themselves at my official reception; and

with this statement was coupled a declaration that I had made the

most earnest remonstrance to the Imperial Government against such

treatment. The simple fact was that the notice was in the

stereotyped form always used when an ambassador arrives. On every

such occasion the proper authorities notify all the persons

concerned, giving the time of his receptions, and this was simply

what was done in my case. On another occasion, telegrams were

sent over to American papers stating that the first secretary of

the embassy and myself, on visiting Parliament to hear an

important debate, had been grossly insulted by various members.

The fact was that we had been received by everybody with the

utmost kindness; that various members had saluted us in the most

friendly manner from the floor or had come into the diplomatic

gallery to welcome us; and that there was not the slightest

shadow of reason for the statement. As an example of the genius

shown in some of these telegrams, another may be mentioned. A

very charming American lady, niece of a member of Mr. McKinley's

cabinet, having arrived on the Norwegian coast, her children were

taken on board the yacht of the Emperor, who was then cruising in

those regions; and later, on their arrival at Berlin, they with

their father and mother were asked by him to the palace to meet

his own wife and children. A few days afterward a telegram was

published in America to the effect that the Emperor, in speaking

to Mrs. White and myself regarding the children, had said that he

was especially surprised, because he had always understood that

American children were badly brought up and had very bad manners.

The simple fact was that, while he spoke of the children with

praise, the rest of the story was merely a sensational invention.

One of the marvels of American life is the toleration by decent

fathers and mothers of sensational newspapers in their

households. Of all the demoralizing influences upon our people,

and especially upon our young people, they are the most steadily

and pervasively degrading. Horace Greeley once published a

tractate entitled, "New Themes for the Clergy," and I would

suggest the evil influence of sensation newsmongering as a most

fruitful theme for the exhortations of all American clergymen to

their flocks, whether Catholic, Jewish, or Protestant. May we not

hope, also, that Mr. Pulitzer's new College of Journalism will

give careful attention to this subject?



As to public questions then demanding attention, the first which

I now recall was a bit of international comedy, serving as a

prelude to more important matters, and worth mentioning here only

as showing a misconception very absurd, yet not without dangers.



One morning, as I had just sat down to my office work, there was

ushered in, with due ceremony, a young gentleman of light color,

Parisian to the tips of his fingers,--in accent, manner, and

garb,--who was announced as the charge d'affaires of Haiti. He

was evidently under deep concern, and was soon in the midst of a

somewhat impassioned statement of his business.



It appeared that his government, like so many which had preceded

it, after a joyous career of proclamations, revolutions,

throat-cutting, confiscation, paper money, and loans, public and

private, had at last met a check, and that in this instance the

check had come in the shape of a German frigate which had dropped

into the harbor of Port-au-Prince, run out its guns, and demanded

redress of injuries and payment of debts to Germany and German

subjects; and the charge, after dwelling upon the enormity of

such a demand, pointed out the duty of the United States to

oblige Germany to desist,--in short, to assert the Monroe

Doctrine as he understood it.



The young diplomatist's statement interested me much; it brought

back vividly to my mind the days when, as a commissioner from the

United States, I landed at Port-au-Prince, observed the wreck and

ruin caused by a recent revolution, experienced the beauties of a

paper-money system carried out so logically that a market-basket

full of currency was needed to buy a market-basket full of

vegetables, visited the tombs of the presidents from which the

bodies of their occupants had been torn and scattered, saw the

ring to which President Salnave had recently been tied when the

supporters of his successor had murdered him, and mused over the

ruins of the presidential mansion, which had been torn in pieces

by bombs from a patriotic vessel. My heart naturally warmed

toward the representative of so much glory, and it seemed sad to

quench his oratorical fire and fervor with a cold statement of

fact. But my duty was plain: I assured him that neither the

President whose name the famous "Doctrine" bears, nor the

Secretary of State who devised it, nor the American people behind

them, had any idea of protecting our sister republics in such

conduct as that of which the Germans complained; and I concluded

by fervently exhorting him to advise his government and people

simply to--pay their debts.



It gave me pleasure to learn, somewhat later, that this very

prosaic solution of the difficulty had been adopted.



I make haste to add that nothing which may be said here or

elsewhere in these recollections regarding sundry equatorial

governments has any reference to our sister republics of South

America really worthy of the name. No countries were in my time

more admirably represented at Berlin than the Argentine Republic,

Chile, and Brazil. The first-named sent as its minister the most

eminent living authority on international law; the second, a

gentleman deeply respected for character and ability, whose

household was one of the most beautiful and attractive I have

ever known; and the third, a statesman and scholar worthy of the

best traditions of his country.



As to more complicated international matters with which my

embassy had to deal, the first to assume a virulent form was that

of the Samoan Islands.



During the previous twenty-five years the United States, Germany,

and Great Britain had seemed to develop equal claims in Samoa.

There had been clashes from time to time, in which good sense had

generally prevailed; but in one case a cyclone which destroyed

the German and American vessels of war in the main port of the

islands seemed providential in preventing a worse form of

trouble.



But now the chronic difficulties became acute. In the consuls of

the three powers what Bismarck used to call the furor consularis

was developed to the highest degree. Yet this was not the worst.

Under the Berlin agreement, made some years before, there was a

German president of the municipality of Apia with ill-defined

powers, and an American chief justice with powers in some

respects enormous, and each of these naturally magnified his

office at the expense of the other. To complete the elements of

discord, there were two great native parties, each supporting its

candidate for kingship; and behind these, little spoken of, but

really at the bottom of the main trouble, were

missionaries,--English Wesleyans on one side, and French Roman

Catholics on the other,--each desiring to save the souls of the

natives, no matter at what sacrifice of their bodies.



This tea-pot soon began to boil violently. The old king having

died, the question arose as to the succession. The power of

appointing the successor having been in the most clear and

definite terms bestowed by the treaty upon the chief justice, he

named for the position Malietoa Tanu, a young chieftain who had

been induced to call himself a Protestant; but on the other side

was Mataafa, an old chief who years before had made much trouble,

had been especially obnoxious to the Germans, and had been

banished, but had been recently allowed to return on his taking

oath that he would abstain from all political action, and would

be true to his allegiance to the Malietoan kings. He had been

induced to call himself a Catholic.



But hardly had he returned when, having apparently been absolved

from his oath, he became the leader of a political party and

insisted on his right to the kingship.



The result was a petty civil war which cost many lives. Nor was

this all. A drunken Swiss having one day amused himself by

breaking the windows of the American chief justice's court and no

effective punishment having been administered by the German

president of Apia, the Yankee chief justice took the matter into

his own hands, and this Little Pedlington business set in motion

sensation-mongers throughout the world. They exerted themselves

to persuade the universe that war might, and indeed ought to,

result between the three great nations concerned. On the arrival

of the American Admiral Kautz, he simply and naturally supported

the decree which the chief justice had made, in strict accordance

with the treaty of Berlin, and was finally obliged to fire upon

the insurgents. Now came a newspaper carnival: screams of wrath

from the sensation press of Germany and yells of defiance from

the sensation press of the United States.



It was fortunate, indeed, that at this period the American

Secretary of State was Mr. John Hay and the German minister of

foreign affairs Count von Bulow. Both at Washington and Berlin

the light of plain common sense was gradually let into this

jungle of half truths and whole falsehoods; the appointment of an

excellent special commission, who supplanted all the officials in

the islands by new men, solved various preliminary problems, so

that finally a treaty was made between the three nations

concerned which swept away the old vicious system, partitioned

the islands between the United States and Germany, giving Great

Britain indemnity elsewhere, and settled all the questions

involved, as we may hope, forever.



Among my duties and pleasures during this period was attendance

upon important debates in the Imperial Parliament. That body

presents many features suggestive of thought. The arrangement

under which the Senate, representing the various states of the

empire, and the House, representing the people as a whole, sit

face to face in joint deliberation, strikes an American as

especially curious; but it seems to work well, and has one

advantage in bringing the most eminent servants of the various

states into direct personal relations with the rank and file from

the country at large. The German Parliament has various good

points. Some one has asserted that the United States Senate is as

much better than the British House of Lords as the British House

of Commons is better than the American House of Representatives.

There is much to be said for this contention, and there are some

points in which the German Parliament also struck me as an

improvement upon our Lower House: they do less than we in

committee, and more in the main assemblage; German members are

more attentive to the work in hand, and spread-eagleism and

speeches to the galleries which are tolerated at Washington are

not tolerated at Berlin. On the other hand, the members at

Berlin, not being paid for their services, absent themselves in

such numbers that the lack of a sufficient deliberating body has

been found, at times, a serious evil.



As to men prominent in debate, allusion has already been made to

the chancellor, and various ministers of the crown might be

added, of whom I should give the foremost place to the minister

of the interior, Count Posadowski. His discussions of all matters

touching his department, and, indeed, of some well outside it,

were masterly. Save, perhaps, our own Senator John Sherman, I

have never heard so USEFUL a speaker on fundamental questions of

public business. As to the representatives, there were many well

worth listening to; but the two who attracted most attention were

Richter, the head of the "Progressist," or, as we should call it,

the radical fraction, and Bebel, the main representative of the

Socialists. Richter I had heard more than once in my old days,

and had been impressed by his extensive knowledge of imperial

finance, his wit and humor, his skill in making his points, and

his strength in enforcing them. He was among the few still

remaining after my long absence, and it was clear to me that he

had not deteriorated,--that he had, indeed, mellowed in a way

which made him even more interesting than formerly. As to Bebel,

though generally disappointing at first, he was quite sure, in

every speech, to raise some point which put the conservatives on

their mettle. His strongest characteristic seems to be his

earnestness: the earnestness of a man who has himself known what

the hardest struggle for existence is, and what it means to

suffer for his opinions. His weakest point seems to be a tendency

to exaggeration which provokes distrust; but, despite this, he

has been a potent force as an irritant in drawing attention to

the needs of the working-classes, and so in promoting that steady

uplifting of their condition and prospects which is one of the

most striking achievements of modern Germany.



Among the many other members interesting on various accounts was

one to whom both Germans and Americans might well listen with

respect--Herr Theodor Barth, editor of "Die Nation," a

representative of the best traditions of the old National Liberal

party. He seemed to me one of the very few Germans who really

understood the United States. He had visited America more than

once, and had remained long enough to get in touch with various

leaders of American thought, and to penetrate below the mere

surface of public affairs. Devoted as he was to his own

fatherland, he seemed to feel intuitively the importance to both

countries of accentuating permanent points of agreement rather

than transient points of difference; hence it was that in his

paper he steadily did us justice, and in Parliament was sure to

repel any unmerited assault upon our national character and

policy. He was clear and forcible, with, at times, a most

effectively caustic utterance against unreason.



While the whole parliamentary body is suggestive to an American,

the Parliament building is especially suggestive to a New-Yorker.

This great edifice at Berlin is considerably larger on the ground

than is the State Capitol at Albany. It is built of a very

beautiful and durable stone, and, in spite of sundry criticisms

on the dome in the center and the pavilions at the corners, is

vastly superior, as a whole, to the Albany building. It is

enriched in all parts, without and within, with sculpture

recalling the historical glories of all parts of the empire and

calculated to stir patriotic pride; it is beautified by paintings

on a great scale by eminent artists; its interior fittings, in

stone, marble, steel, bronze, and oak, are as beautiful and

perfect as the art of the period has been able to make them; and

the whole, despite minor architectural faults, is worthy of the

nation. The building was completed and in use within ten years

from the time of its beginning. The construction of the

State-house at Albany, a building not so large, and containing

to-day no work of art either in painting or sculpture worthy of

notice, has dragged along during thirty years, and cost nearly

four times as much as the Berlin edifice; the latter having

demanded an outlay of a trifle over five million dollars, and the

former considerably over twenty millions.



The German Parliament House, apart from slight defects, as a

great architectural creation is in a style worthy of its

purpose--a style which is preserved in all its parts; while that

at Albany is, perhaps, the most curious jumble in the whole

history of architecture,--the lower stories being Palladian; the

stories above these being, if anything, Florentine; the summit

being, if anything, French Renaissance; while, as regards the

interior, the great west staircase, which is said to have cost

half a million of dollars, is in the Richardsonesque style; the

eastern staircase is in classic style; and a circular staircase

in the interior is in the most flamboyant Gothic which could be

got for money. To be sure, there are rooms at Albany on which

precious Siena marble and Mexican onyx are lavished, but these

are used so as to produce mainly the effect of an unintelligent

desire to spend money.



While in or near the Berlin edifice there is commemoration by

sculpture or painting of a multitude of meritorious public

servants, there is nowhere in the whole building at Albany a

statue or any fit remembrance of the two greatest governors in

the history of the State, DeWitt Clinton and William H. Seward.



The whole thing plunges one into reflection. If that single

building at Albany, which was estimated, upon plans carefully

made by the best of architects, to cost five millions of dollars,

and to be completed in four years, required over thirty years and

an expenditure of over twenty millions, what is a great "barge

canal" to cost, running through the whole length of the State,

encountering enormous difficulties of every sort, estimated at

the beginning to cost one hundred millions of dollars, but

including no estimate for "land damages," "water damages,"

"personal damages," "unprecedented floods," "unforeseen

obstacles," "quicksands," "changes of plan," etc., etc., which

have played such a costly and corrupting part in the past history

of our existing New York canals? And how many years will it take

to complete it? This was the train of thought and this was its

resultant query forced upon me whenever I looked upon the

Parliament House at Berlin.







CHAPTER XLI



AMERICA, GERMANY, AND THE SPANISH WAR--1897-1903



During the early days of this second official stay of mine at

Berlin, Russia had, in one way and another, secured an entrance

into China for her trans-Siberian railway, and seemed to have

taken permanent possession of the vast region extending from her

own territory to the Pacific at Port Arthur. Germany followed

this example, and, in avenging the murder of certain

missionaries, took possession of the harbor of Kiao-Chau. Thereby

other nations were stirred to do likewise,--England, France, and

Italy beginning to move for extensions of territory or commercial

advantages, until it looked much as if China was to be parceled

out among the greater European powers, or at least held in

commercial subjection, to the exclusion of those nations which

had pursued a more dilatory policy.



Seeing this danger, our government instructed its representatives

at the courts of the great powers to request them to join in a

declaration in favor of an "open-door policy" in China, thus

establishing virtually an international agreement that none of

the powers obtaining concessions or controlling "spheres of

influence" in that country should secure privileges infringing

upon the equality of all nations in competing for Chinese trade.

This policy was pushed with vigor by the Washington cabinet, and

I was instructed to secure, if possible, the assent of the German

Government, which, after various conferences at the Foreign

Office and communications with the minister of foreign affairs,

some more, some less, satisfactory, I was at last able to do. The

assent was given very guardedly, but not the less effectively.

Its terms were that Germany, having been from the first in favor

of equal rights to all nations in the trade of China, would

gladly acquiesce in the proposed declaration if the other powers

concerned would do so.



The Emperor William himself was even more open and direct than

his minister. At his dinner to the ambassadors in the spring of

1900, he spoke to me very fully on the subject, and, in a

conversation which I have referred to elsewhere, assured me of

his complete and hearty concurrence in the American policy,

declaring, "We must stand together for the open door."



Finally, on the 9th of April, 1900, I had the satisfaction of

sending to the German Foreign Office the proofs that all the

other powers concerned, including Japan, had joined in the

American declaration, and that the government of the United

States considered this acquiescence to be full and final.



It was really a great service rendered to the world by Mr.

McKinley and Secretary Hay; their action was farseeing, prompt,

bold, and successful.



Yet another subject of contention was the exclusion of sundry

American insurance companies from Germany, due in part to a

policy of "protection," but also to that same distrust of certain

American business methods which had given me much trouble in

dealing with the same question at St. Petersburg. The discussions

were long and tedious, but resulted in a sort of modus vivendi

likely to lead to something better.



The American sugar duties were also a sore subject. Various

writers in the German press and orators in public bodies

continued to insist that America had violated the treaties;

America insisted that she had not; and this trouble, becoming

chronic, aggravated all others. The main efforts of Count von

Bulow and myself were given to allaying inflammation by doses of

common sense and poultices of good-will until common sense could

assert its rights.



The everlasting meat question also went through various vexatious

phases, giving rise to bitter articles in the newspapers,

inflammatory speeches in Parliament, and measures in various

parts of the empire which, while sometimes honest, were always

injurious. American products which had been inspected in the

United States and Hamburg were again broken into, inspected, and

reinspected in various towns to which they were taken for retail,

with the result that the packages were damaged or spoiled, and

the costs of inspection and reinspection ate up all profits. I

once used an illustration of this at the Foreign Office that

seemed to produce some effect. It was the story of the Yankee

showman who, having been very successful in our Northern and

Middle States, took his show to the South, but when he returned

had evidently been stripped of his money. Being asked regarding

it, he said that his show had paid him well at first, but that on

arriving in Texas the authorities of each little village insisted

on holding an inquest over his Egyptian mummy, charging him

coroner's fees for it, and that this had made him a bankrupt.



Speeches, bitter and long, were made on both sides of the

Atlantic; the cable brought reports of drastic reprisals

preparing in Washington; but finally a system was adopted to

which the trade between the two countries has since been uneasily

trying to adjust itself.



Then there was sprung upon us the fruit question. One morning

came a storm of telegrams and letters stating that cargoes of

American fruits had been stopped in the German harbors, under the

charge that they contained injurious insects. The German

authorities were of course honest in this procedure, though they

were doubtless stimulated to it by sundry representatives of the

land-owning class. Our beautiful fruits, especially those of

California, had come to be very extensively used throughout the

empire, and the German consumers had been growing more and more

happy and the German producers more and more unhappy over this

fact, when suddenly there came from the American side accounts of

the scale-insects discovered on pears in California, and of

severe measures taken by sundry other States of our Union to

prohibit their importation. The result was a prohibition of our

fruits in Germany, and this was carried so far that not only

pears from California, but all other fruits, from all other parts

of the country, were at first put under the ban; and not only

fresh but dried and preserved fruits. As a matter of fact, there

was no danger whatever from the scale-insect, so far as fruit was

concerned. The creature never stirs from the spot on the pear to

which it fastens itself, and therefore by no possibility can it

be carried from the house where the fruit is consumed to the

nurseries where trees are grown. We took pains to show the facts

in the case; dealing fairly and openly with the German

Government, allowing that the importation of scale-infested trees

and shrubs might be dangerous, and making no objection to any

fair measures regarding these. The Foreign Office was reasonable,

and gradually the most vexatious of these prohibitions were

removed.



But the war with Spain drew on, and animosities, so far as the

press on both sides of the water was concerned, grew worse.

Various newspapers in Germany charged our government with a

wonderful assortment of high crimes and misdemeanors; but,

happily, in their eagerness to cover us with obloquy, they

frequently refuted each other. Thus they one day charged us with

having prepared long beforehand to crush Spain and to rob her of

her West Indian possessions, and the next day they charged us

with plunging into war suddenly, recklessly, utterly careless of

the consequences. One moment they insisted that American sailors

belonged to a deteriorated race of mongrels, and could never

stand against pure-blooded Spanish sailors; and the next moment,

that we were crushing the noble navy of Spain by brute force.

Various presses indulged in malignant prophecies: the Americans

would find Spain a very hard nut to crack; Spanish soldiers would

drive the American mongrels into the sea; when Cervera got out

with his fleet, the American fleet would slink away; Spanish

ships, being built under the safeguard of Spanish honor, must win

the victory; American ships, built under a regime of corruption,

would be found furnished with sham plating, sham guns, and sham

supplies of every sort. It all reminded me of sundry prophecies

we used to hear before our Civil War to the effect that, when the

Northern and Southern armies came into the presence of each

other, the Yankee soldiers would trade off their muskets to the

foe.



Against President McKinley every sort of iniquity was charged.

One day he was an idiot; another day, the most cunning of

intriguers; at one moment, an overbearing tyrant anxious to rush

into war; at another, a coward fearing war. It must be confessed

that this was mainly drawn from the American partizan press; but

it was, none the less, hard to bear.



In the meantime President McKinley, his cabinet, and the American

diplomatic corps in Europe did everything in their power to

prevent the war. Just as long as possible the President clearly

considered that his main claim on posterity would be for

maintaining peace against pressure and clamor. Under orders from

the State Department I met at Paris my old friend General

Woodford, who was on his way to Spain as minister of the United

States, and General Porter, the American ambassador to France,

our instructions being to confer regarding the best means of

maintaining peace; and we all agreed that everything possible be

done to allay the excitement in Spain; that no claims of a

special sort, whether pecuniary or otherwise, should be urged

until after the tension ceased; that every concession possible

should be made to Spanish pride; and that, just as far as

possible, everything should be avoided which could complicate the

general issue with personal considerations. All of us knew that

the greatest wish of the administration was to prevent the war,

or, if that proved impossible, to delay it.



For years, in common with the great majority of American

citizens, I had believed that the Spanish West Indies must break

loose from Spain some day, but had hoped that the question might

be adjourned until the middle or end of the twentieth century.

For I knew well that the separation of Cuba from Spain would be

followed, after no great length of time, by efforts for her

annexation to the United States, and that if such annexation of

Cuba should ever occur, she must come in as a State; that there

is no use in considering any other form of government for an

outlying dominion so large and so near; that there is no other

way of annexing a dependency so fully developed, and that, even

if there were, the rivalry of political parties contending for

electoral votes would be sure to insist on giving her statehood.

I dreaded the addition to our country of a million and a half of

citizens whose ability to govern themselves was exceedingly

doubtful, to say nothing of helping to govern our Union on the

mainland. The thought of senators and representatives to be

chosen by such a constituency to reside at Washington and to

legislate for the whole country, filled me with dismay.

Especially was the admission of Cuba to statehood a fearful

prospect just at that time, when we had so many difficult

questions to meet in the exercise of the suffrage. I never could

understand then, and cannot understand now, what Senator Morgan

of Alabama, who once had the reputation of being the strongest

representative from the South, could be thinking of when he was

declaiming in the Senate, first in behalf of the "oppressed

Cubans," and next in favor of measures which tended to add them

to the United States, and so to create a vast commonwealth

largely made up of negroes and mulattos accustomed to equality

with the whites, almost within musket-shot of the negroes and

mulattos of the South, from whom the constituents of Mr. Morgan

were at that very moment withholding the right of suffrage. I

could not see then, and I cannot see now, how he could possibly

be blind to the fact that if Cuba ever becomes a State of our

Union, she will soon begin to look with sympathy on those whom

she will consider her "oppressed colored brethren" in the South;

and that she will, just as inevitably, make common cause with

them at Washington, and perhaps in some other places, and

possibly not always by means so peaceful as orating under the

roof of the Capitol.



Moreover, the nation had just escaped a terrible catastrophe at

the last general election; the ignorant, careless, and perverse

vote having gone almost solidly for a financial policy which

would have wrecked us temporarily and disgraced us eternally.

Time will, no doubt, develop a more conservative sentiment in the

States where this vote for evil was cast; as civilization deepens

and advances, better ideas will doubtless grow stronger; but it

is sure that the addition of Cuba to the United States, if it

ever comes, means the adding of a vast illiterate mass of voters

to those who at that election showed themselves so dangerous.



On all these accounts I had felt very anxious to put off the

whole Cuban question until our Republic should become so much

larger and so much more mature that the addition of a few

millions of Spanish-Americans would be of but small account in

the total vote of the country.



Then, too, I had little sympathy with aspirations for what

Spanish revolutionists call freedom, and no admiration at all for

Central American republics. I had officially examined one of them

thoroughly, had known much of others, and had no belief in the

capacity of people for citizenship who prefer to carry on

government by pronunciamtentos, who never acknowledge the rights

of majorities, who are ready to start civil war on the slightest

pretext, and who, when in power, exercise a despotism more

persistent and cruel than any since Nero and Caligula. No Russian

autocrat, claiming to govern by divine right, has ever dared to

commit the high-handed cruelties which are common in sundry West

Indian and equatorial republics. I felt that the great thing was

to gain time before doing anything which might result in the

admission of the millions trained under such influences into all

the rights, privileges, and powers of American citizenship.



But there came the destruction of the Maine in the harbor of

Havana, and thenceforward war was certain. The news was brought

to me at a gala representation of the opera at Berlin, when, on

invitation from the Emperor, the ambassadors were occupying a

large box opposite his own. Hardly had the telegram announcing

the catastrophe been placed in my hands when the Emperor entered,

and on his addressing me I informed him of it. He was evidently

shocked, and expressed a regret which, I fully believe, was

deeply sincere. He instantly asked, with a piercing look, "Was

the explosion from the outside?" My answer was that I hoped and

believed that it was not; that it was probably an interior

explosion. To my great regret, the official report afterward

obliged me to change my mind on the subject; but I still feel

that no Spanish officer or true Spaniard was concerned in the

matter. It has been my good fortune to know many Spanish

officers, and it is impossible for me to conceive one of their

kind as having taken part in so frightful a piece of treachery;

it has always seemed to be more likely that it was done by a

party of wild local fanatics, the refuse of a West Indian

seaport.



The Emperor remained firm in his first impression that the

explosion was caused from the outside. Even before this was

established by the official investigation, he had settled into

that conclusion. On one occasion, when a large number of leading

officers of the North Sea Squadron were dining with him, he asked

their opinion on this subject, and although the great

majority--indeed, almost all present--then believed that the

catastrophe had resulted from an interior explosion, he adhered

to his belief that it was from an exterior attack.



On various occasions before that time I had met my colleague the

Spanish ambassador, Senor Mendez y Vigo, and my relations with

him had been exceedingly pleasant. Each of us had tried to keep

up the hopes of the other that peace might be preserved, and down

to the last moment I took great pains to convince him of what I

knew to be the truth--that the policy of President McKinley was

to prevent war. But I took no less pains to show him that Spain

must aid the President by concessions to public opinion. My

personal sympathies, too, were aroused in behalf of my colleague.

He had passed the allotted threescore years and ten, was

evidently in infirm health, had five sons in the Spanish army,

and his son-in-law had recently been appointed minister at

Washington.



Notice of the declaration of war came to me under circumstances

somewhat embarrassing. On the 21st of April, 1898, began the

festivities at Dresden on the seventieth birthday of King Albert

of Saxony, which was also the twenty-fifth anniversary of his

accession; and in view of the high character of the King and of

the affection for him throughout Germany, and, indeed, throughout

Europe, nearly every civilized power had sent its representatives

to present its congratulations. In these the United States

joined. Throughout our country are large numbers of Saxons, who,

while thoroughly loyal to our Republic, cherish a kindly and even

affectionate feeling toward their former King and Queen.

Moreover, there was a special reason. For many years Dresden had

been a center in which very many American families congregated

for the purpose of educating their children, especially in the

German language and literature, in music, and in the fine arts;

no court in Europe had been so courteous to Americans properly

introduced, and in various ways the sovereigns had personally

shown their good feeling toward our countrymen.



It was in view of this that the Secretary of State instructed me

to present an autograph letter of congratulation from the

President to the King, and on the 20th of April I proceeded to

Dresden, with the embassy secretaries and attaches, for this

purpose. About midnight between the 20th and 21st there came a

loud and persistent knocking at my door in the hotel, and there

soon entered a telegraph messenger with an enormously long

despatch in cipher. Hardly had I set the secretaries at work upon

it than other telegrams began to come, and a large part of the

night was given to deciphering them. They announced the

declaration of war and instructed me to convey to the various

parties interested the usual notices regarding war measures:

blockade, prohibitions, exemptions, regulations, and the like.



At eleven o'clock the next morning, court carriages having taken

us over to the palace, we were going up the grand staircase in

full force when who should appear at the top, on his way down,

but the Spanish ambassador with his suite! Both of us were, of

course, embarrassed. No doubt he felt, as I did, that it would

have been more agreeable just then to meet the representative of

any other power than of that with which war had just been

declared; but I put out my hand and addressed him, if not so

cordially as usual, at least in a kindly way; he reciprocated the

greeting, and our embarrassment was at least lessened. Of course,

during the continuation of the war, our relations lacked their

former cordiality, but we remained personally friendly.



In my brief speech on delivering President McKinley's letter I

tendered to the King and Queen the President's congratulations,

with thanks for the courtesies which had been shown to my

countrymen. This was not the first occasion on which I had

discharged this latter duty, for, at a formal presentation to

these sovereigns some time before, I had taken pains to show that

we were not unmindful of their kindness to our compatriots. The

festivities which followed were interesting. There were dinners

with high state officials, gala opera, and historical

representations, given by the city of Dresden, of a very

beautiful character. On these occasions I met various eminent

personages, among others the Emperor of Austria and his prime

minister, Count Goluchowsky, both of whom discussed current

international topics with clearness and force; and I also had

rather an interesting conversation with the papal nuncio at

Munich, more recently in Paris, Lorenzelli, with reference to

various measures looking to the possible abridgment of the war.



On the third day of the festivities came a great review, and a

sight somewhat rare. To greet the King there were present the

Emperor of Germany, the Emperor of Austria, and various minor

German sovereigns, each of whom had in the Saxon army a regiment

nominally his own, and led it past the Saxon monarch, saluting

him as he reviewed it. The two Emperors certainly discharged this

duty in a very handsome, chivalric sort of way. In the evening

came a great dinner at the palace, at which the King and Queen

presided. The only speech on the occasion was one of

congratulation made by the Emperor of Austria, and it was very

creditable to him, being to all appearance extemporaneous, yet

well worded, quiet, dignified, and manly. The ceremonies closed

on Sunday with a grand "Te Deum" at the palace church, in the

presence of all the majesties,--the joy expressed by the music

being duly accentuated by cannon outside.



I may say, before closing this subject, that Thomas Jefferson's

famous letter to Governor Langdon, describing royal personages as

he knew them while minister to France before the French

Revolution, no longer applies. The events which followed the

Revolution taught the crowned heads of Europe that they could no

longer indulge in the good old Bourbon, Hapsburg, and Braganza

idleness and stupidity. Modern European sovereigns, almost

without exception, work for their living, and work hard. Few

business men go through a more severe training, or a longer and

harder day of steady work, than do most of the contemporary

sovereigns of Europe. This fact especially struck me on my

presentation, about this time, to one of the best of the minor

monarchs, the King of Wurtemberg. I found him a hearty, strong,

active-minded man--the sort of man whom we in America would call

"level-headed" and "a worker." Learning that I had once passed a

winter in Stuttgart, he detained me long with a most interesting

account of the improvements which had been made in the city since

my visit, and showed public spirit of a sort very different from

that which animated the minor potentates of Germany in the last

century. The same may be said of the Grand Duke of Baden, who, in

a long conversation, impressed me as a gentleman of large and

just views, understanding the problems of his time and thoroughly

in sympathy with the best men and movements.



Republican as I am, this acknowledgment must be made. The

historical lessons of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,

and the pressure of democracy, are obliging the monarchs of

Europe to fit themselves for their duties wisely and to discharge

them intelligently. But this is true only of certain ruling

houses. There seems to be a "survival of the fittest." At various

periods in my life I have also had occasion to observe with some

care various pretenders to European thrones, among them the

husband of Queen Isabella of Spain; Prince Napoleon Victor, the

heir to the Napoleonic throne; the Duke of Orleans; Don Carlos,

the representative of the Spanish Bourbons; with sundry others;

and it would be hard to conceive persons more utterly unfit or

futile.



As to the conduct of Germany during our war with Spain, while the

press, with two or three exceptions, was anything but friendly,

and while a large majority of the people were hostile to us on

account of the natural sympathy with a small power battling

against a larger one, the course of the Imperial Government,

especially of the Foreign Office under Count von Bulow and Baron

von Richthofen, was all that could be desired. Indeed, they went

so far on one occasion as almost to alarm us. The American consul

at Hamburg having notified me by telephone that a Spanish vessel,

supposed to be loaded with arms for use against us in Cuba, was

about to leave that port, I hastened to the Foreign Office and

urged that vigorous steps be taken, with the result that the

vessel, which in the meantime had left Hamburg, was overhauled

and searched at the mouth of the Elbe. The German Government

might easily have pleaded, in answer to my request, that the

American Government had generally shown itself opposed to any

such interference with the shipments of small arms to

belligerents, and had contended that it was not obliged to search

vessels to find such contraband of war, but that this duty was

incumbent upon the belligerent nation concerned. This evidence of

the fairness of Germany I took pains to make known, and in my

address at the American celebration in Leipsic on the Fourth of

July declared my belief that the hostility of the German people

and press at large was only temporary, and that the old good

relations would be restored. Knowing that my speech would be

widely quoted in the German press, I took even more pains to show

the reasons why we could bide our time and trust to the

magnanimity of the German people. Of one thing I then and always

reminded my hearers--namely, that during our Civil War, when our

national existence was trembling in the balance and our foreign

friends were few, the German press and people were steadily on

our side.



The occasion was indeed a peculiar one. On the morning of the

Fourth, when we had all assembled, bad news came. Certain German

presses had been very prompt to patch together all sorts of

accounts of American defeats, and to present them in the most

unpleasant way possible; but while we were seated at table in the

evening came a despatch announcing the annihilation of the

Spanish fleet in Cuban waters, and this put us all in good humor.

One circumstance may serve to show the bitterness at heart among

Americans at this period. On entering the dining-hall with our

consul, I noticed two things: first, that the hall was profusely

decorated in a way I had never seen before and had never expected

to see--namely, by intertwined American and British flags; and,

secondly, that there was not a German flag in the room. I

immediately sent for the proprietor and told him that I would not

sit down to dinner until a German flag was brought in. He at

first thought it impossible to supply the want, but, on my

insisting, a large flag was at last found. This was speedily

given a place of honor among the interior decorations of our

hall, and all then went on satisfactorily.



As the war with Spain progressed, various causes of difficulty

arose between Germany and the United States, but I feel bound to

say that the German Government continued to act toward us with

justice. The sensational press, indeed, continued its work on

both sides of the Atlantic. On our side it took pains to secure

and publish stories of insults by the German Admiral Diederichs

to the American Admiral Dewey, and to develop various legends

regarding these two commanders. As a matter of fact, each of the

two admirals, when their relations first began in Manila, was

doubtless rather stiff and on his guard against the other; but

these feelings soon yielded to different sentiments.



The foolish utterances of various individuals, spread by sundry

American papers, were heartily echoed in the German press, the

most noted among these being an alleged after-dinner speech by an

American officer at a New York club, and a Congressional speech

in which the person who made it declared that "the United States,

having whipped Spain, ought now to whip Germany." Still, the

thinking men intrusted with the relations between the two

countries labored on, though at times there must have recurred to

us a sense of the divine inspiration of Schiller's words,

"Against stupidity even the gods fight in vain."



Of course the task of the embassy in protecting American citizens

abroad was especially increased in those times of commotion. At

such periods the number of ways in which American citizens,

native or naturalized, can get into trouble seems infinite; and

here, too, even from the first moment of my arrival in Berlin as

ambassador, I saw evidences of the same evil which had struck me

during my previous missions in Berlin and St. Petersburg--namely,

the constant and ingenious efforts to prostitute American

citizenship. Among the manifold duties of an ambassador is the

granting of passports. The great majority of those who ask for

them are entitled to them; but there are always a considerable

number of persons who, having left Europe just in time to escape

military service, have stayed in America just long enough to

acquire American citizenship, and then, having returned to their

native country, seek to enjoy the advantages of both countries

while discharging the duties of neither. Even worse were the

cases of the descendants of such so-called Americans, most of

them born in Europe and not able even to speak the English

language; worst of all were the cases of sundry

Russians--sometimes stigmatized as "predatory Hebrews"--who,

having left Russia and gone to America, had stayed just long

enough to acquire citizenship, and then returned and settled in

the eastern part of Germany, as near the Russian frontier as

possible. These were naturally regarded as fraudulent interlopers

by both the German and Russian authorities, and much trouble

resulted. Some of them led a life hardly outside the limits of

criminality; but they never hesitated on this account to insist

on their claims to American protection. When they were reminded

that American citizenship was conferred upon them, not that they

might shirk its duties and misuse its advantages in the land of

their birth, but that they might enjoy it and discharge its

duties in the land of their adoption, they scouted the idea and

insisted on their right, as American citizens, to live where they

pleased. Their communications to the embassy were, almost without

exception, in German, Russian, or Polish; very few of them wrote

or even spoke English, and very many of them could neither read

nor write in any language. For the hard-working immigrant,

whether Jew or Gentile, who comes to our country and casts in his

lot with us, to take his share not only of privilege but of duty,

I have the fullest respect and sympathy, and have always been

glad to intervene in his favor; but intervention in behalf of

those fraudulent pretenders I always felt to be a galling burden.



Fortunately the rules of the State Department have been of late

years strengthened to meet this evil, and it has finally become

our practice to inform such people that if they return to America

they can receive a passport for that purpose; but that unless

they show a clear intention of returning, they cannot. Very many

of them persist in their applications in spite of this, and one

case became famous both at the State Department and at the

embassy. Three Russians of the class referred to had emigrated

with their families to America, and, after the usual manner,

stayed just long enough to acquire citizenship, and had then

returned to Germany. One of them committed a crime and

disappeared; the other two went to the extreme eastern frontier

of Prussia and settled there. Again and again the Prussian

Government notified us that under the right exercised by every

nation, and especially by our own, these "undesirable intruders"

must leave Prussian territory or be expelled. Finally we

discovered at the embassy that a secret arrangement had been made

between Germany and Russia which obliged each to return the

undesirable emigrants of the other. This seemed to put the two

families in great danger of being returned to Russia; and, sooner

than risk a new international trouble, a proposal was made to

them, through the embassy, to pay their expenses back to America;

but they utterly refused to leave, and continued to burrow in the

wretched suburbs of one of the German cities nearest the Russian

border. Reams of correspondence ensued--all to no purpose; a

special messenger was sent to influence them--all in vain: they

persisted in living just as near Russia as possible, and in

calling themselves American, though not one of them spoke

English.



From time to time appeared in our own country attacks against the

various American embassies and legations abroad for not

protecting such American citizens, and a very common feature of

these articles was an unfavorable comparison between the United

States and England: it being claimed that Great Britain protects

her citizens everywhere, while the United States does not. This

statement is most misleading. Great Britain, while she is

renowned for protecting her subjects throughout the world,

--bringing the resources of her fleet, if need be, to aid

them,--makes an exception as regards her adopted citizens in the

land of their birth. The person who, having been naturalized in

Great Britain, goes back to the country of his birth, does so at

his or her own risk. The British Government considers itself,

under such circumstances, entirely absolved from the duty of

giving protection. The simple fact is that the United States goes

much further in protecting adopted citizens than does any other

country, and it is only rank demagogism which can find fault

because some of our thinking statesmen do not wish to see

American citizenship prostituted by persons utterly unfit to

receive it, who frequently use it fraudulently, and who, as many

cases prove, are quite ready to renounce it and take up their old

allegiance if they can gain advantage thereby.



Another general duty of the embassy was to smooth the way for the

large number of young men and women who came over as students.

This duty was especially pleasing to me now, as it had been

during my life as minister in Berlin twenty years before. At that

time women were not admitted to the universities; but now large

numbers were in attendance. The university authorities showed

themselves very courteous, and, when there was any doubt as to

the standing of the institution from which a candidate for

admission came, allowed me to pass upon the question and accepted

my certificate. Almost without exception, I found these

candidates excellent; but there were some exceptions. The

applicants were usually persons who had been graduated from some

one of our own institutions; but, from time to time, persons who

had merely passed a freshman year in some little American college

came abroad, anxious to secure the glory of going at once into a

German university. Certificates for such candidates I declined to

sign. To do so would have been an abuse sure to lead the German

authorities finally to reject the great mass of American

students: far better for applicants to secure the best advantages

possible in their own country, and then to supplement their study

at home by proper work abroad.



In sketches of my former mission to Berlin I have mentioned

various applications, some of them psychological curiosities;

these I found continuing, though with variations. Some

compatriots expected me to forward to the Emperor begging

letters, or letters suggesting to him new ideas, unaware that

myriads of such letters are constantly sent which never reach

him, and which even his secretaries never think of reading.

Others sent books, not knowing the rule prevailing among crowned

heads, never to accept a PUBLISHED book, and not realizing that

if this rule were broken, not one book in a thousand would get

beyond the office of his general secretary. Others sent medicine

which they wished him to recommend; and one gentleman was very

persistent in endeavoring to secure his Majesty's decision on a

wager.



Then there were singers or performers on wind or string

instruments wishing to sing or play before him, sculptors and

painters wishing him to visit their studios, and writers of music

wishing him to order their compositions to be brought out at the

Royal Opera.



All these requests culminated in two, wherein the gentle reader

will see a mixture of comic and pathetic. The first was from a

person (not an American) who wished my good offices in enabling

her to obtain a commission for a brilliant marriage,--she having

in reserve, as she assured me, a real Italian duke whom, for a

consideration, she would secure for an American heiress. The

other, which was from an eminently respectable source, urged me

to induce the imperial authorities to station in the United

States a young German officer with whom an American young lady

had fallen in love. And these proposals I was expected to

further, in spite of the fact that the rules for American

representatives abroad forbid all special pleading of any kind in

favor of individual interests or enterprises, without special

instructions from the State Department. Discouraging was it to

find that in spite of the elaborate statement prepared by me

during my former residence, which had been freely circulated

during twenty years, there were still the usual number of people

persuaded that enormous fortunes were awaiting them somewhere in

Germany.



One application, from a truly disinterested man, was grounded in

nobler motives. This was an effort made by an eminent Polish

scholar and patriot to wrest American citizenship for political

purposes. He had been an instructor at various Russian and German

universities had shown in some of his books extraordinary

ability, had gained the friendship of several eminent scholars in

Great Britain and on the Continent, and was finally settled at

one of the most influential seats of learning in Austrian Poland.

He was a most attractive man, wide in his knowledge, charming in

his manner; but not of this world. Having drawn crowds to his

university lectures, he suddenly attacked the Emperor Franz

Josef, who, more than any other, had befriended his compatriots;

was therefore obliged to flee from his post; and now came to

Berlin, proposing seriously that I should at once make him an

American citizen, and thus, as he supposed, enable him to go back

to his university and, in revolutionary speeches, bid defiance to

Austria, Russia, and Germany. Great was his disappointment when

he learned that, in order to acquire citizenship, he would be

obliged to go to the United States and remain there five years.

As he was trying to nerve himself for this sacrifice, I presented

some serious considerations to him. Knowing him to be a man of

honor, I asked him how he could reconcile it with his sense of

veracity to assume the rights of American citizenship with no

intention to discharge its duties. This somewhat startled him.

Then, from a more immediately practical point of view, I showed

that, even if he acquired American citizenship, and could

reconcile his conscience to break the virtual pledge he had made

in order to obtain it, the government of Austria, and, indeed,

all other governments, would still have a full right, under the

simplest principles of international law, to forbid his entrance

into their territories, or to turn him out after he had

entered,--the right of expelling undesirable emigrants being

constantly exercised, even by the United States. This amazed him.

He had absolutely persuaded himself that I could, by some sleight

of hand, transform him into an American citizen; that he could

then at once begin attempts to reestablish the fine old Polish

anarchy in Austria, Russia, and Germany; and that no one of these

nations would dare interfere with him. It was absurd but

pathetic. My advice to him was to go back to his lecture-room and

labor to raise the character of the younger generation of Poles,

in the hope that Poland might do what Scotland had done--rise by

sound mental and moral training from the condition of a conquered

and even oppressed part of a great empire to a controlling

position in it. This advice was, of course, in vain, and he is

now building air-castles amid the fogs of London.



In my life at Berlin as ambassador there was a tinge of sadness.

Great changes had taken place since my student days in that city,

and even since my later stay as minister. A new race of men had

come upon the stage in public affairs, in the university, and in

literary circles. Gone was the old Emperor William, gone also was

the Emperor Frederick, and Bismarck and Moltke and a host of

others who had given dignity and interest to the great

assemblages at the capital. Gone, too, from the university were

Lepsius, Helmholtz, Curtius, Hoffmann, Gneist, Du Bois-Reymond,

and Treitschke, all of whom, in the old days, had been my guests

and friends. The main exceptions seemed to be in the art world.

The number of my artist friends during my stay as minister had

been large, and every one of them was living when I returned as

ambassador; the reason, of course, being that when men

distinguish themselves in art at all, they do so at an earlier

age than do high functionaries of state and professors in the

universities. It was a great pleasure to find Adolf Menzel,

Ludwig Knaus, Carl Beeker, Anton von Werner, and Paul Meyerheim,

though grown gray in their beautiful ministry, still daily at

work in their studios.



Three only of my friends of the older generation in the Berlin

faculty remained; and as I revise these lines the world is laying

tributes upon the grave of the last of them--Theodor Mommsen.

With him my relations were so peculiar that they may deserve some

mention.



During my earlier stays in Berlin he had always seemed especially

friendly to the United States, and it was therefore with regret

that on my return I found him in this respect greatly changed: he

had become a severe critic of nearly everything American; his

earlier expectations had evidently been disappointed; we clearly

appeared to him big, braggart, noisy, false to our principles,

unworthy of our opportunities. These feelings of his became even

more marked as the Spanish-American War drew on. Whenever we met,

and most often at a charming house which both of us frequented,

he showed himself more and more bitter, so that finally our paths

separated. There comes back to me vividly one evening when I

sought to turn off a sharp comment of his upon some recent

American news by saying: "You must give a young nation like ours

more time." On this he exclaimed: "You cannot plead the baby act

any longer. More time! You have HAD time; you are already three

hundred years old!" Having sought in vain to impress on him the

fact that the policy of our country is determined not wholly by

the older elements in its civilization, but very largely by newer

commonwealths which must require time to develop a policy

satisfactory to sedate judges, he burst into a tirade from which

I took refuge in a totally different discussion.



Some days later came another evidence of his feeling. Meeting an

eminent leader in political, and especially in journalistic,

circles, I was shown the corrected proofsheets of an "interview"

on the conduct of the United States toward Spain, given by

Mommsen. It was even more acrid than his previous utterances, and

exhibited sharply and at great length our alleged sins and

shortcomings. Certainly a representative of the American people

was not bound to make supplication, in such a matter, even to so

eminent a scholar and leader of thought, and my comment was

simply as follows: "I have no request to make in the premises--of

Mommsen or of anybody. The article will of course have no effect

on the war; of that there can be but one result: the triumph of

the United States and the liberation of the Spanish islands of

the West Indies; but may there not be some considerations of a

very different order as regards Mommsen himself? Why not ask him,

simply, where his friends are; his readers, his old students, his

disciples? Why not ask him whether he finds fewer clouds over the

policy of Spain than over that of the United States; of which

country, despite all its faults, he has most hope; and for which,

in his heart, he has the greater feeling of brotherhood?"



How far this answer influenced him I know not, but the article

was never published; and thenceforth there seemed some revival of

the older kindly feeling. At my own table and elsewhere he more

than once became, in a measure, like the Mommsen of old. One

utterance of his amused me much. My wife happening, in a talk

with him, to speak of a certain personage as "hardly an ideal

man," he retorted: "Madam, is it possible that you have been

married some years and still believe in the ideal man?"



His old better feeling toward America came out especially when I

next called upon him with congratulations upon his birthday--his

last, alas! But heartiest of all was he during the dinner given

at my departure. My speech was long,--over an hour,--for I had a

message to deliver, and was determined to give it--a message

which I hoped might impress upon my great audience reasons for a

friendly judgment of my country. As I began, Mommsen came to my

side--just back of me, his hand at his ear, listening intently.

There the old man stood from the first word to the last, and on

my conclusion he grasped me heartily with both hands--a

demonstration rare indeed with him. It was our last greeting in

this world.



Would that there were space to dwell upon those in the present

generation of professors who honored me with their friendship;

but one is especially suggested here, since he was selected to

make a farewell address on the occasion above referred to--Adolf

Harnack. At various times I had heard him discourse profoundly

and brilliantly at the university, but came to know him best at

the bicentenary of the Berlin Academy, when he had just added to

the long list of his published works his history of the academy,

in four quarto volumes: a wonderful work, whether considered from

an historical, psychological, or philosophical point of view. His

address on that occasion was masterly, and his conversation at

various social functions instructive and pithy. I remember in one

of them, especially, his delineation of the characteristics and

services of Leibnitz, who was one of the founders of the Royal

Academy, and it was perfection in that kind of conversation which

is worthy of men claiming to possess immortal souls: for it

brought out, especially, examples of Leibnitz's amazing

forethought as to European policy, which seemed at times like

divinely inspired prophecies. He also gave me a number of

interesting things which he had noted in his studies of Frederick

the Great. Some of them I had found already in my own reading,

but one of them I did not remember, and it was both comical and

characteristic. A rural Protestant pastor sent a petition to the

King presenting a grievance and asking redress. It was to the

effect that his church was on one side of a river in Silesia, and

that a younger pastor, whose church was on the opposite side, was

drawing all his parishioners away from him. On the back of the

petition Frederick simply wrote, "Tell him to go and preach on

the other side of the river: that will drive his people back

again."



Hearing Harnack and his leading colleagues in discourse at the

university or academy, or in private, whether in their loftier or

lighter moods, one could understand why the University of Berlin,

though one of the youngest, is the foremost among the

universities of the world.







CHAPTER XLII



AMERICA, GERMANY, AND THE CHINESE WAR--1899-1902



An interesting event of this period was the appearance in Berlin

of ex-President and Mrs. Harrison. The President had but recently

finished his long and wearisome work before the Venezuela

Arbitration Tribunal at Paris, and was very happy in the

consciousness of duty accomplished and liberty obtained. Marks of

high distinction were shown them. The sovereigns invited them to

attend the festivities at Potsdam in honor of the Queen and Queen

Mother of Holland, who were then staying there, and treated them

not only with respect, but with cordiality. The Emperor conversed

long with the President on various matters of public interest: on

noted Americans whom he had met, on the growth of our fleet, on

recent events in our history, and the like, characteristically

ending with a discussion of the superb music which we had been

hearing; and at the supper which followed insisted that Mrs.

Harrison should sit at his side, the Empress giving a similar

invitation to Mr. Harrison. At a later period a dinner was given

to the ex-President by the chancellor of the empire, Prince

Hohenlohe, at which a number of the leading personages in the

empire were present; and it was a pleasure to show my own respect

for the former chief magistrate by a reception which was attended

by about two hundred of our American colony, and a dinner at

which he and Mrs. Harrison made the acquaintance of leading

representative Germans in various fields.



In another chapter of these memoirs I have spoken of President

Harrison as of cold and, at times, abrupt manners; but the

absence of these characteristics during his stay in Berlin, and

afterward in New York, made it clear to me that the cold exterior

which I had noted in him at Washington, especially when Mr.

Roosevelt, Mr. Lodge, and sundry others of us urged upon him an

extension of the classified civil service, was adopted as a means

of preventing encroachments upon the time necessary for his daily

duties. He now appeared in a very different light, his discussion

of men and events showing not only earnest thought and deep

penetration, but a rich vein of humor; his whole bearing being

simple, kindly, and dignified.



During the winter of 1899-1900 came an addition to my experiences

of what American representatives abroad have to expect under our

present happy-go-lucky provision for the diplomatic service. As

already stated, on arriving in Berlin, I had great difficulty in

obtaining any fitting quarters, but at last secured a large and

suitable apartment in an excellent part of the city, its only

disadvantage being that my guests had to plod up seventy-five

steps in order to reach it. Having been obliged to make large

outlays for suitable fittings, extensive repairs, and furniture

throughout, I found that more than the entire salary of my first

year had been thus sunk; but I congratulated myself that I had at

least obtained a residence good, comfortable, and suitable. To be

sure, it was inferior to that of any other ambassador, but I had

fitted it up so that it was considered creditable. Suddenly,

about two years afterward, without a word of warning, came notice

from the proprietor that my lease was void--that he had sold the

house, and that I must leave it; so that it looked as if the

American Embassy would, at an early day, be turned into the

street. This was trying indeed. It was at the beginning of the

social season, and interfered greatly with my duties of every

sort. And there cropped out a feeling, among all conversant with

the case, which I cannot say was conducive to respect for the

wisdom of those who give laws to our country.



But, happily, I had insisted on inserting in the lease a clause

which seemed to make it doubtful whether the proprietor could

turn me out so easily and speedily. Under German law it was a

very precarious reliance, but on this I took my stand, and at

last, thanks mainly to the kindness of my colleague who succeeded

me as a tenant, made a compromise under which I was enabled to

retain the apartment for something over a year longer.



It may be interesting for an American who has a proper feeling

regarding the position of his country abroad to know that the

purchaser of the entire house--not only of the floor which I had

occupied, but of the similar apartment beneath, as well as that

on the ground floor--was the little Grand Duchy of Baden, which

in this way provided for its minister, secretaries, and others

connected with its legation in the German capital.



On the theory of line upon line and precept upon precept, I again

call attention, NOT to the wrong done ME by this American policy,

or rather want of policy,--for I knew in coming what I had to

expect,--but to the injury thus done to the PROPER STANDING OF

OUR COUNTRY BEFORE THE OTHER NATIONS OF THE WORLD. Again I insist

that, in its own interest, a government like ours ought, in every

capital where it is represented, to possess or to hold on long

lease a house or apartment suitable to its representative and

creditable to itself.



Early in the spring of 1900 came an event of some historical

interest. On the 19th of March and the two days following was

celebrated the two-hundredth anniversary of the founding of the

Royal Academy of Sciences. The Emperor, as well as the Academy,

had determined to make it a great occasion, and the result was a

series of very brilliant pageants. These began by a solemn

reception of the delegates from all parts of the world in the

great hall of the palace, my duty being to represent the

Smithsonian Institution at Washington, and my colleagues being

Professors White and Wolf of Harvard, who had been sent by the

American Academy of Sciences. The scene was very striking, all

the delegates, except those from America and Switzerland, being

in the costumes of the organizations they represented; most were

picturesque, and some had a very mediaeval appearance; those from

the ancient universities of Wurzburg and Prague, especially,

looking as if they had just stepped out of an illuminated

manuscript of the fourteenth century. At the time named for the

beginning of the festival the Emperor entered, announced by the

blare of trumpets, preceded by ministers bearing the sword,

standard, and great seal, and by generals bearing the crown,

scepter, and orb. He was surrounded by the highest officials of

the kingdom and empire, and having taken his seat on the throne,

there came majestic music preluding sundry orations and lists of

honors conferred on eminent men of science in all parts of the

world, among whom I was glad to note Professors Gibbs of Yale,

James of Harvard, and Rowland of Johns Hopkins.



The Emperor's speech was characteristic. It showed that his heart

was in the matter; that he felt a just pride in the achievements

of German science, and was determined that no efforts of his

should be wanting to increase and extend them. After the close of

the function, which was made in the same stately way as its

beginning, my colleagues drove home with me, and one of them

said, "Well, I am an American and a republican, but when I am in

a monarchy I like to see a thing of this kind done in the most

magnificent way possible, as it was this morning." A day or two

afterward, at the dinner given to the ambassadors by the Emperor,

I told him this story. He laughed heartily, and then said: "Your

friend is right: if a man is to be a monarch, let him be a

monarch; Dom Pedro of Brazil tried to be something else, and it

did not turn out well."



Impressive in a different way were the ceremonies attendant upon

the coming of age of the German crown prince, on the 6th of May,

1900. To do honor to the occasion, the Emperor Franz Josef of

Austria-Hungary had sent word that he would be present, and for

many days the whole city seemed mainly devoted to decorating its

buildings and streets for his visit; the culmination of the whole

being at the Pariser Platz, in front of the Brandenburg Gate,

where a triumphal arch and obelisks were erected, with other

decorations, patriotic and complimentary. On the morning of the

4th he arrived, and, entering the city at the side of the German

Emperor, each in the proper uniform of the other, he was received

by the burgomaster and town council of Berlin with a most cordial

speech, and then, passing on through the Linden, which was

showily decorated, he was enthusiastically greeted everywhere. No

doubt this greeting was thoroughly sincere, since all good

Germans look upon Franz Josef as their truest ally.



Next evening there was a "gala" performance at the Royal Opera,

the play presented being, of all things in the world, Auber's

"Bronze Horse," which is a farcical Chinese fairy tale set to

very light and pleasing music. The stage setting was gorgeous,

but the audience was still more so, delegates from all the

greater powers of the world being present, including the heirs to

the British and Italian thrones, the Grand Duke Constantine of

Russia, and a multitude of other scions of royalty. One feature

was comical. Near me sat His Excellency the Chinese minister,

surrounded by his secretaries and attaches, all apparently

delighted; and on my asking him, through his interpreter, how he

liked it, he said, "Very much; this shows the Europeans that in

China we know how to amuse ourselves." Of the fact that it was a

rather highly charged caricature of Chinese officialdom he seemed

either really or diplomatically unconscious.



On the following morning I was received in audience by the German

Emperor, bringing to him a warm message of congratulation from

President McKinley; and when His Majesty had replied very

cordially, he introduced me to the crown prince standing at his

side, to whom I gave the President's best wishes. Then came, in

the chapel of the palace, an impressive religious service, the

address by Dr. Dryander being eloquent, and the music, by the

cathedral choir and, at times, by a great military orchestra,

both far above us in the dome, beautiful. At its close the crown

prince came forward, stood before the altar, where I had seen his

parents married twenty years before, and the oath of allegiance,

which was quite long, having been read to him by the colonel of

his regiment, he repeated it, word for word, and made his solemn

pledge, lifting one hand and grasping the imperial standard with

the other. Then, after receiving affectionate embraces from his

father and mother, he was congratulated by the sovereigns and

royal personages. The ambassadors and ministers having been then

received by the Emperor and Empress, the young prince came along

the line and spoke to each of us in a very unaffected and manly

way. He was at that time somewhat taller than his father, with an

intelligent and pleasant face, and is likely, I should say, to do

well in his great position, though not possessing, probably,

anything like his father's varied gifts and graces.



In the evening came a dinner in the White Hall of the palace to

several hundred guests, including the Emperor of Austria-Hungary,

the King of Saxony, and other visiting personages, with the heads

of the diplomatic missions, and the leading personages of the

empire; and near the close of it the Emperor William arose and

made an excellent speech, to all appearance extemporaneous. The

answer by the Emperor of Austria-Hungary was read by him, and was

sensible and appropriate.



That this visit did much to strengthen the ties which bind the

two monarchies was shown not merely by hurrahs in the streets and

dithyrambic utterances in the newspapers, but by a mass of other

testimony. One curious thing was the great care everywhere taken

in the decorations to honor the crown and flag of Hungary equally

with that of Austria, and this, as was shown by the Hungarian

journals, had an excellent effect. By this meeting, no doubt, the

Triple Alliance was somewhat strengthened, and the chances for

continued peace increased, at least during the lifetime of the

Emperor Franz Josef. As to what will follow his death all is

dark. His successor is one of the least suitable of

men,--unprepossessing, and even forbidding, in every respect.

Brought up by the Jesuits, he is distrusted by a vast mass of the

best people in the empire, Catholic and Protestant. A devout

Catholic they would be glad to take, but a Jesuit pupil they

dread, for they know too well what such have brought upon the

empire hitherto, and, indeed, upon every kingdom which has

allowed them in its councils. His previous career has not been

edifying, and there is no reason to expect any change in him. The

Emperor Franz Josef is probably as thoroughly beloved by his

subjects as any sovereign in history has ever been. His great

misfortunes--fearful defeats in the wars with France and Germany,

the suicide of his only son, the assassination of his wife, and

family troubles in more recent times--have thrown about him an

atmosphere of romantic sympathy; while love for his kindly

qualities is mingled with respect for his plain common sense.

During his stay in Berlin I met him a second time. At my first

presentation at Dresden, two years before, there was little

opportunity for extended conversation; but he now spoke quite at

length and in a manner which showed him to be observant of the

world's affairs even in remote regions. He discussed the recent

increase of our army, the progress of our war in the Philippines,

and the extension of American enterprise in various parts of the

world, in a way which was not at all perfunctory, but evidently

the result of large information and careful observation. His

empire, which is a seething caldron of hates, racial, religious,

political, and local, is held together by love and respect for

him; but when he dies this personal tie which unites all these

different races, parties, and localities will disappear, and in

place of it will come the man who by force of untoward

circumstances is to be his successor, and this is anything but a

pleasing prospect to an Austro-Hungarian, or, indeed, to any

thoughtful observer of human affairs.



Interesting to me at this period was a visit from representatives

of the "Kriegerverein"--German-Americans who had formerly fought

in the war between Germany and France, who had since become

American citizens, and who were now revisiting their native land.

They were a very manly body, evidently taking pride in the

American flag which they carried, and also in the part they had

played in Germany. Replying to a friendly address by their

commanding officer, I took up some current American fallacies

regarding Germany and Germans, encouraged my hearers to stand

firm against sensational efforts to make trouble between the two

countries, urged them to keep their children in knowledge of the

German language and in touch with German civilization, while

bringing them up as thoroughly loyal Americans, reminding them

that every American who is interested in German history or

literature or science or art is an additional link in the chain

which binds together the two nations. The speech was of a very

offhand sort; but it seemed to strike deep and speed far, for it

evoked most kindly letters of congratulation and thanks from

various parts of Germany and the United States.



The most striking episode in the history of the world during

these years was the revolution in China. The first event which

startled mankind was the murder of Baron von Ketteler, the German

minister at Peking, a man of remarkable abilities and

accomplishments, who was thought sure to rise high among

diplomatists, and who had especially attracted American

friendships by his marriage with an American lady. The impression

created by this calamity was made all the greater by the fact

that, in the absence of further news from the Chinese capital,

there was reason to fear that the whole diplomatic corps, with

their families, might be murdered. American action in the

entanglements which followed was prompt and successful, and

thinking men everywhere soon saw it to be so. Toward the end of

July, 1900, being about to go to America for the summer, I took

leave of Count von Bulow at the Foreign Office, and, on coming

out, met one of my colleagues, who, although representing one of

the lesser European powers, was well known as exceedingly shrewd

and far-sighted. He said: "I congratulate you on the course

pursued by your government during this fearful Chinese imbroglio.

Other powers have made haste to jump into war; your admiral at

Tientsin seems the only one who has kept his head; other

governments have treated representatives of the Chinese Empire as

hostile, and, in doing so, have cut themselves off from all

direct influence on the Peking Government; the government at

Washington has taken an opposite course, has considered the

troubles as, prima facie, the work of insurrectionists, has

insisted on claiming friendship with the constituted authorities

in China, and, in view of this friendship, has insisted on being

kept in communication with its representative at the Chinese

capital, the result being that your government has been allowed

to communicate with its representative, and has thereby gained

the information and issued the orders which have saved the entire

diplomatic corps, as well as the forces of the different powers

now in Peking."



It was one of those contemporary testimonies to the skill of Mr.

McKinley and Secretary Hay which indicate the verdict of history.



Our later policy was equally sound. It was to prevent any further

territorial encroachments on China by foreign powers, and to

secure the opening of the empire on equal terms to the commerce

of the entire world. On the other hand, the German Government,

exasperated by the murder of its minister at Peking, was at first

inclined to go beyond this, and a speech of the Emperor to his

troops as they were leaving Germany for the seat of war was

hastily construed to mean that they were to carry out a policy of

extermination and confiscation. Even after the first natural

outburst of indignation against the Chinese, it looked as if the

ultimatum presented by the powers would include demands which

could never be met, and would entangle all the powers in a long

and tedious war, leading, perhaps, to a worse catastrophe.

Quietly but vigorously, from first to last, the American policy

was urged by Mr. Conger, American minister at Peking, and by

other representatives of our government abroad; and it was a

happy morning for me when, after efforts many and long continued,

I received at the Berlin Foreign Office the assurance that

Germany would not consider the earlier conditions presented by

the powers to the Chinese Government as "irrevocable." My

constant contention, during interviews at the Foreign Office, had

been that the United States desired as anxiously to see the main

miscreants punished as did any other nation, but that it was of

no use to demand, upon members of the imperial family, and upon

generals in command of great armies, extreme penalties which the

Chinese Government was not strong enough to inflict, or

indemnities which it was not rich enough to pay; that our aim was

not quixotic but practical, and that, in advocating steadily the

"open door" policy, we were laboring quite as much for all other

powers as for ourselves. Of course we were charged in various

quarters with cold-bloodedness, and with merely seeking to

promote our own interest in trade; but the Japanese, who could

understand the question better than the Western powers, steadily

adhered to our policy, and more and more, in its main lines, it

proved to be correct.



On the Fourth of July, 1900, came the celebration of our national

independence at Leipsic, and being asked to respond to the first

regular toast, and, having at my former visit dwelt especially

upon the Presidency, my theme now became the character and

services of the President himself, and it was a pleasure to find

that my statement was received by the German press in a way that

showed a reaction from previous injustice.



During August and September preceding the political campaign

which resulted in Mr. McKinley's reelection I was in the United

States. It was the hottest summer in very many years, and

certainly, within my whole experience, there had been no torrid

heat like that during my visits to Washington. Nearly every one

seemed prostrated by it. Upon arriving at the Arlington Hotel, I

found two old friends unnerved by the temperature, one of them

not daring to risk a sunstroke by going to the train which would

take him to his home in Chicago Retiring to one's room at night,

even in the best-situated hotels, was like entering an oven. The

leading official persons were generally absent, and those who

remained seemed hardly capable of doing business. But there was

one exception. Going to the White House to pay my respects to the

President, I found him the one man in Washington perfectly cool,

serene, and unaffected by the burning heat or by the pressure of

public affairs. Although matters in Cuba, in Porto Rico, in the

Philippines in China, and in the political campaign then going on

must have been constantly in his mind, he had plenty of time,

seemed to take trouble about nothing, and kept me in his office

for a full hour, discussing calmly the various phases of the

situation as they were affected by matters in Germany.



His discussion of public affairs showed the same quiet insight

and strength which I had recognized in him when we first met, in

1884, as delegates at the Chicago National Convention. One thing

during this Washington interview struck me especially: I asked

him if he was to make any addresses during the campaign; he

answered: "No; several of my friends have urged me to do so, but

I shall not. I intend to return to what seems to me the better

policy of the earlier Presidents: the American people have my

administration before them; they have ample material for judging

it, and with them I shall silently leave the whole matter." He

said this in a perfectly simple, quiet way, which showed that he

meant what he said. At the time I regretted his decision; but it

soon became clear that he was right.



At the beginning of the year 1901 came the two-hundredth

anniversary of the founding of the Prussian kingdom.

Representatives of the other governments of the world appeared at

court in full force; and, under instructions from the President,

I tendered his congratulations and best wishes to the monarch, as

follows:



May it please Your Majesty: I am instructed by the President to

present his hearty congratulations on this two-hundredth

anniversary of the founding of the Kingdom of Prussia, and, with

his congratulations, his best wishes for Your Majesty's health

and happiness, as well as the health and happiness of the Royal

Family, and his earnest hopes for the continued prosperity of

Your Majesty's Kingdom and Empire.



At the same time I feel fully authorized to present similar

congratulations and good wishes from the whole people of the

United States. The ties between the two nations, instead of being

weakened by time, have constantly grown stronger. As regards

material interests they are bound together by an enormous

commerce, growing greatly every year: as regards deeper

sentiments, no man acquainted with American History forgets that

the House of Hohenzollern was one of the first European powers to

recognize American Independence; and that it was Frederick the

Great who made that first treaty,--a landmark in the history of

International Law,--the only fault of which was that the world

was not far enough advanced to appreciate it. We also remember

that Germany was the only foreign country which showed decided

sympathy for us during our Civil War--the second struggle for our

national existence.



I also feel fully authorized, in view of Your Majesty's interest

in everything that ministers to the highest interests of

civilization, to express thanks for service which the broad

policy of Germany has rendered the United States in throwing open

to American scholars its Universities, its Technical Schools, its

conservatories of Art, its Museums, and its Libraries. Every

University and advanced school of learning in the United States

recognizes the fact that Germany has been our main foreign

teacher, as regards the higher ranges of Science, Literature, and

Art, and I may be allowed to remind Your Majesty, that while

Great Britain is justly revered by us as our mother country

Germany is beginning to hold to us a similar relation, not only

as the fatherland of a vast number of American citizens, but as

one of the main sources of the intellectual culture spread by our

universities and schools for advanced learning.



Allow me, then, sir, to renew the best wishes of the President

and people of the United States, with their hopes that ever

blessing may attend Your Majesty, the House of Hohenzollern the

Kingdom of Prussia, and the German Empire.





The Emperor in his reply spoke very cordially of the President's

special telegram, which he had received that morning, and then

gave earnest utterance to his belief that the time is coming when

the three great peoples of Germanic descent will stand firmly

together in all the great questions of the world.



The religious ceremonies in the Palace Chapel, with magnificent

music; the banquet, which included pertinent speeches from the

monarchs; and the gala representation at the opera all passed off

well: but, perhaps, that which will dwell longest in my memory

took place at the last. The performance consisted of two pieces:

one a poem glorifying Prussia, recited with music; the other a

play, in four acts, with long, musical interludes, deifying the

great Elector and the house of Hohenzollern. Though splendid in

scenic setting and brilliant in presentation it was very long,

and the ambassadors' box was crowded and hot. In the midst of it

all the French ambassador, the Marquis de Noailles, one of the

most suave courteous, and placid of men, quietly said to me, with

inimitable gravity, "What a bore this must be to those who

understand German! (Comme ca doit etre ennuyeux a ceux qui

correprennent l'Allexnand!)" This sudden revelation of a lower

depth of boredom--from one who could not understand a word of the

play--was worthy of his ancestors in the days of Saint-Simon and

Dangeau.



During the following summer two great sorrows befell me and mine,

but there is nothing to be here chronicled save that in this, as

in previous trials, I took refuge in work which seemed to be

worthy. The diplomatic service in summer is not usually exacting,

especially when one has, as I had, thoroughly loyal and judicious

embassy secretaries. As in a former bereavement I had turned to a

study of the character and services of John of Portugal and his

great successors in the age of discovery, so now I turned to Fra

Paolo Sarpi and the good fight he fought for Venice and humanity.

To my large collection of books on the subject, made mainly in

Italy, I added much from the old book-shops of Germany, and with

these revised my Venetian studies. An old dream of mine had been

to bring out a small book on Fra Paolo: now I sought, more

modestly, to prepare an essay.[6] The work was good for me.

Contemplation of that noblest of the three great Italians between

the Renaissance and the Resurrection of Italy did something to

lift me above sorrow; reading his words, uttered so calmly in all

the storm and stress of his time, soothed me. Viewed from my

work-table on the island of Rugen, the world became less dark as

I thought upon this hero of three centuries ago.





[6] This essay has since been published in the "Atlantic Monthly"

of January and February, 1904.



{Included etext: Project Gutenberg}

****************************************************************

THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY: A MAGAZINE OF Literature, Science, Art, and

Politics VOLUME XCIII {From January, 1904--Number DLV. and

February, 1904--Number DLVI.}



BOSTON AND NEW YORK HOUGHTON MIFFLIN AND COMPANY The Riverside

Press, Cambridge 1904





COPYRIGHT, 1903 AND 1904 BY HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY



The Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A. Electrotyped and

Printed by H. O. Houghton & Company



FRA PAOLO SARPI.



I.



A thoughtful historian tells us that, between the fourteenth

century and the nineteenth, Italy produced three great men. As

the first of these, he names Machiavelli, who, he says, "taught

the world to understand political despotism and to hate it;" as

the second, he names Sarpi who "taught the world after what

manner the Holy Spirit guides the Councils of the Church;" and as

the third, Galileo, who "taught the world what dogmatic theology

is worth when it can be tested by science."



I purpose now to present the second of these. As a MAN, he was by

far the greatest of the three and, in various respects, the most

interesting, for he not only threw a bright light into the most

important general council of the Church and revealed to

Christendom the methods which there prevailed,--in a book which

remains one of the half-dozen classic histories of the

world,--but he fought the most bitter fight for humanity against

the papacy ever known in any Latin nation, and won a victory by

which the whole world has profited ever since. Moreover, he was

one of the two foremost Italian statesmen since the Middle Ages,

the other being Cavour.



He was born at Venice in 1552, and it may concern those who care

to note the subtle interweaving of the warp and woof of history

that the birth year of this most resourceful foe that Jesuitism

ever had was the death year of St. Francis Xavier, the noblest of

Jesuit apostles.



It may also interest those who study the more evident evolution

of cause and effect in human affairs to note that, like most

strong men, he had a strong mother; that while his father was a

poor shopkeeper who did little and died young, his mother was

wise and serene.



From his earliest boyhood, he showed striking gifts and

characteristics. He never forgot a face once seen, could take in

the main contents of a page at a glance, spoke little, rarely ate

meat, and, until his last years, never drank wine.



Brought up, after the death of his father, first by his uncle, a

priest, and then by Capella, a Servite monk, in something better

than the usual priestly fashion, he became known, while yet in

his boyhood, as a theological prodigy. Disputations in his youth,

especially one at Mantua, where, after the manner of the time, he

successfully defended several hundred theses against all comers,

attracted wide attention, so that the Bishop gave him a

professorship, and the Duke, who, like some other crowned heads

of those days,--notably Henry VIII. and James I.,--liked to

dabble in theology, made him a court theologian. But the duties

of this position were uncongenial: a flippant duke, fond of

putting questions which the wisest theologian could not answer,

and laying out work which the young scholar evidently thought

futile, apparently wearied him. He returned to the convent of the

Servites at Venice, and became, after a few years' novitiate, a

friar, changing, at the same time, his name; so that, having been

baptized Peter, he now became Paul.



His career soon seemed to reveal another and underlying cause of

his return: he evidently felt the same impulse which stirred his

contemporaries, Lord Bacon and Galileo; for he began devoting

himself to the whole range of scientific and philosophical

studies, especially to mathematics, physics, astronomy, anatomy,

and physiology. In these he became known as an authority, and

before long was recognized as such through out Europe. It is

claimed, and it is not improbable, that he anticipated Harvey in

discovering the circulation of the blood, and that he was the

forerunner of noted discoveries in magnetism. Unfortunately the

loss of the great mass of his papers by the fire which destroyed

his convent in 1769 forbids any full estimate of his work; but it

is certain that among those who sought his opinion and advice

were such great discoverers as Acquapendente, Galileo,

Torricelli, and Gilbert of Colchester, and that every one of

these referred to him as an equal, and indeed as a master. It

seems also established that it was he who first discovered the

valves of the veins, that he made known the most beautiful

function of the iris,--its contractility,--and that various

surmises of his regarding heat, light, and sound have since been

developed into scientific truths. It is altogether likely that,

had he not been drawn from scientific pursuits by his duties as a

statesman, he would have ranked among the greater investigators

and discoverers, not only of Italy, but of the world.



He also studied political and social problems, and he arrived at

one conclusion which, though now trite, was then novel,--the

opinion that the aim of punishment should not be vengeance, but

reformation. In these days and in this country, where one of the

most serious of evils is undue lenity to crime, this opinion may

be imputed to him as a fault; but in those days, when torture was

the main method in procedure and in penalty, his declaration was

honorable both to his head and heart.



With all his devotion to books, he found time to study men. Even

at school, he had seemed to discern those who would win control.

They discerned something in him also; so that close relations

were formed between him and such leaders as Contarini and

Morosini, with whom he afterwards stood side by side in great

emergencies.



Important missions were entrusted to him. Five times he visited

Rome to adjust perplexing differences between the papal power and

various interests at Venice. He was rapidly advanced through most

of the higher offices in his order, and in these he gave a series

of decisions which won the respect of all entitled to form an

opinion.



Naturally he was thought of for high place in the Church, and was

twice presented for a bishopric; but each time he was rejected at

Rome,--partly from family claims of less worthy candidates,

partly from suspicions regarding his orthodoxy. It was objected

that he did not find the whole doctrine of the Trinity in the

first verse of Genesis, that he corresponded with eminent

heretics of England and Germany, that he was not averse to

reforms, that, in short, he was not inclined to wallow in the

slime from which had crawled forth such huge incarnations of evil

as John XXIII., Julius II., Sixtus IV., and Alexander VI.



His orthodox detractors have been wont to represent him as

seeking vengeance for his non-promotion; but his after career

showed amply that personal grievances had little effect upon him.

It is indeed not unlikely that when he saw bishoprics for which

he knew himself well fitted given as sops to poor creatures

utterly unfit in morals or intellect, he may have had doubts

regarding the part taken by the Almighty in selecting them; but

he was reticent, and kept on with his work. In his cell at Santa

Fosca, he quietly and steadily devoted himself to his cherished

studies; but he continued to study more than books or inanimate

nature. He was neither a bookworm nor a pedant. On his various

missions he met and discoursed with churchmen and statesmen

concerned in the greatest transactions of his time, notably at

Mantua with Oliva, secretary of one of the greatest ecclesiastics

at the Council of Trent; at Milan with Cardinal Borromeo, by far

the noblest of all who sat in that assemblage during its eighteen

years; in Rome and elsewhere with Arnauld Ferrier, who had been

French Ambassador at the Council, Cardinal Severina, head of the

Inquisition, Castagna, afterward Pope Urban VII., and Cardinal

Bellarmine, afterward Sarpi's strongest and noblest opponent.



Nor was this all. He was not content with books or conversations;

steadily he went on collecting, collating, and testing original

documents bearing upon the great events of his time. The result

of all this the world was to see later.



He had arrived at middle life and won wide recognition as a

scholar, scientific investigator, and jurist, when there came the

supreme moment of a struggle which had involved Europe for

centuries,--a struggle interesting not only the Italy and Europe

of those days, but universal humanity for all time.



During the period following the fall of the Roman Empire of the

West there had been evolved the temporal power of the Roman

Bishop. It had many vicissitudes. Sometimes, as in the days of

St. Leo and St. Gregory, it based its claims upon noble

assertions of right and justice, and sometimes, as in the hands

of pontiffs like Innocent VIII. and Paul V., it sought to force

its way by fanaticism. Sometimes it strengthened its authority by

real services to humanity, and sometimes by such monstrous frauds

as the Forged Decretals. Sometimes, as under Popes like Gregory

VII. and Innocent III., it laid claim to the mastership of the

world, and sometimes, as with the majority of the pontiffs during

the two centuries before the Reformation, it became mainly the

appanage of a party or faction or family.



Throughout all this history, there appeared in the Church two

great currents of efficient thought. On one side had been

developed a theocratic theory, giving the papacy a power supreme

in temporal as well as in spiritual matters throughout the world.

Leaders in this during the Middle Ages were St. Thomas Aquinas

and the Dominicans; leaders in Sarpi's days were the Jesuits,

represented especially in the treatises of Bellarmine at Rome and

in the speeches of Laynez at the Council of Trent.[1]





[1] This has been admirably shown by N. R. F. Brown in his

Taylorian Lecture, pages 229-234, in volume for 1889-99.





But another theory, hostile to the despotism of the Church over

the State, had been developed through the Middle Ages and the

Renaissance;--it had been strengthened mainly by the utterances

of such men as Dante, aegidio Colonna, John of Paris, Ockham,

Marsilio of Padua, and Laurentius Valla. Sarpi ranged himself

with the latter of these forces. Though deeply religious, he

recognized the God-given right of earthly governments to

discharge their duties independent of church control.



Among the many centres of this struggle was Venice. She was

splendidly religious--as religion was then understood. She was

made so by her whole environment. From the beginning she had been

a seafaring power, and seafaring men, from their constant wrestle

with dangers ill understood, are prone to seek and find

supernatural forces. Nor was this all. Later, when she had become

rich, powerful, luxurious, licentious, and refractory to the

priesthood, her most powerful citizens felt a need of atoning for

their many sins by splendid religious foundations. So her people

came to live in an atmosphere of religious observance, and the

bloom and fruitage of their religious hopes and fears are seen in

the whole history of Venetian art,--from the rude sculptures of

Torcello and the naive mosaics of San Marco to the glowing

altarpieces and ceilings of John Bellini, Titian, and Tintoretto

and the illuminations of the Grimani Psalter. No class in Venice

rose above this environment. Doges and Senators were as

susceptible to it as were the humblest fishermen on the Lido. In

every one of those glorious frescoes in the corridors and halls

of the Ducal Palace which commemorate the victories of the

Republic, the triumphant Doge or Admiral or General is seen on

his knees making acknowledgment of the divine assistance. On

every Venetian sequin, from the days when Venice was a power

throughout the earth to that fatal year when the young Bonaparte

tossed the Republic over to the House of Austria, the Doge,

crowned and robed, kneels humbly before the Saviour, the Virgin,

or St. Mark. In that vast Hall of the Five Hundred, the most

sumptuous room in the world, there is spread above the heads of

the Doge and Senators and Councilors, as an incentive to the

discharge of their duties on earth, a representation of the

blessed in Heaven.



From highest to lowest, the Venetians lived, moved, and had their

being in this religious environment, and, had their Republic been

loosely governed, its external policy would have been largely

swayed by this all-pervading religious feeling, and would have

become the plaything of the Roman Court. But a democracy has

never been maintained save by the delegation of great powers to

its chosen leaders. It was the remark of one of the foremost

American Democrats of the nineteenth century, a man who received

the highest honors which his party could bestow, that the

Constitution of the United States was made, not to promote

Democracy, but to check it. This statement is true, and it is as

true of the Venetian Constitution as of the American.[1]





[1] See Horatio Seymour's noted article in the North American

Review.





But while both the republics recognized the necessity of curbing

Democracy, the difference between the means employed was

world-wide. The founders of the American Republic gave vast

powers and responsibilities to a president and unheard-of

authority to a supreme court; in the Venetian Republic the Doge

was gradually stripped of power, but there was evolved the

mysterious and unlimited authority of the Senate and Council of

Ten.



In these sat the foremost Venetians, thoroughly imbued with the

religious spirit of their time; but, religious as they were, they

were men of the world, trained in the polities of all Europe and

especially of Italy.



In a striking passage, Guizot has shown how the Crusaders who

went to the Orient by way of Italy and saw the papacy near at

hand came back skeptics. This same influence shaped the statesmen

of Venice. The Venetian Ambassadors were the foremost in Europe.

Their Relations are still studied as the clearest, shrewdest, and

wisest statements regarding the men and events in Europe at their

time. All were noted for skill; but the most skillful were kept

on duty at Rome. There was the source of danger. The Doges,

Senators, and controlling Councilors had, as a rule, served in

these embassies, and they had formed lucid judgments as to

Italian courts in general and as to the Roman Court in

particular. No men had known the Popes and the Curia more

thoroughly. They had seen Innocent VIII. buy the papacy for

money. They had been at the Vatican when Alexander VI. had won

renown as a secret murderer. They had seen, close at hand, the

merciless cruelty of Julius II. They had carefully noted the

crimes of Sixtus IV., which culminated in the assassination of

Julian de' Medici beneath the dome of Florence at the moment the

Host was uplifted. They had sat near Leo X. while he enjoyed the

obscenities of the Calandria and the Mandragora,--plays which, in

the most corrupt of modern cities, would, in our day, be stopped

by the police. No wonder that, in one of their dispatches, they

speak of Rome as "the cloaca of the world."[1]





[1] For Sixtus IV. and his career, with the tragedy in the

Cathedral of Florence see Villari's Life of Machiavelli, English

Edition, vol. ii. pp. 341, 342. For the passages in the

dispatches referred to, vide ibid. vol. i. p. 198.





Naturally, then, while their religion showed itself in wonderful

monuments of every sort, their practical sense was shown by a

steady opposition to papal encroachments.



Of this combination of zeal for religion with hostility to

ecclesiasticism we have striking examples throughout the history

of the Republic. While, in every other European state, cardinals,

bishops, priests, and monks were given leading parts in civil

administration and, in some states, a monopoly of civil honors,

the Republic of Venice not only excluded all ecclesiastics from

such posts, but, in cases which touched church interests, she

excluded even the relatives of ecclesiastics. When church

authority decreed that commerce should not be maintained with

infidels and heretics, the Venetian merchants continued to deal

with Turks, Pagans, Germans, Englishmen, and Dutchmen as before.

When the Church decreed that the taking of interest for money was

sin, and great theologians published in Venice some of their

mightiest treatises demonstrating this view from Holy Scripture

and the Fathers, the Venetians continued borrowing and lending

money on usance. When efforts were made to enforce that

tremendous instrument for the consolidation of papal power, the

bull In Coena Domini, Venice evaded and even defied it. When the

Church frowned upon anatomical dissections, the Venetians allowed

Andreas Vesalius to make such dissections at their University of

Padua. When Sixtus V., the strongest of all the Popes, had

brought all his powers, temporal and spiritual, to bear against

Henry IV. of France as an excommunicated heretic, and seemed

ready to hurl the thunderbolts of the Church against any power

which should recognize him, the Venetian Republic not only

recognized him, but treated his Ambassador with especial

courtesy. When the other Catholic powers, save France, yielded to

papal mandates and sent no representatives to the coronation of

James I. of England, Venice was there represented. When Pope

after Pope issued endless diatribes against the horrors of

toleration, the Venetians steadily tolerated in their several

sorts of worship Jews and Greeks, Mohammedans and Armenians, with

Protestants of every sort who came to them on business. When the

Roman Index forbade the publication of most important works of

leading authors, Venice demanded and obtained for her printers

rights which were elsewhere denied.



As to the religious restrictions which touched trade, the

Venetians in the public councils, and indeed the people at large,

had come to know perfectly what the papal theory meant,--with

some of its promoters, fanaticism, but with the controlling power

at Rome, revenue, revenue to be derived from retailing

dispensations to infringe the holy rules.



This peculiar antithesis--nowhere more striking than at Venice,

on the one side, religious fears and hopes; on the other, keen

insight into the ways of ecclesiasticism--led to peculiar

compromises. The bankers who had taken interest upon money, the

merchants who had traded with Moslems and heretics, in their last

hours frequently thought it best to perfect their title to

salvation by turning over large estates to the Church. Under the

sway of this feeling, and especially of the terrors infused by

priests at deathbeds, mortmain had become in Venice, as in many

other parts of the world, one of the most serious of evils. Thus

it was that the clergy came to possess between one fourth and one

third of the whole territory of the Republic, and in its Bergamo

district more than one half; and all this was exempt from

taxation. Hence it was that the Venetian Senate found it

necessary to devise a legal cheek which should make such

absorption of estates by the Church more and more difficult.



There was a second cause of trouble. In that religious atmosphere

of Venice, monastic orders of every sort grew luxuriantly, not

only absorbing more and more land to be held by the dead hand,

thus escaping the public burdens, but ever absorbing more and

more men and women, and thus depriving the state of any healthy

and normal service from them. Here, too, the Senate thought it

best to interpose a check: it insisted that all new structures

for religious orders must be authorized by the State.



Yet another question flamed forth. Of the monks of every sort

swarming through the city, many were luxurious and some were

criminal. On these last, the Venetian Senate determined to lay

its hands, and in the first years of the seventeenth century all

these questions, and various other matters distasteful to the

Vatican, culminated in the seizure and imprisonment of two

ecclesiastics charged with various high crimes,--among these rape

and murder.



There had just come to the papal throne Camillo Borghese, Paul

V.,--strong, bold, determined, with the highest possible theory

of his duties and of his position. In view of his duty toward

himself, he lavished the treasures of the faithful upon his

family, until it became the richest which had yet risen in Rome;

in view of his duty toward the Church, he built superbly, and an

evidence of the spirit in which he wrought is his name, in

enormous letters, still spread across the facade of St. Peter's.

As to his position, he accepted fully the theories and practices

of his boldest predecessors, and in this he had good warrant; for

St. Thomas Aquinas and Bellarmine had furnished him with

convincing arguments that he was divinely authorized to rule the

civil powers of Italy and of the world.[1]





[1] For details of these cases of the two monks, see Pascolato.

Fra Paolo Sarpi, Milano, 1893, pp. 126-128. For the Borghese

avarice, see Ranke's Popes, vol. iii. pp. 9-20. For the

development of Pope Paul's theory of government, see Ranke, vol.

ii. p. 345, and note in which Bellarmine's doctrine is cited

textually; also Bellarmine's Selbstbiographie, herausgegeben von

Dollinger und Rensch Bonn, 1887. pp. 181, et seq.





Moreover there was, in his pride, something akin to fanaticism.

He had been elected by one of those sudden movements, as well

known in American caucuses as in papal conclaves, when, after a

deadlock, all the old candidates are thrown over, and the choice

suddenly falls on a new man. The cynical observer may point to

this as showing that the laws governing elections, under such

circumstances, are the same, whether in party caucuses or in

church councils; but Paul, in this case, saw the direct

intervention of the Almighty, and his disposition to magnify his

office was vastly increased thereby. He was especially strenuous,

and one of his earliest public acts was to send to the gallows a

poor author, who, in an unpublished work, had spoken severely

regarding one of Paul's predecessors.



The Venetian laws checking mortmain, taxing church property, and

requiring the sanction of the Republic before the erection of new

churches and monasteries greatly angered him; but the crowning

vexation was the seizure of the two clerics. This aroused him

fully. He at once sent orders that they be delivered up to him,

that apology be made for the past and guarantees given for the

future, and notice was served that, in case the Republic did not

speedily obey these orders, the Pope would excommunicate its

leaders and lay an interdict upon its people. It was indeed a

serious contingency. For many years the new Pope had been known

as a hard, pedantic ecclesiastical lawyer, and now that he had

arrived at the supreme power, he had evidently determined to

enforce the high mediaeval supremacy of the Church over the

State. Everything betokened his success. In France he had broken

down all opposition to the decrees of the Council of Trent. In

Naples, when a magistrate had refused to disobey the civil law at

the bidding of priests, and the viceroy had supported the

magistrate, Pope Paul had forced the viceroy and magistrate to

comply with his will by threats of excommunication. In every part

of Italy,--in Malta, in Savoy, in Parma, in Lucca, in Genoa,--and

finally even in Spain, he had pettifogged, bullied, threatened,

until his opponents had given way. Everywhere he was triumphant;

and while he was in the mood which such a succession of triumphs

would give he turned toward Venice.[1]





[1] For letters showing the craven submission of Philip III. of

Spain at this time, see Cornet, Paolo V. e la Republica Veneta,

Vienna, 1859, p. 285.





There was little indeed to encourage the Venetians to resist;

for, while the interests of other European powers were largely

the same as theirs, current political intrigues seemed likely to

bring Spain and even France into a league with the Vatican.



To a people so devoted to commerce, yet so religious, the threat

of an interdict was serious indeed. All church services were to

cease; the people at large, no matter how faithful, were to be as

brute beasts,--not to be legally married, --not to be consoled by

the sacraments, --not to be shriven, and virtually not to be

buried; other Christian peoples were to be forbidden all dealings

with them, under pain of excommunication; their commerce was to

be delivered over to the tender mercies of any and every other

nation; their merchant ships to be as corsairs; their cargoes,

the legitimate prey of all Christendom; and their people, on sea

and land, to be held as enemies of the human race. To this was

added, throughout the whole mass of the people, a vague sense of

awful penalties awaiting them in the next world. Despite all

this, the Republic persisted in asserting its right.



Just at this moment came a diplomatic passage between Pope and

Senate like a farce before a tragedy, and it has historical

significance, as showing what resourceful old heads were at the

service of either side. The Doge Grimani having died, the Vatican

thought to score a point by promptly sending notice through its

Nuncio to Venice that no new election of a Doge could take place

if forbidden by the Pope, and that, until the Senate had become

obedient to the papacy, no such election would be sanctioned. But

the Senate, having through its own Ambassador received a useful

hint, was quite equal to the occasion. It at once declined to

receive this or any dispatch from the Pope on the plea, made with

redundant courtesy and cordiality, that, there being no Doge,

there was no person in Venice great enough to open it. They next

as politely declined to admit the papal Nuncio on the ground that

there was nobody worthy to receive him. Then they proceeded to

elect a Doge who could receive both Nuncio and message,--a sturdy

opponent of the Vatican pretensions, Leonardo Donato.



The Senate now gave itself entirely to considering ways and means

of warding off the threatened catastrophe. Its first step was to

consult Sarpi. His answer was prompt and pithy. He advised two

things: first, to prevent, at all hazards, any publication of the

papal bulls in Venice or any obedience to them; secondly, to hold

in readiness for use at any moment an appeal to a future Council

of the Church.



Of these two methods, the first would naturally seem by far the

more difficult. So it was not in reality. In the letter which

Sarpi presented to the Doge, he devoted less than four lines to

the first and more than fourteen pages to the second. As to the

first remedy, severe as it was and bristling with difficulties,

it was, as he claimed, a simple, natural, straightforward use of

police power. As to the second, the appeal to a future Council

was to the Vatican as a red flag to a bull. The very use of it

involved excommunication. To harden and strengthen the Doge and

Senate in order that they might consider it as an ultimate

possibility, Sarpi was obliged to show from the Scriptures, the

Fathers, the Councils, the early Popes, that the appeal to a

Council was a matter of right. With wonderful breadth of

knowledge and clearness of statement he made his points and

answered objections. To this day, his letter remains a

masterpiece.[1]





[1] For Sarpi's advice to the Doge, see Bianchi Giovini, vol. i.

pp. 216, et seq. The document is given fully in the Lettere di F.

P. S., Firenze, 1863, vol. i. pp. 17, et seq.; also in Machi,

Storia del Consiglio dei Dieci, cap. xxiv., where the bull of

excommunication is also given.





The Republic utterly refused to yield, and now, in 1606, Pope

Paul launched his excommunication and interdict. In meeting them,

the Senate took the course laid down by Sarpi. The papal Nuncio

was notified that the Senate would receive no paper from the

Pope; all ecclesiasties, from the Patriarch down to the lowest

monk, were forbidden, under the penalties of high treason, to

make public or even to receive any paper whatever from the

Vatican; additional guards were placed at the city gates, with

orders to search every wandering friar or other suspicious person

who might, by any possibility, bring in a forbidden missive; a

special patrol was kept, night and day, to prevent any posting of

the forbidden notices on walls or houses; any person receiving or

finding one was to take it immediately to the authorities, under

the severest penalties, and any person found concealing such

documents was to be punished by death.



At first some of the clergy were refractory. The head of the

whole church establishment of Venice, the Patriarch himself, gave

signs of resistance; but the Senate at once silenced him. Sundry

other bishops and high ecclesiastics made a show of opposition;

and they were placed in confinement. One of them seeming

reluctant to conduct the usual church service, the Senate sent an

executioner to erect a gibbet before his door. Another, having

asked that he be allowed to await some intimation from the Holy

Spirit, received answer that the Senate had already received

directions from the Holy Spirit to hang any person resisting

their decree. The three religious orders which had showed most

opposition--Jesuits, Theatins, and Capuchins--were in a

semi-polite manner virtually expelled from the Republic.[2]





[2] For interesting details regarding the departure of the

Jesuits, see Cornet, Paolo V. e la Republica Veneta, pp. 277-279.





Not the least curious among the results of this state of things

was the war of pamphlets. From Rome, Bologna, and other centres

of thought, even from Paris and Frankfort, polemic tractates

rained upon the Republic. The vast majority of their authors were

on the side of the Vatican, and of this majority the leaders were

the two cardinals so eminent in learning and logic, Bellarmine

and Baronius; but, single-handed, Sarpi was, by general consent,

a match for the whole opposing force.[3]





[3] In the library of Cornell University are no less than nine

quartos filled with selected examples of these polemics on both

sides.





Of all the weapons then used, the most effective throughout

Europe was the solemn protest drawn by Sarpi and issued by the

Doge. It was addressed nominally to the Venetian ecclesiastics,

but really to Christendom, and both as to matter and manner it

was Father Paul at his best. It was weighty, lucid, pungent, and

deeply in earnest,--in every part asserting fidelity to the

Church and loyalty to the papacy, but setting completely at

naught the main claim of Pope Paul: the Doge solemnly declaring

himself "a prince who, in temporal matters, recognizes no

superior save the Divine Majesty."



The victory of the friar soon began to be recognized far and

near. Men called him by the name afterward so generally given

him,--the "terribile frate." The Vatican seemed paralyzed. None

of its measures availed, and it was hurt, rather than helped, by

its efforts to pester and annoy Venice at various capitals. At

Rome, it burned Father Paul's books and declared him

excommunicated; it even sought to punish his printer by putting

into the Index not only all works that he had ever printed, but

all that he might ever print. At Vienna, the papal Nuncio thought

to score a point by declaring that he would not attend a certain

religious function in case the Venetian Ambassador should appear;

whereupon the Venetian announced that he had taken physic and

regretted that he could not be present,--whereat all Europe

laughed.



Judicious friends in various European cabinets now urged both

parties to recede or to compromise. France and Spain both

proffered their good offices. The offer of France was finally

accepted, and the French Ambassador was kept running between the

Ducal Palace and the Vatican until people began laughing at him

also. The emissaries of His Holiness begged hard that, at least,

appearances might be saved; that the Republic would undo some of

its measures before the interdict was removed, or at least would

seem to do so, and especially that it would withdraw its refusals

before the Pope withdrew his penalties. All in vain. The

Venetians insisted that they had committed no crime and had

nothing to retract. The Vatican then urged that the Senate should

consent to receive absolution for its resistance to the Pope's

authority. This the Senate steadily refused; it insisted, "Let

His Holiness put things as before, and we will put things as

before; as to his absolution, we do not need it or want it; to

receive it would be to acknowledge that we have been in the

wrong." Even the last poor sop of all was refused: the Senate

would have no great "function" to celebrate the termination of

the interdict; they would not even go to the mass which Cardinal

Joyeuse celebrated on that occasion. The only appearance of

concession which the Republic made was to give up the two

ecclesiastics to the French Ambassador as a matter of courtesy to

the French king; and when this was done, the Ambassador delivered

them to the Pope; but Venice especially reserved all the rights

she had exercised. All the essential demands of the papacy were

refused, and thus was forever ended the papal power of laying an

interdict upon a city or a people. From that incubus,

Christendom, thanks to Father Paul and to Venice, was at last and

forever free.



The Vatican did, indeed, try hard to keep its old claim in being.

A few years after its defeat by Fra Paolo, it endeavored to

reassert in Spain the same authority which had been so humbly

acknowledged there a few years before. It was doubtless felt that

this most pious of all countries, which had previously been so

docile, and which had stood steadily by the Vatican against

Venice in the recent struggle, would again set an example of

submission. Never was there a greater mistake: the Vatican

received from Spanish piety a humiliating refusal.



Next it tried the old weapons against the little government at

Turin. For many generations the House of Savoy had been dutifully

submissive to religious control; nowhere out of Spain had heresy

been treated more cruelly; yet here, too, the Vatican claim was

spurned. But the final humiliation took place some years later

under Urban VIII.,--the same pontiff who wrecked papal

infallibility on Galileo's telescope. He tried to enforce his

will on the state of Lucca, which, in the days of Pope Paul, had

submitted to the Vatican decrees abjectly; but that little

republic now seized the weapons which Sarpi had devised, and

drove the papal forces out of the field: the papal

excommunication was, even by this petty government, annulled in

Venetian fashion and even less respectfully.[1]





[1] The proofs--and from Catholic sources--that it was the Pope

who condemned Galileo's doctrine of the earth's movement about

the sun, and not merely the Congregation of the Index, the

present writer has given in his History of the Warfare of Science

with Theology, vol. i. chap. iii.





Thus the world learned how weak the Vatican hold had become. Even

Pope Paul learned it, and, from being the most strenuous of

modern pontiffs, he became one of the most moderate in everything

save in the enrichment of his family. Thus ended the last serious

effort to coerce a people by an interdict, and so, one might

suppose, would end the work of Father Paul. Not so. There was to

come a second chapter in his biography, more instructive,

perhaps, than the first,--a chapter which has lasted until our

own day.                             A. D. White.





{February, 1904, number DLVI.} II.





The Venetian Republic showed itself duly grateful to Sarpi. The

Senate offered him splendid presents and entitled him "Theologian

of Venice." The presents he refused, but the title with its duty,

which was mainly to guard the Republic against the encroachments

of the Vatican, he accepted, and his life in the monastery of

Santa Fosca went on quietly, simply, laboriously, as before. The

hatred now felt for him at Rome was unbounded. It corresponded to

the gratitude at Venice. Every one saw his danger, and he well

knew it. Potentates were then wont to send assassins on long

errands, and the arm of the Vatican was especially far-reaching

and merciless. It was the period when Pius V, the Pope whom the

Church afterwards proclaimed a saint, commissioned an assassin to

murder Queen Elizabeth.[1]





[1] This statement formerly led to violent denials by

ultramontane champions; but in 1870 it was made by Lord Acton, a

Roman Catholic, one of the most learned of modern historians, and

when it was angrily denied, he quietly cited the official life of

Pope Pius in the Acta  Sanctorum, published by the highest church

authority. This was final; denial ceased, and the statement is no

longer questioned. For other proofs in the line of Lord Acton's

citation, see Bellarmine's Selbstbiographie, cited in a previous

article, pp. 306, et seq.





But there was in Father Paul a trust in Providence akin to

fatalism. Again and again he was warned, and among those who are

said to have advised him to be on his guard against papal

assassins was no less a personage than his greatest controversial

enemy,--Cardinal Bellarmine. It was believed by Sarpi's friends

that Bellarmine's Scotch ideas of duty to humanity prevailed over

his Roman ideas of fealty to the Vatican, and we may rejoice in

the hope that his nobler qualities did really assert themselves

against the casuistry of his brother prelates which sanctioned

assassination.



These warnings were soon seen to be well founded. On a pleasant

evening in October, 1607, a carefully laid trap was sprung.

Returning from his day's work at the Ducal Palace, Father Paul,

just as he had crossed the little bridge of Santa Fosca before

reaching his convent, was met by five assassins. Two of his usual

attendants had been drawn off by the outburst of a fire in the

neighborhood; the other two were old men who proved useless. The

place was well chosen. The descent from the bridge was so narrow

that all three were obliged to march in single file, and just at

this point these ruffians from Rome sprang upon him in the dusk,

separated him from his companions, and gave him, in a moment,

fifteen dagger thrusts, two in his throat and one--a fearful gash

--on the side of his head, and then, convinced that they had

killed him, escaped to their boats, only a few paces distant.



The victim lingered long in the hospital, but his sound

constitution and abstemious habits stood him in good stead. Very

important among the qualities which restored him to health were

his optimism and cheerfulness. An early manifestation of the

first of these was seen when, on regaining consciousness, he

called for the stiletto which had been drawn from the main wound

and, running his fingers along the blade, said cheerily to his

friends, "It is not filed." What this meant, any one knows who

has seen in various European collections the daggers dating from

the "ages of faith" cunningly filed or grooved to hold poison.[1]





[1] There is a remarkable example of a beautiful dagger, grooved

to contain poison, in the imperial collection of arms at Vienna.





As an example of the second of these qualities, we may take his

well-known reply when, to the surgeon dressing the wound made by

the "style" or stiletto, --who spoke of its "extravagance,"

rudeness, and yet ineffectiveness,--Fra Paolo quietly answered

that in these characteristics could be recognized the style of

the Roman Curia.



Meantime the assassins had found their way back to Rome, and were

welcomed with open arms; but it is some comfort to know that

later, when such conscience as there was throughout Italy and

Europe showed intense disgust at the proceeding, the Roman Court

treated them coldly and even severely.



The Republic continued in every way to show Sarpi its sympathy

and gratitude. It made him many splendid offer, which he refused;

but two gifts he accepted. One was full permission to explore the

Venetian archives, and the other was a little doorway, cut

through the garden wall of his monastery, enabling him to reach

his gondola without going through the narrow and tortuous path he

had formerly taken on his daily journey to the public offices.

This humble portal still remains. Beneath few triumphal arches

has there ever passed as great or as noble a conqueror.[2]





[2] The present writer has examined with care the spot where the

attack was made, and found that never was a scoundrelly plot

better conceived or more fiendishly executed. He also visited

what was remaining of the convent in April, 1902, and found the

little door as serviceable as when it was made.





Efforts were also made to cajole him,--to induce him to visit

Rome, with fine promises of recognition and honor, and with

solemn assurances that no harm should come to him; but he was too

wise to yield. Only a few years previously he had seen Giordano

Bruno lured to Rome and burned alive on the Campo dei Fiori. He

had seen his friend and correspondent, Fra Fulgentio Manfredi,

yield to similar allurements and accept a safe conduct to Rome,

which, though it solemnly guaranteed him against harm, proved as

worthless as that of John Huss at the Council of Constance; the

Inquisition torturing him to death on the spot where, six years

earlier, it had burned Bruno. He had seen his friend, the

Archdeacon Ribetti, drawn within the clutch of the Vatican, only

to die of "a most painful colic" immediately after dining with a

confidential chamberlain of the Pope, and, had he lived a few

months longer, he would have seen his friend and confidant,

Antonio de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, to whom he had

entrusted a copy of his most important work, enticed to Rome and

put to death by the Inquisition. Though the Vatican exercised a

strong fascination over its enemies, against Father Paul it was

powerless; he never yielded to it, but kept the even tenor of his

way.[3]





[3] A copy of Manfredi's "safe conduct" is given by Castellani,

Lettere Inedite di F. P. S., p. 12, note. Nothing could be more

explicit.





In the dispatches which now passed, comedy was mingled with

tragedy. Very unctuous was the expression by His Holiness of his

apprehensions regarding "dangers to the salvation" and of his

"fears for the souls" of the Venetian Senators, if they persisted

in asserting their own control of their own state. Hardly less

touching were the fears expressed by the good Oratorian, Cardinal

Baronius, that "a judgment might be brought upon the Republic" if

it declined to let the Vatican have its way. But these

expressions were not likely to prevail with men who had dealt

with Machiavelli.



Uncompromising as ever, Father Paul continued to write letters

and publish treatises which clenched more and more firmly into

the mind of Venice and of Europe the political doctrine of which

he was the apostle,--the doctrine that the State is rightfully

independent of the Church,--and throughout the Christian world he

was recognized as victor.



Nothing could exceed the bitterness of the attacks upon him,

though some of them, at this day, provoke a smile. While efforts

were made to discredit him among scholars by spurious writings or

by interpolations in genuine writings, efforts equally ingenious

were made to arouse popular hostility. One of these was a

painting which represented him writhing amid the flames of hell,

with a legend stating, as a reason for his punishment, that he

had opposed the Holy Father.



Now it was indeed, in the midst of ferocious attacks upon his

reputation and cunning attempts upon his life, that he entered a

new and most effective period of activity. For years, as the

adviser of Venice, he had studied, both as a historian and as a

statesman, the greatest questions which concerned his country,

and especially those which related to the persistent efforts of

the Vatican to encroach upon Venetian self-government. The

results of these studies he had embodied in reports which had

shaped the course of the Republic; and now, his learning and

powers of thought being brought to bear upon the policy of Europe

in general, as affected by similar papal encroachments, he began

publishing a series of treatises, which at once attracted general

attention.[1]





[1] For the extent to which these attacks were carried, see the

large number in the Sarpi collection at the Cornell University

Library, especially volume ix.





First of these, in 1608, came his work on the Interdict. Clearly

and concisely it revealed the nature of the recent struggle, the

baselessness of the Vatican claims, and the solidarity of

interest between Venice and all other European states regarding

the question therein settled. This work of his as a historian

clenched his work as a statesman; from that day forward no nation

has even been seriously threatened with an interdict.



Subsidiary works followed rapidly from his pen, strengthening the

civil power against the clerical; but in 1610 came a treatise,

which marked an epoch, --his History of Ecclesiastical

Benefices.[2] In this he dealt with a problem which had become

very serious, not only in Venice, but in every European state,

showed the process by which vast treasures had been taken from

the control of the civil power and heaped up for ecclesiastical

pomp and intrigue, pointed out special wrongs done by the system

to the Church as well as the State, and advocated a reform which

should restore this wealth to better uses. His arguments spread

widely and sank deep, not only in Italy, but throughout Europe,

and the nineteenth century has seen them applied effectively in

every European country within the Roman obedience.





[2] The old English translation of this book, published in 1736

at Westminster, is by no means a very rare book, and it affords

the general reader perhaps the most accessible means of

understanding Fra Paolo's simplicity, thoroughness, and vigor.





In 1611 he published his work on the Inquisition at Venice,

presenting historical arguments against the uses which

ecclesiasticism, under papal guidance, had made of that tribunal.

These arguments spread far, and developed throughout Europe those

views of the Inquisition which finally led to its destruction.

Minor treatises followed, dealing with state questions arising

between the Vatican and Venice, each treatise--thoroughly well

reasoned and convincing--having a strong effect on the discussion

of similar public questions in every other European nation.



In 1613 came two books of a high order, each marking an epoch.

The first of these was upon the Right of Sanctuary, and in it

Sarpi led the way, which all modern states have followed, out of

the old, vicious system of sanctioning crime by sheltering

criminals. The cogency of his argument and the value of its

application gained for him an especial tribute by the best

authority on such questions whom Europe had seen,--Hugo Grotius.



Closely connected with this work was that upon the Immunity of

the Clergy. Both this and the previous work were in the same

order of ideas, and the second fastened into the European mind

the reasons why no state can depend upon the Church for the

punishment of clerical criminals. His argument was a triumphant

vindication of Venice in her struggle with Paul V on this point;

but it was more than that. It became the practical guide of all

modern states. Its arguments dissipated the last efforts

throughout Europe to make a distinction, in criminal matters,

between the priestly caste and the world in general.



Among lesser treatises which followed is one which has done much

to shape modern policy regarding public instruction. This was his

book upon the Education given by the Jesuits. One idea which it

enforced sank deep into the minds of all thoughtful men,--his

statement that Jesuit maxims develop "sons disobedient to their

parents, citizens unfaithful to their country, and subjects

undutiful to their sovereign." Jesuit education has indeed been

maintained, and evidences of it may be seen in various European

countries. The traveler in Italy constantly sees in the larger

Italian towns long lines of young men and boys, sallow, thin, and

listless, walking two and two, with priests at each end of the

coffle. These are students taking their exercise, and an American

or Englishman marvels as he remembers the playing fields of his

own country. Youth are thus brought up as milksops, to be

graduated as scape-graces. The strong men who control public

affairs, who lead men and originate measures in the open, are not

bred in Jesuit forcing-houses. Even the Jesuits themselves have

acknowledged this, and perhaps the strongest of all arguments

supplementary to those given by Father Paul were uttered by Padre

Curci, eminent in his day as a Jesuit gladiator, but who realized

finally the impossibility of accomplishing great things with men

moulded by Jesuit methods.



All these works took strong hold upon European thought. Leading

men in all parts of Europe recognized Sarpi as both a great

statesman and a great historian. Among his English friends were

such men as Lord Bacon and Sir Henry Wotton; and his praises have

been sounded by Grotius, by Gibbon, by Hallam, and by Macaulay.

Strong, lucid, these works of Father Paul have always been

especially attractive to those who rejoice in the leadership of a

master mind.



But in 1619 came the most important of all,--a service to

humanity hardly less striking than that which he had rendered in

his battle against the Interdict,--his history of the Council of

Trent.



His close relations to so many of the foremost men of his day and

his long study in public archives and private libraries bore

fruit in this work, which takes rank among the few great,

enduring historical treatises of the world. Throughout, it is

vigorous and witty, but at the same time profound; everywhere it

bears evidences of truthfulness and is pervaded by sobriety of

judgment. Its pictures of the efforts or threats by

representatives of various great powers to break away from the

papacy and establish national churches; its presentation of the

arguments of anti-papal orators on one side and of Laynez and his

satellites on the other; its display of acts and revelations of

pretexts; its penetration into the whole network of intrigue, and

its thorough discussion of underlying principles,--all are

masterly.



Though the name of the author was concealed in an anagram, the

book was felt, by the Vatican party, to be a blow which only one

man could have dealt, and the worst blow which the party had

received since its author had defeated the Interdict at Venice.

Efforts were made, by outcries and calumnies, to discredit the

work, and they have been continued from that day to this, but in

vain. That there must be some gaps and many imperfections in it

is certain; but its general character is beyond the reach of

ultramontane weapons. The blow was felt to be so heavy that the

Jesuit Pallavicini was empowered to write a history of the

Council to counterbalance it, and his work was well done; but

Ranke, the most unprejudiced of judges, comparing the two,

assigns the palm to Father Paul. His book was immediately spread

throughout Europe; but of all the translations, perhaps the most

noteworthy was the English. Sarpi had entrusted a copy of the

original to his friend, Antonio de Dominis, Archbishop of

Spalato, and he, having taken refuge in England, had it

translated there, the authorship being ascribed on the title-page

to "Pietro Soave Polano." This English translation was, in vigor

and pith, worthy of the original. In it can be discerned, as

clearly as in the original, that atmosphere of intrigue and

brutal assertion of power by which the Roman Curia, after packing

the Council with petty Italian bishops, bade defiance to the

Catholic world. This translation, more than all else, has enabled

the English-speaking peoples to understand what was meant by the

Italian historian when he said that Father Paul "taught the world

how the Holy Spirit guides the Great Councils of the Church." It

remains cogent down to this day; after reading it one feels that

such guidance might equally be claimed for Tammany Hall.



Although Father Paul never acknowledged the authorship of the

history of the Council of Trent, and although his original copy,

prepared for the press, with his latest corrections, still

remains buried in the archives at Venice, the whole world knew

that he alone could have written it.



But during all these years, while elaborating opinions on the

weightiest matters of state for the Venetian Senate, and sending

out this series of books which so powerfully influenced the

attitude of his own and after generations toward the Vatican, he

was working with great effect in yet another field. With the

possible exception of Voltaire, he was the most vigorous and

influential letter-writer during the three hundred years which

separated Erasmus from Thomas Jefferson. Voltaire certainly

spread his work over a larger field, lighted it with more wit,

and gained by it more brilliant victories; but as regards

accurate historical knowledge, close acquaintance with statesmen,

familiarity with the best and worst which statesmen could do,

sober judgment and cogent argument, the great Venetian was his

superior. Curiously enough, Sarpi resembles the American

statesman more closely than either of the Europeans. Both he and

Jefferson had the intense practical interest of statesmen, not

only in the welfare of their own countries, but in all the

political and religious problems of their times. Both were keenly

alive to progress in the physical sciences, wherever made. Both

were wont to throw a light veil of humor over very serious

discussions. Both could use, with great effect, curt, caustic

description: Jefferson's letter to Governor Langdon satirizing

the crowned heads of Europe, as he had seen them, has a worthy

pendant in Fra Paolo's pictures of sundry representatives of the

Vatican. In both these writers was a deep earnestness which, at

times, showed itself in prophetic utterances. The amazing

prophecy of Jefferson against American slavery, beginning with

the words, "I tremble when I remember that God is just," which,

in the light of our civil war, seems divinely inspired, is

paralleled by some of Sarpi's utterances against the unmoral

tendencies of Jesuitism and Ultramontanism; and these too seem

divinely inspired as one reads them in the light of what has

happened since in Spain, in Sicily, in Naples, in Poland, in

Ireland, and in sundry South American republics.



The range of Sarpi's friendly relations was amazing. They

embraced statesmen, churchmen, scholars, scientific

investigators, diplomatists in every part of Europe, and among

these Galileo and Lord Bacon, Grotius and Mornay, Salmasius and

Casaubon, De Thou and Sir Henry Wotton, Bishop Bedell and

Vossius, with a great number of others of nearly equal rank.

Unfortunately the greater part of his correspondence has

perished. In the two small volumes collected by Polidori, and in

the small additional volume of letters to Simon Contarini,

Venetian Ambassador at Rome, unearthed a few years since in the

Venetian archives by Castellani, we have all that is known. It is

but a small fraction of his epistolary work, but it enables us to

form a clear opinion. The letters are well worthy of the man who

wrote the history of the Council of Trent and the protest of

Venice against the Interdict.



It is true that there has been derived from these letters, by his

open enemies on one side and his defenders of a rather sickly

conscientious sort on the other, one charge against him: this is

based on his famous declaration, "I utter falsehood never, but

the truth not to every one." ("La falsita non dico mai mai, ma la

verita non a ogniuno.")[1] Considering his vast responsibilities

as a statesman and the terrible dangers which beset him as a

theologian; that in the first of these capacities the least

misstep might wreck the great cause which he supported, and that

in the second such a misstep might easily bring him to the

torture chamber and the stake, normally healthful minds will

doubtless agree that the criticism upon these words is more

Pharisaic than wholesome.





[1] For this famous utterance, see notes of conversations given

by Christoph, Burggraf von Dohna, in July, 1608, in Briefe und

Acten zur Geschichte des Dreissigjahrigen Krieges, Munchen, 1874,

p. 79.





Sarpi was now spoken of, more than ever, both among friends and

foes, as the "terribile frate." Terrible to the main enemies of

Venice he indeed was, and the machinations of his opponents grew

more and more serious. Efforts to assassinate him, to poison him,

to discredit him, to lure him to Rome, or at least within reach

of the Inquisition, became almost frantic; but all in vain. He

still continued his quiet life at the monastery of Santa Fosca,

publishing from time to time discussions of questions important

for Venice and for Europe, working steadily in the public service

until his last hours. In spite of his excommunication and of his

friendships with many of the most earnest Protestants of Europe,

he remained a son of the church in which he was born. His life

was shaped in accordance with its general precepts, and every day

he heard mass. So his career quietly ran on until, in 1623, he

met death calmly, without fear, in full reliance upon the divine

justice and mercy. His last words were a prayer for Venice.



He had fought the good fight. He had won it for Venice and for

humanity. For all this, the Republic had, in his later years,

tried to show her gratitude, and he had quietly and firmly

refused the main gifts proposed to him. But now came a new

outburst of grateful feeling. The Republic sent notice of his

death to other powers of Europe through its Ambassadors in the

terms usual at the death of royal personages; in every way, it

showed its appreciation of his character and services, and it

crowned all by voting him a public monument.



Hardly was the decree known, when the Vatican authorities sent

notice that, should any monument be erected to Sarpi, they would

anew and publicly declare him excommunicate as a heretic. At

this, the Venetian Senate hesitated, waited, delayed. Whenever

afterwards the idea of carrying out the decree for the monument

was revived, there set in a storm of opposition from Rome. Hatred

of the terrible friar's memory seemed to grow more and more

bitter. Even rest in the grave was denied him. The church where

he was buried having been demolished, the question arose as to

the disposition of his bones. To bury them in sacred ground

outside the old convent would arouse a storm of ecclesiastical

hostility, with the certainty of their dispersion and

desecration; it seemed impossible to secure them from priestly

hatred: therefore it was that his friends took them from place to

place, sometimes concealing them in the wall of a church here,

sometimes beneath the pavement of a church there, and for a time

keeping them in a simple wooden box at the Ducal Library. The

place where his remains rested became, to most Venetians,

unknown. All that remained to remind the world of his work was

his portrait in the Ducal Library, showing the great gash made by

the Vatican assassins.



Time went on, and generations came which seemed to forget him.

Still worse, generation after generation came, carefully trained

by clerical teachers to misunderstand and hate him. But these

teachers went too far; for, in 1771, nearly one hundred and fifty

years after his death, the monk Vaerini gathered together, in a

pretended biography, all the scurrilities which could be

imagined, and endeavored to bury the memory of the great patriot

beneath them. This was too much. The old Venetian spirit, which

had so long lain dormant, now asserted itself: Vaerini was

imprisoned and his book suppressed.



A quarter of a century later the Republic fell under the rule of

Austria, and Austria's most time-honored agency in keeping down

subject populations has always been the priesthood. Again Father

Paul's memory was virtually proscribed, and in 1803 another

desperate attempt was made to cover him with infamy. In that year

appeared a book entitled The Secret History of the Life of Fra

Paolo Sarpi, and it contained not only his pretended biography,

but what claimed to be Sarpi's own letters and other documents

showing him to be an adept in scoundrelism and hypocrisy. Its

editor was the archpriest Ferrara of Mantua; but on the

title-page appeared, as the name of its author, Fontanini,

Archbishop of Ancira, a greatly respected prelate who had died

nearly seventy years before, and there was also stamped, not only

upon the preliminary, but upon the final page of the work, the

approval of the Austrian government. To this was added a pious

motto from St. Augustine, and the approval of Pius VII was

distinctly implied, since the work was never placed upon the

Index, and could not have been published at Venice, stamped as it

was and registered with the privileges of the University, without

the consent of the Vatican.



The memory of Father Paul seemed likely now to be overwhelmed.

There was no longer a Republic of Venice to guard the noble

traditions of his life and service. The book was recommended and

spread far and wide by preachers and confessors.



But at last came a day of judgment. The director of the Venetian

archives discovered and had the courage to announce that the work

was a pious fraud of the vilest type; that it was never written

by Fontanini, but that it was simply made up out of the old

scurrilous work of Vaerini, suppressed over thirty years before.

As to the correspondence served up as supplementary to the

biography, it was concocted from letters already published, with

the addition of Jesuitical interpolations and of forgeries.[1]

Now came the inevitable reaction, and with it the inevitable

increase of hatred for Austrian rule and the inevitable question,

how, if the Pope is the infallible teacher of the world in all

matters pertaining to faith and morals, could he virtually

approve this book, and why did he not, by virtue of his divine

inerrancy, detect the fraud and place its condemnation upon the

Index. The only lasting effect of the book, then, was to revive

the memory of Father Paul's great deeds and to arouse Venetian

pride in them. The fearful scar on his face in the portrait spoke

more eloquently than ever, and so it was that, early in the

nineteenth century, many men of influence joined in proposing a

suitable and final interment for the poor bones, which had seven

times been buried and reburied, and which had so long been kept

in the sordid box at the Ducal Library. The one fitting place of

burial was the cemetery of San Michele. To that beautiful island,

so near the heart of Venice, had, for many years, been borne the

remains of leading Venetians. There, too, in more recent days,

have been laid to rest many of other lands widely respected and

beloved.





[1] For a full and fair statement of the researches which exposed

this pious fraud, see Castellani, Prefect of the Library of St.

Mark, preface to his Lettere Inedite di F. P. S., p. xvii. For

methods used in interpolating or modifying passages in Sarpi's

writings, see Bianchi Giovini, Biografia di Sarpi, Zurigo, 1847,

vol. ii. pp. 135, et seq.





But the same persistent hatred which, in our own day, grudged and

delayed due honors at the tombs of Copernicus and Galileo among

Catholics, and of Humboldt among Protestants, was still bitter

against the great Venetian scholar and statesman. It could not be

forgotten that he had wrested from the Vatican the most terrible

of its weapons. But patriotic pride was strong, and finally a

compromise was made: it was arranged that Sarpi should be buried

and honored at his burial as an eminent man of science, and that

no word should be spoken of his main services to the Republic and

to the world. On this condition he was buried with simple honors.



Soon, however, began another chapter of hatred. There came a pope

who added personal to official hostility. Gregory XVI, who in his

earlier days had been abbot of the monastery of San Michele, was

indignant that the friar who had thwarted the papacy should lie

buried in the convent which he himself had formerly ruled, and

this feeling took shape, first, in violent speeches at Rome, and

next, in brutal acts at Venice. The monks broke and removed the

simple stone placed over the remains of Father Paul, and when it

was replaced, they persisted in defacing and breaking it, and

were only prevented from dragging out his bones, dishonoring them

and casting them into the lagoon, by the weight of the massive,

strong, well-anchored sarcophagus, which the wise foresight of

his admirers had provided for them. At three different visits to

Venice, the present writer sought the spot where they were laid,

and in vain. At the second of these visits, he found the

Patriarch of Venice, under whose rule various outrages upon

Sarpi's memory had been perpetrated, pontificating gorgeously

about the Grand Piazza; but at his next visit there had come a

change. The monks had disappeared. Their insults to the

illustrious dead had been stopped by laws which expelled them

from their convent, and there, little removed from each other in

the vestibule and aisle of the great church, were the tombs of

Father Paul and of the late Patriarch side by side; the great

patriot's simple gravestone was now allowed to rest unbroken.



Better even than this was the reaction provoked by these

outbursts of ecclesiastical hatred. It was felt, in Venice,

throughout Italy, and indeed throughout the world, that the old

decree for a monument should now be made good. The first steps

were hesitating. First, a bust of Father Paul was placed among

those of great Venetians in the court of the Ducal Palace; but

the inscription upon it was timid and double-tongued. Another

bust was placed on the Pincian Hill at Rome, among those of the

most renowned sons of Italy. This was not enough: a suitable

monument must be erected. Yet it was delayed, timid men

deprecating the hostility of the Roman Court. At last, under the

new Italian monarchy, the patriotic movement became irresistible,

and the same impulse which erected the splendid statue to

Giordano Bruno on the Piazza dei Fiori at Rome,--on the very spot

where he was burned,--and which adorned it with the medallions of

eight other martyrs to ecclesiastical hatred, erected in 1892,

two hundred and seventy years after it had been decreed, a

statue, hardly less imposing, to Paolo Sarpi, on the Piazza Santa

Fosca at Venice, where he had been left for dead by the Vatican

assassins. There it stands, noble and serene,--a monument of

patriotism and right reason, a worthy tribute to one who, among

intellectual prostitutes and solemnly constituted impostors,

stood forth as a true man, the greatest of his time,--one of the

greatest of all times,--an honor to Venice, to Italy, and to

humanity.                                  Andrew D. White.



*************************************************************



Then came the death of the Empress Frederick. Even during her

tragic struggle with Bismarck, and the unpopularity which beset

her during my former official term at Berlin, she had been kind

to me and mine. At my presentation to her in those days, at

Potsdam, when she stood by the side of her husband, afterward the

most beloved of emperors since Marcus Aurelius, she evidently

exerted herself to make the interview pleasant to me. She talked

of American art and the Colorado pictures of Moran, which she had

seen and admired; of German art and the Madonna painted by Knaus

for the Russian Empress, which Miss Wolfe had given the

Metropolitan Museum at New York; and in reply to my

congratulations upon a recent successful public speech of her

eldest son, a student at Bonn, she had dwelt, in a motherly way,

upon the difficulties which environ a future sovereign at a great

university. In more recent days, and especially during the years

before her death, she had been, at her table in Berlin and at her

castle of Kronberg, especially courteous. There comes back to me

pleasantly a kindly retort of hers. I had spoken to her of a

portrait of George III which had interested me at the old castle

of Homburg nearly forty years before. It had been sent to his

daughter, the Landgravine of Hesse-Homburg, who had evidently

wished to see her father's face as it had really become; for it

represented the King, not in the gold-laced uniform, not in the

trim wig not in the jauntily tied queue of his official portraits

and statues, but as he was: in confinement, wretched and

demented; in a slouching gown, with a face sad beyond expression;

his long, white hair falling about it and over it; of all

portraits in the world, save that, at Florence, of Charles V in

his old age, the saddest. So, the conversation drifting upon

George III and upon the old feeling between the United States and

Great Britain, now so happily changed, I happened to say, "It is

a remembrance of mine, now hard to realize, that I was brought up

to ABHOR the memory of George III." At this she smiled and

answered, "That was very unjust; for I was brought up to ADORE

the memory of Washington." Then she spoke at length regarding the

feeling of her father and mother toward the United States during

our Civil War, saying that again and again she had heard her

father argue to her mother, Queen Victoria, for the Union and

against slavery. She discussed current matters of world politics

with the strength of a statesman; yet nothing could be more

womanly in the highest sense. On my saying that I hoped to see

the day when Germany, Great Britain, and the United States would

stand together in guarding the peace of the world, she threw up

her hands and replied, "Heaven grant it; but you forget Japan."

The funeral at Potsdam dwells in my mind as worthy of her. There

were, indeed, pomp and splendor, but subdued, as was befitting;

and while the foreign representatives stood beside her coffin,

the Emperor spoke to me, very simply and kindly, of his sorrow

and of mine. Then, to the sound of funeral music and muffled

church bells, he, with the King of Great Britain and members of

their immediate family just behind the funeral car, the

ambassadors accompanying them, and a long procession following,

walked slowly along the broad avenue through that beautiful

forest, until, in the Church of Peace, she was laid by the side

of her husband, Emperor Frederick the Noble.







CHAPTER XLIII



BERLIN, YALE, OXFORD, AND ST. ANDREWS--1901-1903



Darkest of all hours during my embassy was that which brought

news of the assassination of President McKinley. It was on the

very day after his great speech at Buffalo had gained for him the

admiration and good will of the world. Then came a week of

anxiety--of hope alternating with fear; I not hopeful: for there

came back to me memories of President Garfield's assassination

during my former official stay in Berlin, and of our hope against

hope during his struggle for life: all brought to naught. Late in

the evening of September 14 came news of the President's

death--opening a new depth of sadness; for I had come not merely

to revere him as a patriot and admire him as a statesman, but to

love him as a man. Few days have seemed more overcast than that

Sunday when, at the little American chapel in Berlin, our colony

held a simple service of mourning, the imperial minister of

foreign affairs and other representatives of the government

having quietly come to us. The feeling of the German people--awe,

sadness, and even sympathy--was real. Formerly they had disliked

and distrusted the President as the author of the protective

policy which had cost their industries so dear; but now, after

his declaration favoring reciprocity,--with his full recognition

of the brotherhood of nations,--and in view of this calamity, so

sudden, so distressing, there had come a revulsion of feeling.



To see one whom I so honored, and who had formerly been so

greatly misrepresented, at last recognized as a great and true

man was, at least, a solace.



At this period came the culmination of a curious episode in my

official career. During the war in China the Chinese minister at

Berlin, Lu-Hai-Houan, feeling himself cut off from relations with

the government to which he was accredited, and, indeed, with all

the other powers of Europe, had come at various times to me, and

with him, fortunately, came his embassy counselor, Dr. Kreyer,

whom I had previously known at Berlin and St. Petersburg as a

thoughtful man, deeply anxious for the welfare of China, and

appreciative of the United States, where he had received his

education. The minister was a kindly old mandarin of high rank,

genial, gentle, evidently struggling hard against the depression

caused by the misfortunes of his country, and seeking some little

light, if, perchance, any was to be obtained. In his visits to

me, and at my return visits to him, the whole condition of things

in China was freely and fully discussed, and never have I exerted

myself more to give useful advice. First, I insisted upon the

necessity of amends for the fearful wrong done by China to other

nations, and then presented my view of the best way of developing

in his country a civilization strong enough to resist hostile

forces, exterior and interior. As to dealings with the Christian

missionaries, against whom he showed no fanatical spirit, but

who, as he thought, had misunderstood China and done much harm, I

sought to show him that the presumption was in their favor, but

that if the Chinese Government ultimately came to the decision

that their stay in China was incompatible with the safety of the

nation, its course was simple: that on no account was it to kill

or injure any of them or of their converts; that while, in my

view, it would be wise to arrange for their continuance in China

under proper regulation, still, that if they must be expelled, it

should be done in the most kindly and considerate way, and with

due indemnity for any losses to which they might be subjected. Of

course, there was no denying that, under the simplest principles

of international law, China has the right at any moment to shut

its doors against, or to expel, any people whatever whom it may

consider dangerous or injurious--this power being constantly

exercised by all the other nations of the earth, and by none more

than by the American Government, as so many Chinese seeking

entrance to our ports have discovered; but again and again I

warned him that this, if it were ever done at all, must be done

without harshness and with proper indemnities, and that any

return to the cruelties of the past would probably end in the

dividing up of maritime China among the great powers of the

world. As to the building up of the nation, I laid stress on the

establishment of institutions for technical instruction; and took

pains to call his attention to what had been done in the United

States and by various European governments in this respect. He

seemed favorably impressed by this, but dwelt on what he

considered the fanaticism of sundry Chinese supporters of

technical education against the old Chinese classical

instruction. Here I suggested to him a system which might save

what was good in the old mode of instruction: namely, the

continuance of the best of the old classical training, but giving

also high rank to modern studies.



We also talked over the beginning of a better development of the

Chinese army and navy, of better systems of taxation, and of the

nations from which good examples and competent instruction might

be drawn in these various fields. Curious was his suggestion of a

possible amalgamation of Chinese moral views with the religious

creeds of the western world. He observed that Christianity seemed

to be weak, mainly, on the moral side, and he suggested, at some

length, a combination of the Christian religion with the

Confucian morality. Interesting was it to hear him, as a

Confucian, dwell on the services which might thus be rendered to

civilization. There was a simple, kindly shrewdness in the man,

and a personal dignity which was proof against the terrible

misfortunes which had beset his country. Again and again he

visited me, always wishing to discuss some new phase of the

questions at issue. I could only hope that, as he was about to

return to China, some of the ideas brought out in our

conversations might prove fruitful. One result of the relation

thus formed was that when Prince Chun, the brother of the Emperor

of China, came to make apology before the throne of the Emperor

William, he called upon me. Unfortunately I was out, but,

returning his visit, I met him, and, what was more to the

purpose, the dignitaries of his suite, some of whom interested me

much; and I was glad of a chance, through them, to impress some

of the ideas brought out in my previous conversations with the

minister. I cannot say that I indulged in any strong hopes as

regards the prince himself; but, noting the counselors who

surrounded him, and their handling of the questions at issue, I

formed more hope for the conservation of China as a great and

beneficent power than I had ever had before.



To this succeeded an episode of a very different sort. For some

time Mr. Andrew Carnegie had done me the honor to listen to

advice of mine regarding some of his intended benefactions in

Scotland, the United States, and elsewhere. I saw and felt the

great possibilities for good involved when so noble a heart, so

shrewd a head, so generous a hand had command of one of the most

colossal fortunes ever at the disposal of a human being; and the

bright purposes and plans revealed in his letters shone through

the clouds of that mournful summer. So it was that, on my journey

to America, made necessary by the sudden death of my son, I

accepted Mr. Carnegie's invitation to visit him at his castle of

Skibo in the extreme north of Scotland. Very striking, during the

two days' journey from London to Edinburgh, and from Edinburgh to

Bonar, were the evidences of mourning for President McKinley in

every city, village, and hamlet. It seemed natural that, in the

large towns and on great public buildings, flags at half-mast and

in mourning should show a sense of the calamity which had

befallen a sister nation; but what appealed to me most were the

draped and half-masted flags on the towers of the little country

churches and cottages. Never before in the history of any two

countries had such evidences of brotherly feeling been shown.

Thank God! brotherly feeling had conquered demagogism.



The visit to Mr. Carnegie helped to give a new current to my

thoughts. The attractions of his wonderful domain forty thousand

acres, with every variety of scenery,--ocean, forest, moor, and

mountain,--the household with its quaint Scotch usages--the piper

in full tartan solemnly going his rounds at dawn, and the music

of the organ swelling, morning and evening, through the castle

from the great hall--all helped to give me new strength. There

was also good company: Frederic Harrison, thoughtful and

brilliant, whom I had before known only by his books and a brief

correspondence; Archdeacon Sinclair of London, worthy, by his

scholarly accomplishments, of his descent from the friend of

Washington; and others who did much to aid our hosts in making

life at the castle beautiful. Going thence to America, I found

time to cooperate with my old friend, President Gilman, in

securing data for Mr. Carnegie, especially at Washington, in view

of his plan of a national institution for the higher scientific

research.



It was a sad home-coming; but these occupations and especially a

visit to New Haven at the bicentennial celebration of Yale aided

to cheer me. This last was indeed a noteworthy commemoration.

There had come to me, in connection with it, perhaps the greatest

honor of my life: an invitation to deliver one of the main

addresses; but it had been received at the time of my deepest

depression, and I had declined it, but with no less gratitude

that the authorities of my Alma Mater had thought me worthy of

that service. In so doing, I sacrificed much; for there was one

subject which, under other circumstances, I would gladly have

developed at such a time and before such an audience. But as I

listened to the admirable address given by my old college mate,

Mr. Justice Brewer, when the honors of the university were

conferred upon the President, the Secretary of State, and so many

distinguished representatives from all parts of the world, it was

a satisfaction to me, after all, that I could enjoy it quietly,

with no sense of responsibility, and could, indeed, rest and be

thankful.



As to my own personal history, there came at this time an event

which could not but please me: the Royal Academy of Sciences at

Berlin chose me as one of its foreign honorary members. It was a

tribute of the sort for which I cared most, especially because it

brought me into closer relations with leaders in science and

literature whom I had so long admired.



To finish the chronicle of that period, I may add that, on my

return from America, being invited to Potsdam for the purpose, I

gave the Emperor the very hearty message which the President had

sent him, and that, during this interview and the family dinner

which followed it, he spoke most appreciatively and intelligently

of the President, of the recent victory for good government in

the city of New York, of the skill shown by Americans in great

works of public utility, and especially of the remarkable

advances in the development of our navy.



One part of this conversation had a lighter cast. At the close of

that portion of the communication from the President which

referred to various public affairs came a characteristic touch in

the shape of an invitation to hunt in the Rocky Mountain regions:

it was the simple message of one healthy, hearty, vigorous hunter

to another, and was to the effect that the President especially

envied the Emperor for having shot a whale, but that if his

Majesty would come to America he should have the best possible

opportunity to add to his trophies a Rocky Mountain lion, and

that he would thus be the first monarch to kill a lion since

Tiglath-Pileser, whose exploit is shown on the old monuments of

Assyria. The hearty way in which the message was received showed

that it would have been gladly accepted had that been possible.



On New Year's day of 1902 began the sixth year of my official

stay at Berlin. At his reception of the ambassadors the Emperor

was very cordial, spoke most heartily regarding President

Roosevelt, and asked me to forward his request that the

President's daughter might be allowed to christen the imperial

yacht then building in America. In due time this request was

granted, and as the special representative of the sovereign at

its launching he named his brother--Prince Henry. No man in the

empire could have been more fitly chosen. His career as chief

admiral of the German navy had prepared him to profit by such a

journey, and his winning manners assured him a hearty welcome.



My more serious duties were now relieved by sundry festivities,

and of these was a dinner on the night of the prince's departure

from Berlin, given to the American Embassy by the Emperor, who

justly hoped and believed that the proposed expedition would

strengthen good feeling between the two countries. After dinner

we all sat in the smoking-room of the old Schloss until midnight,

and various pleasant features of the conversation dwell in my

memory--particularly the Emperor's discussions of Mark Twain and

other American humorists; but perhaps the most curious was his

amusement over a cutting from an American newspaper--a printed

recipe for an American concoction known as "Hohenzollern punch,"

said to be in readiness for the prince on his arrival. The number

of intoxicants, and the ingenuity of their combination, as his

Majesty read the list aloud, were amazing; it was a terrific

brew, which only a very tough seaman could expect to survive.



But as we all took leave of the prince at the station afterward,

there were in my heart and mind serious misgivings. I knew well

that, though the great mass of the American people were sure to

give him a hearty welcome, there were scattered along his route

many fanatics, and, most virulent of all, those who had just then

been angered by the doings of sundry Prussian underlings in

Poland. I must confess to uneasiness during his whole stay in

America, and among the bright days of my life was that on which

the news came that he was on board a German liner and on his

return.



One feature of that evening is perhaps more worthy of record.

After the departure of the prince, the Emperor's conversation

took a more serious turn, and as we walked toward his carriage he

said, "My brother's mission has no political character whatever,

save in one contingency: If the efforts made in certain parts of

Europe to show that the German Government sought to bring about a

European combination against the United States during your

Spanish war are persisted in, I have authorized him to lay before

the President certain papers which will put that slander at rest

forever." As it turned out, there was little need of this, since

the course both of the Emperor and his government was otherwise

amply vindicated.



The main matter of public business during the first months of the

year was the Russian occupation of Manchuria, regarding which our

government took a very earnest part, instructing me to press the

matter upon the attention of the German Government, and to follow

it up with especial care. Besides this, it was my duty to urge a

fitting representation of Germany at the approaching St. Louis

Exposition. Regarding this there were difficulties. The Germans

very generally avowed themselves exposition-weary

(Ausstellungsmude); and no wonder, for exposition had succeeded

exposition, now in this country, now in that, and then in various

American cities, each anxious to outdo the other, until all

foreign governments were well-nigh tired out. But the St. Louis

Exposition encountered an adverse feeling much more serious than

any caused by fatigue,--the American system of high protection

having led the Germans to distrust all our expositions, whether

at New Orleans, Chicago, Buffalo, or St. Louis, and to feel that

there was really nothing in these for Germany; that, in fact,

German manufacturing interests would be better served by avoiding

them than by taking part in them. Still, by earnest presentation

of the matter at the Foreign Office and to the Emperor, I was

able to secure a promise that German art should be well

represented.



In March, a lull having come in public business as well as in

social duty, I started on my usual excursion to Italy, its most

interesting feature being my sixth stay in Venice. Ten days in

that fascinating city were almost entirely devoted to increasing

my knowledge of Fra Paolo Sarpi. Various previous visits had

familiarized me with the main events in his wonderful career; but

I now met with two pieces of especially good fortune. First, I

made the acquaintance of the Rev. Dr. Alexander Robertson, an

ardent admirer of Father Paul, and author of an excellent

biography of him; and, next, I was able to add to my own material

a mass of rare books and manuscripts relating to the great

Venetian. Most interesting was my visit, in company with Dr.

Robertson, to the remains of Father Paul's old monastery, where

we found what no one, up to our time, seems to have

discovered--the little door which the Venetian Senate caused to

be made in the walls of the monastery garden, at Father Paul's

request, in order that he might reach his gondola at once, and

not be again exposed to assassins like those sent by Pope Paul V,

who had attacked him and left him, to all appearances dead, in

the little street near the monastery.



Returning to Berlin, the usual round of duty was resumed; but

there seems nothing worthy to be chronicled, save possibly the

visit of the Shah of Persia and the Crown Prince of Siam. Both

were seen in all their glory at the gala opera given in their

honor; but the Persian ruler appeared to little advantage, for he

was obliged to retire before the close of the representation. He

was evidently prematurely old and worn out. The feature of this

social function which especially dwells in my memory was a very

interesting talk with the Emperor regarding the kindness shown

his brother by the American people, at the close of which he

presented me to his guest, the Crown Princess of Saxony. She was

especially kindly and pleasing, discussing various topics with

heartiness and simplicity; and it was a vast surprise to me when,

a few months later, she became the heroine of perhaps the most

astonishing escapade in the modern history of royalty.



As to matters of business, there came one which especially

rejoiced me. Mr. Carnegie having established the institution for

research which bears his name at Washington, with an endowment of

ten million dollars, and named me among the trustees, my old

friend Dr. Gilman had later been chosen President of the new

institution, and now arrived in Berlin to study the best that

Germans were doing as regards research in science. Our excursions

to various institutions interested me greatly; both the men we

met and things we saw were full of instruction to us, and of all

public duties I have had to discharge, I recall none with more

profit and pleasure. One thing in this matter struck me as never

before--the quiet wisdom and foresight with which the various

German governments prepare to profit by the best which science

can be made to yield them in every field.



Upon these duties followed others of a very different sort. On

the 19th of June died King Albert of Saxony, and in view of his

high character and of the many kindnesses he had shown to

Americans, I was instructed to attend his funeral at Dresden as a

special representative of the President. The whole ceremonial was

interesting; there being in it not only a survival of various

mediaeval procedures, but many elements of solemnity and beauty;

and the funeral, which took place at the court church in the

evening, was especially impressive. Before the high altar stood

the catafalque; in front of it, the crown, scepter, orb, and

other emblems of royalty; and at its summit, the coffin

containing the body of the King. Around this structure were

ranged lines of soldiers and pages in picturesque uniforms and

bearing torches. Facing these were the seats for the majesties,

including the new King, who had at his right the Emperor of

Austria, and at his left the German Emperor, while next these

were the seats of foreign ambassadors and other representatives.

Of all present, the one who seemed least in accord with his

surroundings was the nephew of the old and the son of the new

King, Prince Max, who was dressed simply as a priest, his plain

black gown in striking contrast with the gorgeous uniforms of the

other princes immediately about him. The only disconcerting

feature was the sermon. It was given by one of the priests

attached to the court church, and he evidently considered this an

occasion to be made much of; for instead of fifteen minutes, as

had been expected, his sermon lasted an hour and twenty minutes,

much to the discomfort of the crowd of officials, who were

obliged to remain standing from beginning to end, and especially

to the chagrin of the two Emperors, whose special trains and

time-tables, as well as the railway arrangements for the general

public, were thereby seriously deranged.



But all fatigues were compensated by the music. The court choir

of Dresden is famous, and for this occasion splendid additions

had been made both to it and to the orchestra; nothing in its way

could be more impressive, and as a climax came the last honors to

the departed King, when, amid the music of an especially

beautiful chorus, the booming of artillery in the neighboring

square, and the tolling of the bells of the city on all sides,

the royal coffin slowly sank into the vaults below.



On the following morning I was received by the new King. He

seemed a man of sound sense, and likely to make a good

constitutional sovereign. Our talk was simply upon the relations

of the two countries, during which I took pains to bespeak for my

countrymen sojourning at Dresden the same kindnesses which the

deceased King had shown them.



During the summer a study of some of the most important

industries at the Dusseldorf Exposition proved useful; but

somewhat later other excursions had a more direct personal

interest; for within a few hours of each other came two

unexpected communications: one from the president of Yale

University, commissioning me to represent my Alma Mater at the

tercentenary of the Bodleian at Oxford; the other from the

University of St. Andrews, inviting me to the installation of Mr.

Andrew Carnegie as lord rector of that institution; and both

these I accepted.



The celebration at Oxford was in every way interesting to me; but

I may say frankly that of all things which gave me pleasure, the

foremost was the speech of presentation, in the Sheldonian

Theatre, when the doctorate of civil law was conferred upon me.

The first feature in this speech, assigning the reasons for

conferring the degree, was a most kindly reference to my part in

establishing the Arbitration Tribunal at the International

Conference of The Hague; and this, of course, was gratifying. But

the second half of the speech touched me more nearly; for it was

a friendly appreciation of my book regarding the historical

relations between science and theology in Christendom. This was a

surprise indeed! Years before, when writing this book, I had said

to myself, "This ends all prospect of friendly recognition of any

work I may ever do, so far as the universities and academies of

the world are concerned. But so be it; what I believe I will

say." And now, suddenly, unexpectedly, came recognition and

commendation in that great and ancient center of religious

thought and sentiment, once so reactionary, where, within my

memory, even a man like Edward Everett was harshly treated for

his inability to accept the shibboleths of orthodoxy.



This reviving of old and beginning of new friendships, with the

hearty hospitality lavished upon us from all sides, left

delightful remembrances. Several times, during the previous fifty

years, I had visited Oxford and been cordially welcomed; but this

greeting surpassed all others.



There was, indeed, one slight mishap. Being called upon to speak

in behalf of the guests at the great dinner in Christ Church

Hall, I endeavored to make a point which I thought new and

perhaps usefully suggestive. Having referred to the increasing

number of international congresses, expositions, conferences,

academic commemorations, anniversaries, and the like, I dwelt

briefly on their agency in generating friendships between men of

influence in different countries, and therefore in maintaining

international good will; and then especially urged, as the pith

and point of my speech, that such agencies had recently been made

potent for peace as never before. In support of this view, I

called attention to the fact that the Peace Conference at The

Hague had not only established an arbitration tribunal for

PREVENTING war, but had gained the adhesion of all nations

concerned to a number of arrangements, such as international

"Commissions of Inquiry," the system of "Seconding Powers," and

the like, for DELAYING war, thus securing time during which

better international feelings could assert themselves, and

reasonable men on either side could work together to bring in the

sober second thought; that thereby the friendships promoted by

these international festivities had been given, as never before,

time to assert themselves as an effective force for peace against

jingo orators, yellow presses, and hot-heads generally; and

finally, in view of this increased efficiency of such gatherings

in promoting peace, I urged that they might well be multiplied on

both sides of the Atlantic, and that as many delegates as

possible should be sent to them.



"A poor thing, but mine own." Alas! next day, in the press, I was

reported as simply uttering the truism that such gatherings

increase the peaceful feeling of nations; and so the main point

of my little speech was lost. But it was a slight matter, and of

all my visits to Oxford, this will remain in my memory as the

most delightful.[7]





[7] The full speech has since been published in the "Yale Alumni

Weekly."





The visit to St. Andrews was also happy. After the principal of

the university had conferred the doctorate of laws upon several

of the guests, including Mr. Choate, the American ambassador at

London, and myself, Mr. Carnegie gave his rectorial address. It

was decidedly original, its main feature being an argument in

behalf of a friendly union of the United States and Great Britain

in their political and commercial policy, and for a similar union

between the Continental European nations for the protection of

their industries and for the promotion of universal peace, with a

summons to the German Emperor to put himself at the head of the

latter. It was prepared with skill and delivered with force. Very

amusing were the attempts of the great body of students to throw

the speaker off his guard by comments, questions, and chaff. I

learned later that, more than once, orators has thus been

entrapped or entangled, and that on one occasion an address had

been completely wrecked by such interruptions; but Mr. Carnegie's

Scotch-Yankee wit carried him through triumphantly: he met all

these efforts with equanimity and good humor, and soon had the

audience completely on his side.



Returning to Berlin, there came preparations for closing my

connection with the embassy. I had long before decided that on my

seventieth birthday I would cease to hold any official position

whatever. Pursuant to that resolution, my resignation had been

sent to the President, with the statement that it must be

considered final. In return came the kindest possible letters

from him and from the Secretary of State; both of them

attributing a value to my services much beyond anything I would

dare claim.



On my birthday came a new outburst of kindness. From all parts of

Europe and America arrived letters and telegrams, while from the

Americans in various parts of Germany--especially from the Berlin

colony--came a superbly engrossed address, and with it a

succession of kindly visitors representing all ranks in Berlin

society. One or two of these testimonials I may be pardoned for

especially mentioning. Some time after the letter from President

Roosevelt above mentioned, there had come from him a second

epistle, containing a sealed envelop on which were inscribed the

words: "To be opened on your seventieth birthday." Being duly

opened on the morning of that day, it was found to be even more

heartily appreciative than his former letter, and the same was

found to be true of a second letter by the Secretary of State,

Mr. Hay; so that I add these to the treasures to be handed down

to my grandchildren.



Shortly afterward came a letter from the chancellor of the

empire, most kindly appreciative. It will be placed, with those

above referred to, at the close of this chapter.



Especially noteworthy also was the farewell dinner given me at

the Kaiserhof by the German-American Association. Never had I

seen so many Germans eminent in politics, diplomacy, literature,

science, art, education, and commerce assembled on any single

occasion. Hearty speeches were made by the minister of the

interior, Count Posadowsky, who presided, and by Professor

Harnack of the university, who had been selected to present the

congratulations of my entertainers. I replied at length, and as

in previous speeches during my career, both as minister and

ambassador, I had endeavored to present to my countrymen at home

and abroad the claims of Germany upon American good will, I now

endeavored to reveal to the great body of thinking Germans some

of the deeper characteristics and qualities of the American

people; my purpose being in this, as in previous speeches, to

bring about a better understanding between the two nations.



The Emperor being absent in England, my departure from Berlin was

delayed somewhat beyond the time I had fixed; but on the 27th of

November came my final day in office. In the morning my wife and

myself were received in special audience by both the sovereigns,

who afterward welcomed us at their table. Both showed unaffected

cordiality. The Emperor discussed with me various interesting

questions in a most friendly spirit, and, on my taking leave,

placed in my hands what is known as the "Great Gold Medal for Art

and Science," saying that he did this at the request of his

advisers in those fields, and adding assurances of his own which

greatly increased the value of the gift. Later in the day came a

superb vase from the royal manufactory of porcelain, bearing his

portrait and cipher, as a token of personal good will.



On the same evening was the American Thanksgiving dinner, with

farewells to and from the American colony, and during the

following days farewell gatherings at the houses of the dean of

the ambassadors, the secretary of state for foreign affairs, and

the chancellor of the empire; finally, on the evening of December

5, with hearty good-byes at the station from a great concourse of

my diplomatic colleagues and other old friends, we left Berlin.



Our first settlement was at a pretty villa at Alassio, on the

Italian Riviera; and here, in March, 1903, looking over my

garden, a mass of bloom, shaded by palms and orange-trees in full

bearing, and upon the Mediterranean beyond, I settled down to

record these recollections of my life--making excursions now and

then into interesting parts of Italy.



As to these later journeys, one, being out of the beaten track,

may be worth mentioning. It was an excursion in the islands of

Elba and Corsica. Though anything but a devotee of Napoleon, I

could not but be interested in that little empire of his on the

Italian coast, and especially in the town house, country-seat,

and garden where he planned the return to Europe which led to the

final catastrophe.



More interesting still was the visit to Corsica and, especially,

to Ajaccio. There the traveler stands before the altar where

Napoleon's father and mother were married, at the font where he

was baptized, in the rooms where he was born, played with his

brothers during his boyhood, and developed various scoundrelisms

during his young manhood: the furniture and surroundings being as

they were when he knew them.



Just around the corner from the house in which the Bonapartes

lived was the more stately residence of the more aristocratic

family of Pozzo di Borgo. It interested me as the nest in which

was reared that early playmate and rival of Napoleon, who

afterward became his most virulent, persistent, and successful

enemy, who pursued him through his whole career as a hound

pursues a wolf, and who at last aided most effectively in

bringing him down.



After exhausting the attractions of Ajaccio, we drove up a broad,

well-paved avenue, gradually rising and curving until, at a

distance of six or seven miles, it ended at the country-seat of

this same family of Pozzo di Borgo, far up among the mountains.

There, on a plateau commanding an amazing view, and in the midst

of a superb park, we found the rural retreat of the family; but,

to our surprise, not a castle, not a villa, not like any other

building for a similar purpose in Italy or anywhere else in the

world, but a Parisian town house, recently erected in the style

of the Valois period, with Mansard roof. As we approached it, I

was struck by architectural details even more at variance with

the surroundings than was the general style of the building: all

its exterior decoration presenting the features of a pavilion

from the old Tuileries at Paris; and in the garden hard by we

found battered and blackened fragments of pilasters, shown by the

emblems and ciphers upon them to have come from that part of the

Tuileries once inhabited by Napoleon. The family being absent, we

were allowed to roam through the house, and there found the

statues, paintings, tapestries, books, and papers of Napoleon's

arch-enemy, the great Pozzo di Borgo himself, all of them more or

less connected with the great struggle. There, too, in the

library were collected the decorations bestowed upon him by all

the sovereigns of Europe for his successful zeal in hunting down

the common enemy--"the Corsican Ogre." The palace, inside and

out, is a monument to the most famous of Corsican vendettas.



My two winters at Alassio after leaving Berlin, though filled

with deferred work, were restful. During a visit to America in

1903, I joined my class at Yale in celebrating its fiftieth

anniversary, giving there a public address entitled "A Patriotic

Investment." The main purpose of this address was to promote the

establishment of Professorships of Comparative Legislation in our

leading universities. I could not think then, and cannot think

now, of any endowment likely to be more speedily and happily

fruitful in good to the whole country. In the spring of 1904 I

returned to my old house on the grounds of Cornell University,

and there, with my family, old associates, and new friends about

me, have devoted myself to various matters long delayed, and

especially to writing sundry articles in the "Atlantic Monthly,"

the "Century Magazine," and various other periodicals, and to the

discharge of my duties as a Trustee of Cornell and as a Regent of

the Smithsonian Institution and a Trustee of the Carnegie

Institution at Washington. It is, of course, the last of my life,

but I count myself happy in living to see so much of good

accomplished and so much promise of good in every worthy field of

human effort throughout our country and indeed throughout the

world.



Following are the letters referred to in this chapter.



FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

WHITE HOUSE,

WASHINGTON.                                    



OYSTER BAY, NEW YORK,

                                    August 5, 1902. 

MY DEAR AMBASSADOR WHITE:



It is with real regret that I accept your resignation, for I

speak what is merely a self-evident truth when I say that we

shall have to look with some apprehension to what your successor

does, whoever that successor may be, lest he fall short of the

standard you have set.



It is a very great thing for a man to be able to feel, as you

will feel when on your seventieth birthday you prepare to leave

the Embassy, that you have been able to serve your country as it

has been served by but a very limited number of people in your

generation. You have done much for it in word and in deed. You

have adhered to a lofty ideal and yet have been absolutely

practical and, therefore, efficient, so that you are a perpetual

example to young men how to avoid alike the Scylla of

indifference and the Charybdis of efficiency for the wrong....



With regards and warm respect and admiration,                     

         Faithfully yours,

                     (Signed) THEODORE ROOSEVELT. 



HON. ANDREW D. WHITE,

      Ambassador to Germany,

           Berlin, Germany.





WHITE HOUSE,

WASHINGTON. 



OYSTER BAY, NEW YORK,                                        

September 15, 1902



MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR:



Will you read the inclosed on your seventieth birthday? I have

sealed it so you can break the seal then.                         

Faithfully yours,                     

(Signed) THEODORE ROOSEVELT.



HON. ANDREW D. WHITE,

      U. S. Ambassador,

           Berlin, Germany.







WHITE HOUSE,

WASHINGTON.                                    



OYSTER BAY,                                         

September 15, 1902.



MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR:



On the day you open this you will be seventy years old. I cannot

forbear writing you a line to express the obligation which all

the American people are under to you. As a diplomat you have come

in that class whose foremost exponents are Benjamin Franklin and

Charles Francis Adams, and which numbers also in its ranks men

like Morris, Livingston, and Pinckney. As a politician, as a

publicist, and as a college president you have served your

country as only a limited number of men are able to serve it. You

have taught by precept, and you have taught by practice. We are

all of us better because you have lived and worked, and I send

you now not merely my warmest well-wishes and congratulations,

but thanks from all our people for all that you have done for us

in the past.                     Faithfully yours,                

         (Signed) THEODORE ROOSEVELT. 



HON. ANDREW D. WHITE,

      U. S. Ambassador,

           Berlin, Germany.







FROM THE SECRETARY OF STATE.                                      

NEWBURY, N. H.,                                         



August 3, 1902.



DEAR MR. WHITE:



I have received your very kind letter of the 21st July, which is

the first intimation I have had of your intention to resign your

post of ambassador to Germany. I am sorry to hear the country is

to lose your services in the place you have filled with such

distinguished ability and dignity. It is a great thing to say--as

it is simple truth to say it--that you have, during your

residence in Berlin, increased the respect felt for America not

only in Germany but in all Europe. You have thus rendered a great

public service,--independent of all the details of your valuable

work. The man is indeed fortunate who can go through a long

career without blame, and how much more fortunate if he adds

great achievement to blamelessness. You have the singular

felicity of having been always a fighting man, and having gone

through life without a wound.



I congratulate you most on your physical and mental ability to

enjoy the rest you have chosen and earned....



My wife joins me in cordial regards to Mrs. White, and I am

always,      

            

Faithfully yours,                               

(Signed) JOHN HAY.





DEPARTMENT OF STATE,

WASHINGTON,



November 7, 1902.



DEAR MR. WHITE:



I cannot let the day pass without sending you a word of cordial

congratulation on the beginning of what I hope will be the most

delightful part of your life. Browning long ago sang, "The best

is yet to be," and, certainly, if world-wide fame troops of

friends, a consciousness of well-spent years, and a great career

filled with righteous achievement are constituents of happiness,

you have everything that the heart of man could wish.             

       Yours faithfully,                     

(Signed) JOHN HAY.  



His Excellency ANDREW D. WHITE, etc., etc., etc.





FROM THE CHANCELLOR OF THE GERMAN EMPIRE.

                               Wilhelm Str. 77.



MY DEAR AMBASSADOR:



On the occasion of this memorable day, I beg to send you my best

wishes. May God grant you perfect health and happiness. Be

assured that I always shall remember the excellent relations

which have joined us during so many years, and accept the

assurance of the highest esteem and respect of your most

affectionate                                         

BULOW. 

7 Nov. 1902.







CHAPTER XLIV



MY RECOLLECTIONS OF WILLIAM II--1879-1903



At various times since my leaving the Berlin Embassy various

friends have said to me, "Why not give us something definite

regarding the German Emperor?" And on my pleading sundry

difficulties and objections, some of my advisers have recalled

many excellent precedents, both American and foreign, and others

have cited the dictum, "The man I don't like is the man I don't

know."



The latter argument has some force with me. Much ill feeling

between the United States and Germany has had its root in

misunderstandings; and, as one of the things nearest my heart

since my student days has been a closer moral and intellectual

relation between the two countries, there is, perhaps, a reason

for throwing into these misunderstandings some light from my own

experience.



My first recollections of the present Emperor date from the

beginning of my stay as minister at Berlin, in 1879. The official

presentations to the Emperor and Empress of that period having

been made, there came in regular order those to the crown prince

and princess, and on my way to them there fell into my hands a

newspaper account of the unveiling of the monument to the eminent

painter Cornelius, at Dusseldorf, the main personage in the

ceremony being the young Prince William, then a student at Bonn.

His speech was given at some length, and it impressed me. There

was a certain reality of conviction and aspiration in it which

seemed to me so radically different from the perfunctory

utterances usual on such occasions that, at the close of the

official interview with his father and mother, I alluded to it.

Their response touched me. There came at once a kindly smile upon

the father's face, and a glad sparkle into the mother's eyes:

pleasing was it to hear her, while showing satisfaction and

pride, speak of her anxiety before the good news came, and of the

embarrassments in the way of her son at his first public address

on an occasion of such importance; no less pleasing was it to

note the father's happy acquiescence: there was in it all a

revelation of simple home feeling and of wholesome home ties

which clearly indicated something different from the family

relations in sundry royal houses depicted by court chroniclers.



Not long afterward the young prince appeared at some of the court

festivities, and I had many opportunities to observe him. He

seemed sprightly, with a certain exuberance of manner in meeting

his friends which was not unpleasing; but it was noticeable that

his hearty salutations were by no means confined to men and women

of his own age; he was respectful to old men, and that is always

a good sign; it could be easily seen, too, that while he

especially sought the celebrities of the Franco-Prussian War, he

took pains to show respect to men eminent in science, literature,

and art. There seemed a healthy, hearty life in him well

befitting a young man of his position and prospects: very

different was he from the heir to the throne in another country,

whom I had occasion to observe at similar functions, and who

seemed to regard the whole human race with indifference.



Making the usual visits in Berlin society, I found that people

qualified to judge had a good opinion of his abilities; and not

infrequent were prophecies that the young man would some day

really accomplish something.



My first opportunity to converse with him came at his marriage,

when a special reception was given by him and his bride to the

diplomatic corps. He spoke at considerable length on American

topics--on railways, steamers, public works, on Americans whom he

had met, and of the things he most wished to see on our side the

water; altogether he seemed to be broad-minded, alert, with a

quick sense of humor, and yet with a certain solidity of judgment

beneath it all.



After my departure from Berlin there flitted over to America

conflicting accounts of him, and during the short reign of his

father there was considerable growth of myth and legend to his

disadvantage. Any attempt to distil the truth from it all would

be futile; suffice it that both in Germany and Great Britain

careful statements by excellent authorities on both sides have

convinced me that in all that trying crisis the young man's

course was dictated by a manly sense of duty.



The first thing after his accession which really struck me as a

revelation of his character was his dismissal of Bismarck. By

vast numbers of people this was thought the act of an exultant

young ruler eager to escape all restraint, and this opinion was

considerably promoted in English-speaking countries by an

ephemeral cause: Tenniel's cartoon in "Punch" entitled "Dropping

the Pilot." As most people who read this will remember, the iron

chancellor was therein represented as an old, weatherbeaten

pilot, in storm-coat and sou'wester, plodding heavily down the

gangway at the side of a great ship; while far above him, leaning

over the bulwarks, was the young Emperor, jaunty, with a

satisfied smirk, and wearing his crown. There was in that little

drawing a spark of genius, and it sped far; probably no other

cartoon in "Punch" ever produced so deep an effect, save,

possibly, that which appeared during the Crimean War with the

legend "General February turned Traitor"; it went everywhere,

appealing to deep sentiment in human hearts.



And yet, to me--admiring Bismarck as the greatest German since

Luther, but reflecting upon the vast interests involved--this act

was a proof that the young monarch was a stronger man than any

one had supposed him to be. Certainly this dismissal must have

caused him much regret; all his previous life had shown that he

admired Bismarck--almost adored him. It gave evidence of a deep

purpose and a strong will. Louis XIV had gained great credit

after the death of Mazarin by declaring his intention of ruling

alone--of taking into his own hands the vast work begun by

Richelieu; but that was the merest nothing compared to this. This

was, apparently, as if Louis XIII, immediately after the triumphs

of Richelieu, had dismissed him and declared his purpose of

henceforth being his own prime minister. The young Emperor had

found himself at the parting of the ways, and had deliberately

chosen the right path, and this in spite of almost universal

outcries at home and abroad. The OLD Emperor William could let

Bismarck have his way to any extent: when his chancellor sulked

he could drive to the palace in the Wilhelmstrasse, pat his old

servant on the back, chaff him, scold him, laugh at him, and set

him going again, and no one thought less of the old monarch on

that account. But for the YOUNG Emperor William to do this would

be fatal; it would class him at once among the rois

fatneants--the mere figureheads--"the solemnly constituted

impostors," and in this lay not merely dangers to the young

monarch, but to his dynasty and to the empire.



His recognition of this fact was, and is, to me a proof that the

favorable judgments of him which I had heard expressed in Berlin

were well founded.



But this decision did much to render him unpopular in the United

States, and various other reports which flitted over increased

the unfavorable feeling. There came reports of his speeches to

young recruits, in which, to put it mildly, there was preached a

very high theory of the royal and imperial prerogative, and a

very exacting theory of the duty of the subject. Little account

was taken by distant observers of the fundamental facts in the

case; namely, that Germany, being a nation with no natural

frontiers, with hostile military nations on all sides, and with

serious intestine tendencies to anarchy, must, if she is to live,

have the best possible military organization and a central power

strong to curb all the forces of the empire, and quick to hurl

them. Moreover, these speeches, which seemed so absurd to the

average American, hardly astonished any one who had lived long in

Germany, and especially in Prussia. The doctrines laid down by

the young monarch to the recruits were, after all, only what they

had heard a thousand times from pulpit and school desk, and are a

logical result of Prussian history and geography. Something, too,

must be allowed to a young man gifted, energetic, suddenly

brought into so responsible a position, looking into and beyond

his empire, seeing hostile nations north, south, east, and west,

with elements of unreason fermenting within its own borders, and

feeling that the only reliance of his country is in the good

right arms of its people, in their power of striking heavily and

quickly, and in unquestioning obedience to authority.



In the history of American opinion at this time there was one

comical episode. The strongholds of opinion among us friendly to

Germany have been, for the last sixty years, our universities and

colleges, in so many of which are professors and tutors who,

having studied in Germany, have brought back a certain love for

the German fatherland. To them there came in those days a curious

tractate by a little-known German professor--one of the most

curious satires in human history. To all appearance it was simply

a biographical study of the young Roman emperor Caligula. It

displayed the advantages he had derived from a brave and pious

imperial ancestry, and especially from his devout and gifted

father; it showed his natural gifts and acquired graces, his

versatility, his growing restlessness, his manifold ambitions,

his contempt of wise counsel, the dismissal of his most eminent

minister, his carelessness of thoughtful opinion, his meddling in

anything and everything, his displays in the theater and in the

temples of the gods, his growth--until the world recognized him

simply as a beast of prey, a monster. The whole narrative was so

managed that the young prince who had just come to the German

throne seemed the exact counterpart of the youthful Roman

monarch--down to the cruel stage of his career; THAT was left to

anticipation. The parallels and resemblances between the two were

arranged with consummate skill, and whenever there was a passage

which seemed to present an exact chronicle of some well-known

saying or doing of the modern ruler there would follow an

asterisk with a reference to a passage in Tacitus or Suetonius or

Dion Cassius or other eminent authority exactly warranting the

statement. This piece of historical jugglery ran speedily through

thirty editions, while from all parts of Germany came refutations

and counter-refutations by scores, all tending to increase its

notoriety. Making a short tour through Germany at that period,

and stopping in a bookseller's shop at Munich to get a copy of

this treatise, I was shown a pile of pamphlets which it had

called out, at least a foot high. Comically enough, its author

could not be held responsible for it, since the name of the young

Emperor William was never mentioned; all it claimed to give or

did give was the life of Caligula, and certainly there was no

crime in writing a condemnatory history of him or any other

imperial miscreant who died nearly two thousand years ago. In the

American colleges and universities this tractate doubtless made

good friends of Germany uneasy, and it even shocked some

excellent men who knew much of Roman history and little of

mankind; but gradually common sense resumed its sway. As men

began to think they began to realize that the modern German

Empire resembles in no particular that debased and corrupt mass

with which the imperial Roman wretches had to do, and that the

new German sovereign, in all his characteristics and tendencies

is radically a different being from any one of the crazy beasts

of prey who held the imperial power during the decline of Rome.



Sundry epigrams had also come over to us; among others, the

characterization of the three German Emperors: the first William

as "Der greise Kaiser," the Emperor Frederick as "Der weise

Kaiser," and the second William as "Der Reise Kaiser"; and there

were unpleasant murmurs regarding sundry trials for petty

treason. But at the same time there was evident, in the midst of

American jokes at the young Emperor's expense, a growing feeling

that there was something in him; that, at any rate, he was not a

fat-witted, Jesuit-ridden, mistress-led monarch of the old

Bourbon or Hapsburg sort; that he had "go" in him--some fine

impulses, evidently; and here and there a quotation from a speech

showed insight into the conditions of the present world and

aspiration for its betterment.



In another chapter I have given a general sketch of the

conversation at my first presentation to him as ambassador; it

strengthened in my mind the impression already formed,--that he

was not a monarch of the old pattern. The talk was not

conventional; he was evidently fond of discoursing upon

architecture, sculpture, and music, but not less gifted in

discussing current political questions, and in various

conversations afterward this fact was observable. Conventional

talk was reduced to a minimum; the slightest hint was enough to

start a line of remark worth listening to.



Opportunities for conversation were many. Besides the usual

"functions" of various sorts, there were interviews by special

appointment, and in these the young monarch was neither backward

in presenting his ideas nor slow in developing them. The range of

subjects which interested him seemed unlimited, but there were

some which he evidently preferred: of these were all things

relating to ships and shipping, and one of the first subjects

which came up in conversations between us was the books of

Captain Mahan, which he discussed very intelligently, awarding

great praise to their author, and saying that he required all his

naval officers to read them.



Another subject in order was art in all its developments. During

the first years of my stay he was erecting the thirty-two

historical groups on the Avenue of Victory in the Thiergarten,

near my house. My walks took me frequently by them, and they

interested me, not merely by their execution, but by their

historical purpose, commemorating as they do the services of his

predecessors, and of the strongest men who made their reigns

significant during nearly a thousand years. He was always ready

to discuss these works at length, whether from the artistic,

historical, or educational point of view. Not only to me, but to

my wife he insisted on their value as a means of arousing

intelligent patriotism in children and youth. He dwelt with pride

on the large number of gifted sculptors in his realm, and his

comments on their work were worth listening to. He himself has

artistic gifts which in his earlier days were shown by at least

one specimen of his work as a painter in the Berlin Annual

Exhibition; and in the window of a silversmith's shop on the

Linden I once saw a prize cup for a yacht contest showing much

skill in invention and beauty in form, while near it hung the

pencil drawing for it in his own hand.



His knowledge of music and love for it have been referred to

elsewhere in these chapters. Noteworthy was it that his feeling

was not at all for music of a thin, showy sort; he seemed to be

touched by none of the prevailing fashions, but to cherish a

profound love for the really great things in music. This was

often shown, as, for example, at the concert at Potsdam to which

he invited President and Mrs. Harrison, and in his comments upon

the pieces then executed. But the most striking evidence of it

was the music in the Royal Chapel. It has been given me to hear

more than once the best music of the Sistine Pauline, and Lateran

choirs at Rome, of the three great choirs at St. Petersburg, of

the chorus at Bayreuth, and of other well-known assemblages under

high musical direction; but the cathedral choir at Berlin, in its

best efforts, surpassed any of these, and the music, both

instrumental and choral, which reverberates under the dome of the

imperial chapel at the great anniversaries there celebrated is

nowhere excelled. For operatic music of the usual sort he seemed

to care little. If a gala opera was to be given, the chances were

that he would order the performance of some piece of more

historical than musical interest. Hence, doubtless, it was that

during my whole stay the opera at Dresden surpassed decidedly

that at Berlin, while in the higher realms of music Berlin

remained unequaled.



Dramatic art is another field in which he takes an enlightened

interest: he has great reason for doing so, both as a statesman

and as a man.



As a result of observation and reflection during a long life

which has touched public men and measures in wide variety, I

would desire for my country three things above all others, to

supplement our existing American civilization: from Great Britain

her administration of criminal justice; from Germany her theater;

and from any European country, save Russia, Spain, and Turkey,

its government of cities.



As to the second of these desired contributions, ten years in

Germany at various periods during an epoch covering now nearly

half a century have convinced me that her theater, next after her

religious inheritance, gives the best stimulus and sustenance to

the better aspirations of her people. Through it, and above all

by Schiller, the Kantian ethics have been brought into the

thinking of the average man and woman; and not only Schiller, but

Lessing, Goethe, Gutzkow, and a long line of others have given an

atmosphere in which ennobling ideals bloom for the German youth,

during season after season, as if in the regular course of

nature. The dramatic presentation, even in the smallest towns,

is, as a rule, good; the theater and its surroundings are, in the

main, free from the abuses and miseries of the stage in

English-speaking lands, and, above all, from that all-pervading

lubricity and pornographic stench which have made the French

theater of the last half of the nineteenth century a main cause

in the decadence of the French people. In most German towns of

importance one finds the drama a part of the daily life of its

citizens--ennobling in its higher ranges, and in its influence

clean and wholesome.



It may be added that in no city of any English-speaking country

is Shakspere presented so fully, so well, and to such large and

appreciative audiences as in Berlin. All this, and more, the

Emperor knows, and he acts upon his knowledge. Interesting was it

at various times to see him sitting with his older children at

the theater, evidently awakening their interest in dramatic

masterpieces; and among these occasions there come back to me,

especially, the evenings when he thus sat, evidently discussing

with them the thought and action in Shakspere's "Julius Caesar"

and "Coriolanus," as presented on the stage before us. I could

well imagine his comments on the venom of demagogues, on the

despotism of mobs, on the weaknesses of strong men, and on the

need, in great emergencies, of a central purpose and firm

control. His view of the true character and mission of the

theater he has given at various times, and one of his talks with

the actors in the Royal Theater, shortly after my arrival, may be

noted as typical. In it occur passages like the following: "When

I came into the government, ten years ago, . . . I was convinced

that this theater, under the guidance of the monarch, should,

like the school and the university, have as its mission the

development of the rising generation, the promotion of the

highest intellectual good in our German fatherland, and the

ennobling of our people in mind and character.... I beg of you

that you continue to stand by me, each in his own way and place,

serving the spirit of idealism, and waging war against

materialism and all un-German corruptions of the stage."



After various utterances showing his steady purpose in the same

direction, there came out, in one of the later years of my stay,

sundry remarks of his showing a new phase of the same thought, as

follows: "The theater should not only be an important factor in

education and in the promotion of morals, but it should also

present incarnations of elegance, of beauty, of the highest

conceptions of art; it should not discourage us with sad pictures

of the past, with bitter awakenings from illusions, but be

purified, elevated, strengthened for presenting the ideal. . . .

Our ordinary life gives us every day the most mournful realities,

and the modern authors whose pleasure it is to bring these before

us upon the stage have accepted an unhealthy mission and

accomplish a discouraging work."



In his desire to see the theater aid in developing German ideals

and in enriching German life, he has promoted presentations of

the great episodes and personages in German history. Some of

these, by Wildenbruch and Lauff, permeated with veins of true

poetry, are attractive and ennobling. Of course not all were

entirely successful. I recall one which glorified especially a

great epoch in the history of the house of Hohenzollern, the

comical effect of which on one of my diplomatic colleagues I have

mentioned elsewhere; but this, so far as my experience goes, was

an exception.



There seems much reason for the Emperor's strenuous endeavors in

this field. The German theater still remains more wholesome than

that of any other country, but I feel bound to say that, since my

earlier acquaintance with it, from 1854 to 1856 and from 1879 to

1881, there has come some deterioration, and this is especially

shown in various dramas which have been held up as triumphs. In

these, an inoculation from the French drama seems to have

resulted in destruction of the nobler characteristics of the

German stage. One detects the cant of Dumas, fils, but not his

genius; and, when this cant is mingled with German pessimism, it

becomes at times unspeakably repulsive. The zeal for this new

drama seems to me a fad, and rather a slimy fad. With all my

heart I wish the Emperor success in his effort to keep the German

stage upon the higher planes.



Another subject which came up from time to time was that of

archaelogical investigation. Once, in connection with some talk

on German railway enterprises in Asia Minor, I touched upon his

great opportunities to make his reign illustrious by services to

science in that region. He entered into the subject heartily; it

was at once evident that he was awake to its possibilities, and

he soon showed me much more than I knew before of what had been

done and was doing, but pointed out special difficulties in

approaching, at present, some most attractive fields of

investigation.



Interesting also were his views on education, and more than once

the conversation touched this ground. As to his own academic

training, there is ample testimony that he appreciated the main

classical authors whom he read in the gymnasium at Cassel; but it

was refreshing to hear and to read various utterances of his

against gerund-grinding and pedantry. He recognizes the fact that

the worst enemies of classical instruction in Germany, as,

indeed, elsewhere, have been they of its own household, and he

has stated this view as vigorously as did Sydney Smith in England

and Francis Wayland in America. Whenever he dwelt on this subject

the views which he presented at such length to the Educational

Commission were wont to come out with force and piquancy.



On one occasion our discussion turned upon physical education,

and especially upon the value to students of boating. As an old

Yale boating man, a member of the first crew which ever sent a

challenge to Harvard, and one who had occasion in the

administration of an American university to consider this form of

exercise from various standpoints, I may say that his view of its

merits and his way of promoting it seemed to me thoroughly

sensible.



From time to time some mention from me of city improvements

observed during my daily walks led to an interesting discussion.

The city of Berlin is wonderfully well governed, and exhibits all

those triumphs of modern municipal skill and devotion which are

so conspicuously absent, as a rule, from our American cities.

While his capital preserves its self-governing powers, it is

clear that he purposes to have his full say as to everything

within his jurisdiction. There were various examples of this, and

one of them especially interested me: the renovation of the

Thiergarten. This great park, virtually a gift of the

Hohenzollern monarchs, which once lay upon the borders of the

city, but is now in the very heart of it, had gradually fallen

far short of what it should have been. Even during my earlier

stays in Berlin it was understood that some of his predecessors,

and especially his father, had desired to change its copse-like

and swampy character and give it more of the features of a

stately park, but that popular opposition to any such change had

always shown itself too bitter and uncompromising. This seemed a

great pity, for while there were some fine trees, a great

majority of them were so crowded together that there was no

chance of broad, free growth either for trees or for shrubbery.

There was nothing of that exquisitely beautiful play, upon

expanses of green turf, of light and shade through wide-expanded

boughs and broad masses of foliage, which gives such delight in

any of the finer English or American parks. Down to about half a

dozen years since it had apparently been thought best not to

interfere, and even when attention was called to the dark, swampy

characteristics of much of the Thiergarten, the answer was that

it was best to humor the Berliners; but about the beginning of my

recent stay the young Emperor intervened with decision and force,

his work was thorough, and as my windows looked out over one

corner of this field of his operations, their progress interested

me, and they were alluded to from time to time in our

conversations. Interesting was it to note that his energy was

all-sufficient; the Berliners seemed to regard his activity as

Arabs regard a sand-storm,--as predestined and irresistible,--and

the universal verdict now justifies his course, both on sanitary

and artistic grounds.



The same thing may be said, on the whole, of the influence he has

exerted on the great adornments of his capital city. The position

and character of various monuments on which he has impressed his

ideas, and the laying out and decoration of sundry streets and

parks, do credit not merely to his artistic sense, but to his

foresight.



This prompt yet wise intervention, actuated by a public spirit

not only strong but intelligent, is seen, in various other parts

of the empire, in the preservation and restoration of its

architectural glories. When he announced to me at Potsdam his

intention to present specimens representative of German

architecture and sculpture to the Germanic Museum at Harvard, he

showed, in enumerating and discussing the restorations at

Marienburg and Naumburg, the bas-reliefs at Halberstadt, the

masks and statues of Andreas Schluter at Berlin, and the

Renaissance and rococo work at Lubeck and Danzig, a knowledge and

appreciation worthy of a trained architect and archaeologist.



As to his feeling for literature, his addresses on various

occasions show amply that he has read to good purpose, not only

in the best authors of his own, but of other countries. While

there is not the slightest tinge of pedantry in his speeches or

talk, there crop out in them evidences of a curious breadth and

universality in his reading. His line of reading for amusement

was touched when, at the close of an hour of serious official

business, an illustration of mine from Rudyard Kipling led him to

recall many of that author's most striking situations, into which

he entered with great zest; and at various other times he cited

sayings of Mark Twain which he seemed especially to enjoy. Here

it may be mentioned that one may note the same breadth in his

love for art; for not only does he rejoice in the higher

achievements of architecture, sculpture, and painting, but he

takes pleasure in lighter work, and an American may note that he

is greatly interested in the popular illustrations of Gibson.



I once asked some of the leading people nearest him how he found

time to observe so wide a range, and received answer that it was

as much a marvel to them as to me; he himself once told me that

he found much time for reading during his hunting excursions.



Nor does he make excursions into various fields of knowledge by

books alone. Any noteworthy discovery or gain in any leading

field of thought or effort attracts his attention at once, and

must be presented to him by some one who ranks among its foremost

exponents.



But here it should be especially noted that, active and original

as the Emperor is, he is not, and never has been, caught by FADS

either in art, science, literature, or in any other field of

human activity. The great artists who cannot draw or paint, and

who, therefore, despise those who can and are glorified by those

who cannot; the great composers who can give us neither harmony

nor melody, and therefore have a fanatical following among those

who labor under like disabilities; the great writers who are

unable to attain strength, lucidity, or beauty, and therefore

secure praise for profundity and occult wisdom,--none of these

influence him. In these, as in other things, the Hohenzollern

sanity asserts itself. He recognizes the fact that normal and

healthy progress is by an evolution of the better out of the

good, and that the true function of genius in every field is to

promote some phase of this evolution either by aiding to create a

better environment, or by getting sight of higher ideals.



As to his manner, it is in ordinary intercourse simple, natural,

kindly, and direct, and on great public occasions dignified

without the slightest approach to pomposity. I have known scores

of our excellent fellow-citizens in little offices who were

infinitely more assuming. It was once said of a certain United

States senator that "one must climb a ladder to speak with him";

no one would dream of making any assertion of this sort regarding

the present ruler of the Prussian Kingdom and German Empire.



But it would be unjust to suppose that minor gifts and

acquirements form the whole of his character; they are but a part

of its garb. He is certainly developing the characteristics of a

successful ruler of men and the solid qualities of a statesman.

It was my fortune, from time to time, to hear him discuss at some

length current political questions; and his views were presented

with knowledge, clearness, and force. There was nothing at all

flighty in any of his statements or arguments. There is evidently

in him a large fund of that Hohenzollern common sense which has

so often happily modified German, and even European, politics. He

recognizes, of course, as his ancestors generally have done, that

his is a military monarchy, and that Germany is and must remain a

besieged camp; hence his close attention to the army and navy.

Every one of our embassy military attaches expressed to me his

surprise at the efficiency of his inspections of troops, of his

discrimination between things essential and not essential, and of

his insight into current military questions. Even more striking

testimony was given to me by our naval attaches as to his minute

knowledge not only of his own navy, but of the navies of other

powers, and especially as to the capabilities of various classes

of ships and, indeed, of individual vessels. One thoroughly

capable of judging told me that he doubted whether there was any

admiral in our service who knew more about every American ship of

any importance than does the Kaiser. It has been said that his

devotion to the German navy is a whim. That view can hardly

command respect among those who have noted his labor for years

upon its development, and his utterances regarding its connection

with the future of his empire. As a simple matter of fact, he

recognizes the triumphs of German commercial enterprises, and

sees in them a guarantee for the extension of German power and

for a glory more permanent than any likely to be obtained by

military operations in these times. When any candid American

studies what has been done, or, rather, what has NOT been done,

in his own country, with its immense seacoast and its many

harbors on two oceans, to build up a great merchant navy, and

compares it with what has been accomplished during the last fifty

years by the steady, earnest, honest enterprise of Germany, with

merely its little strip of coast on a northern inland sea, and

with only the Hanseatic ports as a basis, he may well have

searchings of heart. The "Shipping Trust" seems to be the main

outcome of our activity, and lines of the finest steamers running

to all parts of the world the outcome of theirs. There is a

history here which we may well ponder; the young Emperor has not

only thought but acted upon it.



As to yet broader work, the crucial test of a ruler is his

ability to select MEN, to stand by them when he has selected

them, and to decide wisely how far the plans which he has thought

out, and they have thought out, can be fused into a policy worthy

of his country. Judged by this test, the young monarch would seem

worthy of his position; the men he has called to the various

ministries are remarkably fit for their places, several of them

showing very high capacity, and some of them genius.



As to his relation to the legislative bodies, it is sometimes

claimed that he has lost much by his too early and open

proclamation of his decisions, intentions, and wishes; and it can

hardly be denied that something must be pardoned to the ardor of

his patriotic desire to develop the empire in all its activities;

but, after all due allowance has been made, there remains

undeniable evidence of his statesmanlike ability to impress his

views upon the national and state legislatures. A leading member

of one of the parliamentary groups, very frequently in opposition

to government measures, said to me: "After all, it is impossible

for us to resist him; he knows Germany so well, and his heart is

so thoroughly in his proposals, that he is sure to gain his

points sooner or later."



An essential element of strength in this respect is his

acquaintance with men and things in every part of his empire.

Evidences of this were frequent in his public letters and

telegrams to cities, towns, groups, and individuals. Nor was it

"meddling and muddling." If any fine thing was done in any part

of the empire, he seemed the first to take notice of it. Typical

of his breadth of view were the cases of various ship captains

and others who showed heroism in remote parts of the world, his

telegram of hearty approval being usually the first thing they

received on coming within reach of it, and substantial evidence

of his gratitude meeting them later.



On the other hand, as to his faculty for minute observation and

prompt action upon it: a captain of one of the great liners

between Hamburg and New York told me that when his ship was ready

to sail the Emperor came on board, looked it over, and after

approving various arrangements said dryly, "Captain, I should

think you were too old a sailor to let people give square corners

to your tables." The captain quietly acted upon this hint; and

when, many months later, the Kaiser revisited the ship, he said,

"Well, captain, I am glad to see that you have rounded the

corners of your tables."



He is certainly a working man. The record of each of his days at

Berlin or Potsdam, as given in the press, shows that every hour,

from dawn to long after dusk, brings its duties--duties demanding

wide observation, close study, concentration of thought, and

decision. Nor is his attention bounded by German interests. He is

a keen student of the world at large. At various interviews there

was ample evidence of his close observation of the present

President of the United States, and of appreciation of his doings

and qualities; so, too, when the struggle for decent government

in New York was going on, he showed an intelligent interest in

Mr. Seth Low; and in various other American matters there was

recognition of the value of any important stroke of good work

done by our countrymen.



As to his view of international questions, two of the

opportunities above referred to especially occur to me here.



The first of these was during the troubles in Crete between the

Greeks and the Turks. As I talked one evening with one of my

colleagues who represented a power especially interested in the

matter, the Emperor came up and at once entered into the

discussion. He stated the position of various powers in relation

to it, and suggested a line of conduct. There was straightforward

good sense in his whole contention, a refreshing absence of

conventionalities, and a very clear insight into the realities of

the question, with a shrewd forecast of the result. More

interesting to me was another conversation, in the spring of

1899. As the time drew near for the sessions of the Peace

Conference at The Hague, I was making preparations for leaving

Berlin to take up my duty in that body, when one morning there

appeared at the embassy a special messenger from the Emperor

requesting me to come to the palace. My reception was hearty, and

he plunged at once into the general subject by remarking, "What

the conference will most need is good common sense; and I have

sent Count Munster, my ambassador at Paris, because he has lots

of it." With this preface, he went very fully into the questions

likely to come before the conference, speaking regarding the

attitude of the United States and the various powers of Europe

and Asia with a frankness, fullness, and pungency which at times

rather startled me. On the relations between the United States,

Germany, and Great Britain he was especially full. Very

suggestive also were his remarks regarding questions in the far

East, and especially on the part likely to be played by Japan and

China--the interests of various powers in these questions being

presented in various aspects, some of them decidedly original and

suggestive. While there were points on which we could hardly

agree, there were some suggestions which proved to be of especial

value, and to one of them is due the fact that on most questions

the German delegates at The Hague stood by the Americans, and

that on the most important question of all they finally, after a

wide divergence from our view, made common cause with Great

Britain and the United States. I regret that the time has not

come when it is permissible to give his conversation in detail;

it treated a multitude of current topics, and even burning

questions, with statesmanlike breadth, and at the same time with

the shrewdness of a man of the world. There were in it sundry

personal touches which interested me; among others, a statement

regarding Cecil Rhodes, the South African magnate, and a

reference to sundry doings and sayings of his own which had been

misrepresented, especially in England. One point in this was

especially curious. He said, "Some people find fault with me for

traveling so much; but this is part of my business: I try to know

my empire and my people, to see for myself what they need and

what is going on, what is doing and who are doing it. It is my

duty also to know men and countries outside the empire. I am not

like ----," naming a sovereign well known in history, "who never

stirred out of the house if he could help it, and so let men and

things go on as they pleased."



This union of breadth and minuteness in his view of his empire

and of the world is, perhaps, his most striking characteristic.

It may be safely said that, at any given moment, he knows

directly, or will shortly know, the person and work of every man

in his empire who is really taking the lead in anything worthy of

special study or close attention. The German court is considered

very exclusive, but one constantly saw at its assemblages men

noted in worthy fields from every part of Germany and, indeed, of

Europe. Herein is a great difference between the German and

Russian courts. If, during my official life at St. Petersburg, I

wished to make the acquaintance of a man noted in science,

literature, or art, he must be found at professorial gatherings

across the Neva. He rarely, if ever, appeared in the throng of

military and civil officials at the Winter Palace. But at Berlin

such men took an honored place at the court among those whom the

ruler sought out and was glad to converse with.



As to the world outside the empire, I doubt whether any other

sovereign equals him in personal acquaintance with leaders in

every field of worthy activity. It was interesting from time to

time to look over the official lists of his guests at breakfast,

or luncheon, or dinner, or supper, or at military exercises, or

at the theater; for they usually embraced men noted in civil,

ecclesiastical, or military affairs, in literature, science, art,

commerce, or industry from every nation. One class was

conspicuous by its absence at all such gatherings, large or

small; namely, the MERELY rich. Rich men there were, but they

were always men who had done something of marked value to their

country or to mankind; for the mere "fatty tumors" of the

financial world he evidently cared nothing.



A special characteristic in the German ruler is independence of

thought. This quality should not be confounded, as it often is,

with mere offhand decision based upon prejudices or whimsies. One

example, which I have given elsewhere, may be here referred to as

showing that his rapid judgments are based upon clear insight:

his OWN insight, and not that of others. On my giving him news of

the destruction of the Maine at Havana, he at once asked me

whether the explosion was from the outside; and from first to

last, against the opinions of his admirals and captains, insisted

that it must have been so.



He is certainly, in the opinion of all who know him,

impulsive--indeed, a very large proportion of his acts which

strike the attention of the world seem the result of impulse;

but, as a rule, it will be found that beneath these impulses is a

calm judgment. Even when this seems not to be the case, they are

likely to appeal all the more strongly to humanity at large.

Typical was his impulsive proposal to make up to the Regent of

Bavaria the art appropriation denied by sundry unpatriotic

bigots. Its immediate result was a temporary triumph for the

common enemy, but it certainly drew to the Emperor the hearts of

an immense number of people, not only inside, but outside his

empire; and, in the long run, it will doubtless be found to have

wrought powerfully for right reason. As an example of an

utterance of his which to many might seem to be the result of a

momentary impulse, but which reveals sober contemplation of

problems looming large before the United States as well as

Germany, I might cite a remark made last year to an American

eminent in public affairs. He said, "You in America may do what

you please, but I will not suffer capitalists in Germany to suck

the life out of the workingmen and then fling them like squeezed

lemon-skins into the gutter."



Any one who runs through the printed volume of his speeches will

see that he is fertile in ideas on many subjects, and knows how

to impress them upon his audiences. His voice and manner are

good, and at times there are evidences of deep feeling, showing

the man beneath the garb of the sovereign. This was especially

the case in his speech at the coming of age of his son. The

audience was noteworthy, there being present the Austrian

Emperor, members of all the great ruling houses of Europe the

foremost men in contemporary German history, and the diplomatic

representatives of foreign powers--an audience representing wide

differences in points of view and in lines of thought, yet no one

of them could fail to be impressed by sundry references to the

significance of the occasion.



Even the most rapid sketch of the Emperor would be inadequate

without some reference to his religious views. It is curious to

note that while Frederick the Great is one of the gods of his

idolatry, the two monarchs are separated by a whole orb of

thought in their religious theories and feelings. While a

philosophical observer may see in this the result of careful

training in view of the evident interests of the monarchy in

these days, he must none the less acknowledge the reality and

depth of those feelings in the present sovereign. No one who has

observed his conduct and utterances, and especially no one who

has read his sermon and prayer on the deck of one of his

war-ships just at the beginning of the Chinese war, can doubt

that there is in his thinking a genuine substratum of religious

feeling. It is true that at times one is reminded of the remark

made to an American ecclesiastic by an eminent German theological

professor regarding that tough old monarch, Frederick William I;

namely, that while he was deeply religious, his religion was "of

an Old Testament type." Of course, the religion of the present

Emperor is of a type vastly higher than that of his ancestor,

whose harshness to the youth who afterward became the great

Frederick has been depicted in the "Memoirs" of the Margravine of

Bayreuth; but there remains clearly in the religion of the

present Emperor a certain "Old Testament" character--a feeling of

direct reliance upon the Almighty, a consciousness of his own

part in guiding a chosen people, and a readiness, if need be, to

smite the Philistines. One phase of this feeling appears in the

music at the great anniversaries, when the leading men of the

empire are brought together beneath the dome of the Palace

Church. The anthems executed by the bands and choirs, and the

great chorals sung by the congregation, breathe anything but the

spirit of the Sermon on the Mount; they seem rather to echo the

grim old battle-hymns of the Thirty Years' War and the war in the

Netherlands.



And yet it must be said that there goes with this a remarkable

feeling of justice to his subjects of other confessions than his

own, and a still more remarkable breadth of view as regards the

relations of modern science to what is generally held as orthodox

theology. The fearlessness with which he recently summoned

Professor Delitzsch to unfold to him and to his family and court

the newly revealed relations of Assyrian research to biblical

study, which gave such alarm in highly orthodox circles, and his

fairness in estimating these researches, certainly revealed

breadth of mind as well as trust in what he considered the

fundamental verities of religion.



A good example of the curious union, in his mind, of religious

feeling, tolerance, and shrewd policy is shown in various

dealings with his Roman Catholic subjects.



Of course he is not ignorant that his very existence as King of

Prussia and German Emperor is a thorn in the side of the Roman

Curia; he knows, as every thinking German knows, that, with the

possible exception of the British monarchy, no other is so hated

by the Vatican monsignori as his own. He is perfectly aware of

the part taken in that quarter against his country and dynasty at

all times, and especially during the recent wars; and yet all

this seems not to influence him in the slightest as regards

justice to his Roman Catholic subjects. He does indeed, resist

the return of the Jesuits into the empire,--his keen insight

forbids him to imitate the policy of Frederick the Great in this

respect,--but his dealings with the Roman Catholic Church at

large show not merely wisdom but kindliness. If he felt bound to

resist, and did successfully resist, the efforts of Cardinal

Rampolla to undermine German rule and influence in Alsace and

Lorraine, there was a quiet fairness and justice in his action

which showed a vast deal of tolerant wisdom. His visits to the

old Abbey of Laach, his former relations with its young abbot,

his settlement of a vexed question by the transfer of the abbot

to the bishopric of Metz, his bringing of a loyal German into

episcopal power at Strasburg, his recent treatment of the prince

bishop of Breslau and the archbishop of Cologne, all show a wise

breadth of view. Perhaps one of the brightest diplomatic strokes

in his career was his dealing with a Vatican question during his

journey in the East. For years there had been growing up in world

politics the theory that France, no matter how she may deal with

monks and nuns and ultramontane efforts within her own immediate

boundaries, is their protector in all the world beside, and

especially in the Holy Land. The relation of this theory to the

Crimean War, fifty years ago, is one of the curious things of

history, and from that day to this it has seemed to be hardening

more and more into a fixed policy--even into something like a

doctrine of international law. Interesting was it, then, to see

the Emperor, on his visit to the Sultan, knock the ground from

under the feet of all this doctrine by securing for the Roman

Catholic interest at Jerusalem what the French had never been

able to obtain--the piece of ground at the Holy City, so long

coveted by pious Catholics, whereon, according to tradition, once

stood the lodging of the Virgin Mary. This the Emperor quietly

obtained of the Sultan, and, after assisting at the dedication of

a Lutheran church at Jerusalem, he telegraphed to the Pope and to

other representatives of the older church that he had made a gift

of this sacred site to those who had so long and so ardently

desired it.



Considerable criticism has been made on the score of his evident

appreciation of his position, and his theory of his relation to

it; but when his point of view is cited, one perhaps appreciates

it more justly. I have already shown this point of view in the

account of the part taken by him at the two-hundredth anniversary

of the Royal Academy, and of his remark, afterward, contrasting

his theory of monarchy with that of Dom Pedro of Brazil. Jocose

as was the manner of it, it throws light upon his idea of his

duty in the state. While a constitutional monarch, he is not so

in the British sense. British constitutional monarchy is made

possible by the "silver streak"; but around the German Empire, as

every German feels in his heart, is no "silver streak." This fact

should be constantly borne in mind by those who care really to

understand the conditions of national existence on the continent

of Europe. Herein lies the answer to one charge that has been so

often made against the German Emperor--of undue solicitude

regarding his official and personal position, as shown in sundry

petty treason trials. The simple fact is that German public

opinion, embodied in German law, has arrived at the conclusion

that it is not best to allow the head of the state to be the

sport of every crank or blackguard who can wield a pen or pencil.

The American view, which allowed Lincoln, Garfield, and McKinley

to be attacked in all the moods and tenses of vituperation, and

to be artistically portrayed as tyrants, drunkards, clowns,

beasts of prey, and reptiles, has not yet been received into

German modes of thought. Luther said that he "would not suffer

any man to treat the Gospel as a sow treats a sack of oats"; and

that seems to be the feeling inherent in the German mind

regarding the treatment of those who represent the majesty of the

nation.



And here a word regarding the relation of Kaiser and people. In

one of the letters to John Adams written by Thomas Jefferson as

they both were approaching the close of life, the founder of

American democracy declared that he had foreseen the failure of

French popular rule, and had therefore favored in France,

democrat though he was, a constitutional monarchy. Had Jefferson

lived in our time, he would doubtless have arrived at a similar

conclusion regarding Germany, for he would have taken account of

the difference between a country like ours, with no long period

of history which had given to dominant political ideas a

religious character,--a country stretching from ocean to ocean,

with no neighbors to make us afraid, --and a country like

Germany, with an ancient historic head, with no natural

frontiers, and beset on every side by enemies; and Jefferson

would doubtless have taken account also of the fact that, were

the matter submitted to popular vote, the present sovereign, with

his present powers, would be the choice of an overwhelming

majority of the German people. The German imperial system, like

our own American republican system, is the result of an evolution

during many generations--an evolution which has produced the

present government, decided its character, fixed its form,

allotted its powers, and decided on the men at the head of it;

and this fact an American, no matter how devoted to republicanism

and democracy in his own country, may well acknowledge to be as

fixed in the political as in the physical world.



Of course some very bitter charges have been made against him as

regards Germany, the main one being that he does not love

parliamentary government and has, at various times, infringed

upon the constitution of the empire.



As to loving parliamentary government, he would probably say that

he cannot regard a system as final which, while attaching to the

front of the chariot of progress a full team to pull it forward,

attaches another team to the rear to pull it backward. But

whatever his theory, he has in practice done his best to promote

the efficiency of parliamentary government, and to increase

respect for it in his kingdom of Prussia, by naming as life

members of the Senate sundry men of the highest character and of

immense value in the discussion of the most important questions.

Two of these, appointed during my stay, I knew and admired. The

first, Professor Gustav Schmoller, formerly rector of the

University of Berlin, is one of the leading economists of the

world, who has shown genius in studying and exhibiting the

practical needs of the German people, and in discerning the best

solutions of similar problems throughout the world--profound,

eloquent, conciliatory, sure to be of immense value as a senator.

The second, Professor Slaby, director of the great technical

institution of Germany at Charlottenburg, is one of the leading

authorities of the world on everything that pertains to the

applications of electricity, a great administrator, a wise

counselor on questions pertaining to the German educational

system. Neither of these men orates, but both are admirable

speakers, and are sure to be of incalculable value. I name them

simply as types: others were appointed, equally distinguished in

other fields. If, then, the Emperor is blamed for not liking

parliamentary and party government, it is only fair to say that

he has taken the surest way to give it strength and credit.



As to the alleged violations of the German constitution, the

same, in a far higher degree, were charged against Kaiser William

I and Bismarck,--and these charges were true,--but it is also

true that thereby those men saved and built up their country. As

a matter of fact, the intuitive sense as well as the reflective

powers of Germans seem to show them that the real dangers to

their country come from a very different quarter--from men who

promote hatreds of race, class, and religion within the empire,

and historic international hatreds without it.



So, too, various charges have been made against the Emperor as

regards the United States. From time to time there came, during

my stay, statements in sundry American newspapers, some

belligerent, some lacrymose, regarding his attitude toward our

country. It seemed to be taken for granted by many good people

during our Spanish War that the Emperor was personally against

us. It is not unlikely that he may have felt sympathy for that

forlorn, widowed Queen Regent of Spain, making so desperate a

struggle to save the kingdom for her young son; if so, he but

shared a feeling common to a very large part of humanity, for

certainly there have been few more pathetic situations; but that

he really cared anything for the success of Spain is exceedingly

doubtful. The Hohenzollern common sense in him must have been for

years vexed at the folly and fatuity of Spanish policy. He

probably inherits the feeling of his father, who, when visiting

the late Spanish monarch some years before his death, showed a

most kindly personal feeling toward Spain and its ruler, and an

intense interest in various phases of art developed in the

Spanish peninsula; but, in his diary, let fall remarks which show

his feeling toward the whole existing Spanish system. One of

these I recall especially. Passing a noted Spanish town, he

remarks: "Here are ten churches, twenty monasteries, and not a

single school." No Hohenzollern is likely to waste much sympathy

on a nation which brings on its fate by preferring monasticism to

education; and never during the Spanish War did he or his

government, to my knowledge, show the slightest leaning toward

our enemies. Certain it is that when sundry hysterical publicists

and meddlesome statesmen of the Continent proposed measures

against what they thought the dangerous encroachments of our

Republic, he quietly, but resolutely and effectually, put his

foot upon them.



Another complaint sometimes heard in America really amounts to

this: that the Emperor is pushing German interests in all parts

of the world, and is not giving himself much trouble about the

interests of other countries. There is truth in this, but the

complainants evidently never stop to consider that every thinking

man in every nation would despise him were it otherwise.



Yet another grievance, a little time since, was that, apparently

with his approval, his ships of war handled sundry Venezuelans

with decided roughness. This was true enough and ought to warm

every honest man's heart.



The main facts in the case were these: a petty equatorial

"republic," after a long series of revolutions,--one hundred and

four in seventy years, Lord Lansdowne tells us, --was enjoying

peace and the beginnings of prosperity. Thanks to the United

States, it had received from an international tribunal the

territory to which it was entitled, was free from disturbance at

home or annoyance abroad, and was under a regular government

sanctioned by its people. Suddenly, an individual started another

so-called "revolution." He was the champion of no reform,

principle, or idea; he simply represented the greed of himself

and a pack of confederates whose ideal was that of a gang of

burglars. With their aid he killed, plundered, or terrorized

until he got control of the government--or, rather, became

himself the government. Under the name of a "republic" he erected

a despotism and usurped powers such as no Russian autocrat would

dare claim. Like the men of his sort who so often afflict

republics in the equatorial regions of South America, he had no

hesitation in confiscating the property and taking the lives, not

only of such of his fellow-citizens as he thought dangerous to

himself, but also of those whom he thought likely to become so.

He made the public treasury his own, and doubtless prepared the

way, as so many other patriots of his sort in such "republics"

have done, for retirement into a palace at Paris, with ample

funds for enjoying the pleasures of that capital, after he, like

so many others, shall have been, in turn, kicked out of his

country by some new bandit stronger than he.



So far so good. If the citizens of Venezuela like or permit that

sort of thing, outside nations have no call to interfere; but

this petty despot, having robbed, maltreated, and even murdered

citizens of his own country, proceeded to maltreat and rob

citizens of other countries and, among them, those of the German

Empire. He was at first asked in diplomatic fashion to desist and

to make amends, but for such appeals he simply showed contempt.

His purpose was evidently to plunder all German subjects within

his reach, and to cheat all German creditors beyond his reach. At

this the German Government, as every government in similar

circumstances is bound to do, demanded redress and sent ships to

enforce the demand. This was perfectly legitimate; but

immediately there arose in the United States an outcry against a

"violation of the Monroe Doctrine." As a matter of fact, the

Monroe Doctrine was no more concerned in the matter than was the

doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints; but there was enough

to start an outcry against Germany, and so it began to spread.

The Germans were careful to observe the best precedents in

international law, yet every step they took was exhibited in

sundry American papers as a menace to the United States. There

was no more menace to the United States than to the planet

Saturn. The conduct of the German Government was in the interest

of the United States as well as of every other decent government.

Finally, the soldiers in a Venezuelan fort wantonly fired upon a

German war vessel--whereupon the commander of the ship, acting

entirely in accordance, not only with international law, but with

natural right, defended himself, and knocked the fort about the

ears of those who occupied it, thus giving the creatures who

directed them a lesson which ought to rejoice every thinking

American. At this the storm on paper against Germany, both in

America and Great Britain, broke out with renewed violence, and

there was more talk about dangers to the Monroe Doctrine. As one

who, at The Hague Conference, was able to do something for

recognition of the Monroe Doctrine by European powers, and who,

as a member of the Venezuelan Commission, did what was possible

to secure justice to Venezuela, I take this opportunity to

express the opinion that the time has come for plain speaking in

this matter. Even with those of us who believe in the Monroe

Doctrine there begins to arise a question as to which are nearest

the interests and the hearts of Americans,--the sort of "dumb

driven cattle" who allow themselves to be governed by such men as

now control Venezuela, or the people of Germany and other

civilized parts of Europe, as well as those of the better South

American republics, like Chile, the Argentine Republic, Brazil,

and others, whose interests, aspirations, ideals, and feelings

are so much more closely akin to our own.



Occasionally, too, there have arisen plaintive declarations that

the Emperor does not love the United States or admire its

institutions. As to that I never saw or heard of anything showing

dislike to our country; but, after all, he is a free man, and

there is nothing in international law or international comity

requiring him to love the United States; it is sufficient that he

respects what is respectable in our government and people, and we

may fairly allow to him his opinion on sundry noxious and

nauseous developments among us which we hope may prove temporary.

As to admiring our institutions, he is probably not fascinated by

our lax administration of criminal justice, which leaves at large

more unpunished criminals, and especially murderers, than are to

be found in any other part of the civilized world, save,

possibly, some districts of lower Italy and Sicily. He probably

does not admire Tammany Hall or the Philadelphia Ring, and has

his own opinion of cities which submit to such tyranny; quite

likely he has not been favorably impressed by the reckless waste

and sordid jobbery recently revealed at St. Louis and

Minneapolis; it is exceedingly doubtful whether he admires some

of the speeches on national affairs made for the "Buncombe

district" and the galleries; but that he admires and respects the

men in the United States who do things worth doing, and say

things worth saying; that he takes a deep interest in those

features of our policy, or achievements of our people, which are

to our credit; that he enjoys the best of our literature; that he

respects every true American soldier and sailor, every American

statesman or scholar or writer or worker of any sort who really

accomplishes anything for our country, is certain.



To sum up his position in contemporary history: As the German

nation is the result of an evolution of individual and national

character in obedience to resistless inner forces and to its

environment, so out of the medley of imperial and royal

Hohenstaufens, Hapsburgs, Wittelsbachs, Wettins, Guelphs, and the

like, have arisen, as by a survival of the fittest, the

Hohenzollerns. These have given to the world various strong

types, and especially such as the Great Elector, Frederick II,

and William I. Mainly under them and under men trained or

selected by them, Germany, from a great confused mass of warriors

and thinkers and workers, militant at cross-purposes, wearing

themselves out in vain struggles, and preyed upon by malevolent

neighbors, has become a great power in arms, in art, in science,

in literature; a fortress of high thought; a guardian of

civilization; the natural ally of every nation which seeks the

better development of humanity. And the young monarch who is now

at its head--original, yet studious of the great men and deeds of

the past; brave, yet conciliatory; never allowing the mail-clad

fist to become unnerved, but none the less devoted to the

conquests of peace; standing firmly on realities, but with a

steady vision of ideals--seems likely to add a new name to the

list of those who, as leaders of Germany, have advanced the

world.







CHAPTER XLV



AS PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN DELEGATION AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE

OF THE HAGUE: I--1899



On the 24th of August, 1898, the Russian Government proposed, in

the name of the Emperor Nicholas II, a conference which should

seek to arrest the constantly increasing development of armaments

and thus contribute to a durable peace; and on the 11th of

January, 1899, his minister of foreign affairs, Count Mouravieff,

having received favorable answers to this proposal, sent forth a

circular indicating the Russian view as to subjects of

discussion. As to the place of meeting, there were obvious

reasons why it should not be the capital of one of the greater

powers. As to Switzerland, the number of anarchists and nihilists

who had taken refuge there, and the murder of the Empress of

Austria by one of them shortly before, at Geneva, in broad

daylight, had thrown discredit over the ability of the Swiss

Government to guarantee safety to the conference; the Russian

Government therefore proposed that its sessions be held at The

Hague, and this being agreed to, the opening was fixed for the

18th of May.



From the first there was a misunderstanding throughout the world

as to what the Emperor Nicholas really proposed. Far and near it

was taken for granted that he desired a general disarmament, and

this legend spread rapidly. As a matter of fact, this was neither

his proposal nor his purpose; the measures he suggested being

designed "to put an end to the constantly increasing development

of armaments."



At the outset I was skeptical as to the whole matter. What I had

seen of the Emperor Nicholas during my stay in Russia had not

encouraged me to expect that he would have the breadth of view or

the strength of purpose to carry out the vast reforms which

thinking men hoped for. I recalled our conversation at my

reception as minister, when, to my amazement, he showed himself

entirely ignorant of the starving condition of the peasantry

throughout large districts in the very heart of the empire.[8]

That he was a kindly man, wishing in a languid way the good of

his country, could not be doubted; but the indifference to

everything about him evident in all his actions, his lack of

force even in the simplest efforts for the improvement of his

people, and, above all, his yielding to the worst elements in his

treatment of the Baltic provinces and Finland, did not encourage

me to believe that he would lead a movement against the enormous

power of the military party in his vast empire. On this account,

when the American newspapers prophesied that I was to be one of

the delegates, my feelings were strongly against accepting any

such post. But in due time the tender of it came in a way very

different from anything I had anticipated: President McKinley

cabled a personal request that I accept a position on the

delegation, and private letters from very dear friends, in whose

good judgment I had confidence, gave excellent reasons for my

doing so. At the same time came the names of my colleagues, and

this led me to feel that the delegation was to be placed on a

higher plane than I had expected. In the order named by the

President, they were as follows: Andrew D. White; Seth Low,

President of Columbia University; Stanford Newel, Minister at The

Hague; Captain Mahan, of the United States navy; Captain Crozier,

of the army; and the Hon. Frederick W. Holls as secretary. In

view of all this, I accepted.





[8] See account of this conversation in "My Mission to Russia,"

Chapter XXXIII, pp. 9-10.





Soon came evidences of an interest in the conference more earnest

and wide-spread than anything I had dreamed. Books, documents,

letters, wise and unwise, thoughtful and crankish, shrewd and

childish, poured in upon me; in all classes of society there

seemed fermenting a mixture of hope and doubt; even the German

Emperor apparently felt it, for shortly there came an invitation

to the palace, and on my arrival I found that the subject

uppermost in his mind was the approaching conference. Of our

conversation, as well as of some other interviews at this period,

I speak elsewhere.



On the 16th of May I left Berlin, and arrived late in the evening

at The Hague. As every day's doings were entered in my diary, it

seems best to give an account of this part of my life in the

shape of extracts from it.





May 17, 1899.



This morning, on going out of our hotel, the Oude Doelen, I found

that since my former visit, thirty-five years ago, there had been

little apparent change. It is the same old town, quiet,

picturesque, full of historical monuments and art treasures. This

hotel and the neighboring streets had been decorated with the

flags of various nations, including our own, and crowds were

assembled under our windows and in the public places. The hotel

is in one of the most attractive parts of the city

architecturally and historically, and is itself interesting from

both points of view. It has been a hostelry ever since the middle

ages, and over the main entrance a tablet indicates rebuilding in

1625. Connected with it by interior passages are a number of

buildings which were once private residences, and one of the

largest and best of these has been engaged for us. Fortunately

the present Secretary of State, John Hay, has been in the

diplomatic service; and when I wrote him, some weeks ago, on the

importance of proper quarters being secured for us, he entered

heartily into the matter, giving full powers to the minister here

to do whatever was necessary, subject to my approval. The result

is that we are quite as well provided for as any other delegation

at the conference.



In the afternoon our delegation met at the house of the American

minister and was duly organized. Although named by the President

first in the list of delegates, I preferred to leave the matter

of the chairmanship entirely to my associates, and they now

unanimously elected me as their President.



The instructions from the State Department were then read. These

were, in effect, as follows:



The first article of the Russian proposals, relating to the

non-augmentation of land and sea forces, is so inapplicable to

the United States at present that it is deemed advisable to leave

the initiative, upon this subject, to the representatives of

those powers to which it may properly apply.



As regards the articles relating to the non-employment of new

firearms, explosives, and other destructive agencies, the

restricted use of the existing instruments of destruction, and

the prohibition of certain contrivances employed in naval

warfare, it seems to the department that they are lacking in

practicability and that the discussion of these articles would

probably provoke divergency rather than unanimity of view. The

secretary goes on to say that "it is doubtful if wars will be

diminished by rendering them less destructive, for it is the

plain lesson of history that the periods of peace have been

longer protracted as the cost and destructiveness of war have

increased. The expediency of restraining the inventive genius of

our people in the direction of devising means of defense is by no

means clear, and, considering the temptations to which men and

nations may be exposed in a time of conflict, it is doubtful if

an international agreement of this nature would prove effective."



As to the fifth, sixth, and seventh articles, aiming, in the

interest of humanity, to succor those who by the chance of battle

have been rendered helpless, to alleviate their sufferings, and

to insure the safety of those whose mission is purely one of

peace and beneficence, we are instructed that any practicable

proposals should receive our earnest support.



On the eighth article, which proposes the wider extension of

"good offices, mediation, and arbitration," the secretary dwells

with much force, and finally says: "The proposal of the

conference promises to offer an opportunity thus far unequaled in

the history of the world for initiating a series of negotiations

that may lead to important practical results." The delegation is

therefore enjoined to propose, at an opportune moment, a plan for

an International Tribunal of Arbitration which is annexed to the

instructions, and to use their influence in the conference to

procure the adoption of its substance.



And, finally, we are instructed to propose to the conference the

principle of extending to strictly private property at sea the

immunity from destruction or capture by belligerent powers

analogous to that which such property already enjoys on land, and

to endeavor to have this principle incorporated in the permanent

law of civilized nations. A well-drawn historical resume of the

relations of the United States to the question of arbitration

thus far is added, and a historical summary of the action of the

United States, hitherto, regarding the exemption of private

property at sea from seizure during war.



The document of most immediate importance is the plan furnished

us for international arbitration. Its main features are as

follows:



First, a tribunal "composed of judges chosen, on account of their

personal integrity and learning in international law, by a

majority of the members of the highest court now existing in each

of the adhering states, one from each sovereign state

participating in the treaty, who shall hold office until their

successors are appointed by the same body."



Secondly, the tribunal to meet for organization not later than


six months after the treaty shall have been ratified by nine

powers; to organize itself as a permanent court, with such

officers as may be found necessary, and to fix its own place of

session and rules of procedure.



The third article provides that "the contracting nations will

mutually agree to submit to the international tribunal all

questions of disagreement between them, excepting such as may

relate to or involve their political independence or territorial

integrity."



The fifth article runs as follows: "A bench of judges for each

particular case shall consist of not fewer than three nor more

than seven, as may be deemed expedient, appointed by the

unanimous consent of the tribunal, and shall not include any

member who is either a native, subject, or citizen of the state

whose interests are in litigation in the case."



The sixth article provides that the general expenses of the

tribunal be divided equally among the adherent powers; but that

those arising from each particular case be provided for as may be

directed by the tribunal; also that non-adherent states may bring

their cases before it, on condition of the mutual agreement that

the state against which judgment shall be found shall pay, in

addition to the judgment, the expenses of the adjudication.



The seventh article makes provision for an appeal, within three

months after the notification of the decision, upon presentation

of evidence that the judgment contains a substantial error of

fact or law.



The eighth and final article provides that the treaty shall

become operative when nine sovereign states, whereof at least six

shall have taken part in the conference of The Hague, shall have

ratified its provisions.



It turns out that ours is the only delegation which has anything

like a full and carefully adjusted plan for a court of

arbitration. The English delegation, though evidently exceedingly

desirous that a system of arbitration be adopted, has come

without anything definitely drawn. The Russians have a scheme;

but, so far as can be learned, there is no provision in it for a

permanent court.



In the evening there was a general assemblage of the members of

the conference at a reception given by Jonkheer van Karnebeek,

formerly Dutch minister of foreign affairs, and now first

delegate from the Netherlands to the conference. It was very

brilliant, and I made many interesting acquaintances; but,

probably, since the world began, never has so large a body come

together in a spirit of more hopeless skepticism as to any good

result. Though no one gives loud utterance to this feeling, it is

none the less deep. Of course, among all these delegates

acquainted with public men and measures in Europe, there is

considerable distrust of the intentions of Russia; and,

naturally, the weakness of the Russian Emperor is well

understood, though all are reticent regarding it. The only open

utterances are those attributed to one or two of the older

European diplomatists, who lament being sent on an errand which

they fear is to be fruitless. One of these is said to have

bewailed this mission as a sad ending to his public services, and

to have declared that as he had led a long life of devotion to

his country and to its sovereign, his family might well look upon

his career as honorable; but that now he is probably doomed to

crown it with an open failure.



May 18.



At two o'clock in the afternoon the conference held its open

session at the "House in the Wood." The building is most

interesting, presenting as it does the art and general ideas of

two hundred and fifty years ago; it is full of historical

associations, and the groves and gardens about it are delightful.

The walls and dome of the great central hall are covered with

immense paintings in the style of Rubens, mainly by his pupils;

and, of these, one over the front entrance represents Peace

descending from heaven, bearing various symbols and, apparently,

entering the hall. To this M. de Beaufort, our honorary

president, the Netherlands minister of foreign affairs, made a

graceful allusion in his opening speech, expressing the hope that

Peace, having entered the hall, would go forth bearing blessings

to the world. Another representation, which covers one immense

wall, is a glorification of various princes of Orange: it is in

full front of me, as I sit, the Peace fresco being visible at my

left, and a lovely view of the gardens, and of the water beyond,

through the windows at my right.



The "House in the Wood" was built early in the seventeenth

century by a princess of the house of Orange, the grandmother of

William III of England. The central hall under the dome, above

referred to, is now filled up with seats and desks, covered with

green cloth, very neat and practical, and mainly arranged like

those in an English college chapel. Good fortune has given me one

of the two best seats in the house; it being directly in front of

the secretaries, who are arranged in a semicircle just below the

desk of the president; at my left are the other members of our

delegation, and facing me, across the central aisle, is Count

Munster, at the head of the German delegation. This piece of good

luck comes from the fact that we are seated in the alphabetical

order of our countries, beginning with Allemagne, continuing with

Amerique, and so on down the alphabet.



The other large rooms on the main floor are exceedingly handsome,

with superb Japanese and Chinese hangings, wrought about the

middle of the last century to fit the spaces they occupy; on all

sides are the most perfect specimens of Japanese and Chinese

bronzes, ivory carvings, lacquer-work, and the like: these rooms

are given up to the committees into which the whole body is

divided. Up-stairs is a dining-hall in which the Dutch Government

serves, every working-day, a most bounteous lunch to us all, and

at this there is much opportunity for informal discussion. Near

the main hall is a sumptuous saloon, hung round with interesting

portraits, one of them being an admirable likeness of Motley the

historian, who was a great favorite of the late Queen, and

frequently her guest in this palace.



Our first session was very interesting; the speech by the

honorary president, M. de Beaufort, above referred to, was in

every way admirable, and that by the president, M. de Staal,

thoroughly good. The latter is the Russian ambassador to London;

I had already met him in St. Petersburg, and found him

interesting and agreeable. He is, no doubt, one of the foremost

diplomatists of this epoch; but he is evidently without much

knowledge of parliamentary procedure. Congratulatory telegrams

were received from the Emperor of Russia and the Queen of the

Netherlands and duly answered.





May 19.



At eleven in the morning, in one of the large rooms of the hotel,

the presidents of delegations met to decide on a plan of

organization and work; and, sitting among them, I first began to

have some hopes of a good result. Still, at the outset, the

prospect was much beclouded. Though a very considerable number of

the foremost statesmen in Europe were present, our deliberations

appeared, for a time, a hopeless chaos: the unfamiliarity of our

president, Baron de Staal, with parliamentary usages seemed

likely to become embarrassing; but sundry statesmen, more

experienced in such matters, began drawing together, and were

soon elaborating a scheme to be presented to the entire

conference. It divided all the subjects named in the Mouravieff

circular among three great committees, the most important being

that on "Arbitration." The choice of representatives on these

from our delegation was made, and an ex-officio membership of all

three falls to me.



In the course of the day I met and talked with various

interesting men, among them Count Nigra, formerly Cavour's

private secretary and ambassador at the court of Napoleon III,

where he accomplished so much for Italian unity; Sir Julian

Pauncefote, the British ambassador at Washington; and M.

Bernaert, president of the Belgian Chamber. In the evening, at a

reception given by the minister of foreign affairs, M. de

Beaufort, I made further acquaintances and had instructive

conversations.



In addition to the strict duties of the conference, there is, of

course, a mass of social business, with no end of visits, calls,

and special meetings, to say nothing of social functions, on a

large scale, at the houses of sundry ministers and officials; but

these, of course, have their practical uses.



The Dutch Government is showing itself princely in various ways,

making every provision for our comfort and enjoyment.



In general, I am considerably encouraged. The skeptical feeling

with which we came together seems now passing away; the recent

speech of the Emperor William at Wiesbaden has aroused new hopes

of a fairly good chance for arbitration, and it looks as if the

promise made me just before I left Berlin by Baron von Bulow,

that the German delegation should cooperate thoroughly with our

own, is to be redeemed. That delegation assures us that it is

instructed to stand by us as far as possible on all the principal

questions. It forms a really fine body, its head being Count

Munster, whom I have already found very agreeable at Berlin and

Paris, and its main authority in the law of nations being

Professor Zorn, of the University of Konigsberg; but, curiously

enough, as if by a whim, the next man on its list is Professor

Baron von Stengel of Munich, who has written a book AGAINST

arbitration; and next to him comes Colonel Schwartzhoff, said to

be a man of remarkable ability in military matters, but strongly

prejudiced against the Russian proposals.



As to arbitration, we cannot make it compulsory, as so many very

good people wish; it is clear that no power here would agree to

that; but even to provide regular machinery for arbitration,

constantly in the sight of all nations, and always ready for use,

would be a great gain.



As to disarmament, it is clear that nothing effective can be done

at present. The Geneva rules for the better care of the wounded

on land will certainly be improved and extended to warfare on

sea, and the laws of war will doubtless be improved and given

stronger sanction.



Whether we can get our proposals as to private property on the

high seas before the conference is uncertain; but I think we can.

Our hopes are based upon the fact that they seem admissible under

one heading of the Mouravieff circular. There is, of course, a

determination on the part of leading members to exclude

rigorously everything not provided for in the original programme,

and this is only right; for, otherwise, we might spend years in

fruitless discussion. The Armenians, for example, are pressing us

to make a strong declaration in their behalf. Poland is also here

with proposals even more inflammatory; so are the Finlanders; and

so are the South African Boers. Their proposals, if admitted,

would simply be bombshells sure to blow all the leading nations

of Europe out of the conference and bring everything to naught.

Already pessimists outside are prophesying that on account of

these questions we are doomed to utter failure.



The peace people of all nations, including our own, are here in

great force. I have accepted an invitation from one of them to

lunch with a party of like mind, including Baroness von Suttner,

who has written a brilliant book, "Die Waffen Nieder," of which

the moral is that all nations shall immediately throw down their

arms. Mr. Stead is also here, vigorous as usual, full of curious

information, and abounding in suggestions.



There was a report, on our arriving, that the Triple Alliance

representatives are instructed to do everything to bring the

conference into discredit, but this is now denied. It is said

that their programme is changed, and things look like it. On the

whole, though no one is sanguine, there is more hope.





May 21.



In the morning went with Dr. Holls to a Whitsunday service at the

great old church here. There was a crowd, impressive chorals, and

a sermon at least an hour long. At our request, we were given

admirable places in the organ-loft, and sat at the side of the

organist as he managed that noble instrument. It was sublime.

After the closing voluntary Holls played remarkably well



To me the most striking feature in the service was a very earnest

prayer made by the clergyman for the conference. During the

afternoon we also visited the old prison near the Vijver, where

the De Witts and other eminent prisoners of state were confined,

and in front of which the former were torn in pieces by the mob.

Sadly interesting was a collection of instruments of torture,

which had the effect of making me better satisfied with our own

times than I sometimes am.



In the evening, with our minister, Mr. Newel, and the Dean of

Ely, his guest, to an exceedingly pleasant "tea" at the house of

Baroness Gravensteen, and met a number of interesting people,

among them a kindly old gentleman who began diplomatic life as a

British attache at Washington in the days of Webster and Clay,

and gave me interesting accounts of them.



The queer letters and crankish proposals which come in every day

are amazing. I have just added to my collection of diplomatic

curiosities a letter from the editor of a Democratic paper in

southern Illinois, addressed to me as ambassador at Mayence,

which he evidently takes to be the capital of Germany, asking me

to look after a great party of Western newspaper men who are to

go up the Rhine this summer and make a brief stay in the

above-named capital of the empire. I also receive very many

letters of introduction, which of course make large demands upon

my time. The number of epistles, also, which come in from public

meetings in large and small American towns is very great, some

evidently representing no persons other than the writers. As I

write the above, I open mechanically a letter from a peace

meeting assembled in Ledyard, Connecticut, composed of "Rogerine

Quakers"; but what a "Rogerine Quaker" is I know not. Some of

these letters are touching, and some have a comic side. A very

good one comes from May Wright Sewall; would that all the others

were as thoughtful!



It goes without saying that the Quakers are out in full force. We

have been answering by cable some of the most important

communications sent us from America; the others we shall try to

acknowledge by mail, though they are so numerous that I begin to

despair of this. If these good people only knew how all this

distracts us from the work which we have at heart as much as

they, we should get considerably more time to think upon the

problems before us.





May 22.



In the afternoon came M. de Bloch, the great publicist, who has

written four enormous volumes on war in modern times, summaries

of which, in the newspapers, are said to have converted the young

Emperor Nicholas to peace ideas, and to have been the real cause

of his calling the conference together. I found him interesting,

full of ideas, and devoted most earnestly to a theory that

militarism is gradually impoverishing all modern states, and that

the next European war will pauperize most of them.



Just afterward Count Welsersheimb, president of the Austrian

delegation, called, and was very anxious to know the line we are

to take. I told him frankly that we are instructed to present a

plan of arbitration, and to urge a resolution in favor of

exempting private property, not contraband of war, from seizure

on the high seas; that we are ready to go to the full length in

improving the laws of war, and in extending the Geneva rules to

maritime warfare; but that we look on the question of reducing

armaments as relating wholly to Europe, no part of it being

applicable to the United States.



As he seemed strongly in favor of our contention regarding

private property on the high seas, but fearful that Russia and

England, under a strict construction of the rules, would not

permit the subject to be introduced, I pointed out to him certain

clauses in the Mouravieff circular which showed that it was

entirely admissible.





May 23.



In the morning came a meeting of the American delegation on the

subject of telegraphing Washington for further instructions. We

find that some of the details in our present instructions are

likely to wreck our proposals, and there is a fear among us that,

by following too closely the plan laid down for us at Washington,

we may run full in the face of the Monroe Doctrine. It is indeed,

a question whether our people will be willing to have matters of

difference between South American States, or between the United

States and a South American State, or between European and South

American States, submitted to an arbitration in which a majority

of the judges are subjects of European powers. Various drafts of

a telegram were made, but the whole matter went over.



At ten the heads of delegations met and considered a plan of

organizing the various committees, and the list was read. Each of

the three great committees to which the subjects mentioned in the

Mouravieff circular are assigned was given a president,

vice-president, and two honorary presidents. The first of these

committees is to take charge of the preliminary discussion of

those articles in the Mouravieff circular concerning the

non-augmentation of armies and the limitation in the use of new

explosives and of especially destructive weapons. The second

committee has for its subject the discussion of humanitarian

reforms--namely, the adaptation of the stipulations of the

Convention of Geneva of 1864 to maritime warfare, the

neutralization of vessels charged with saving the wounded during

maritime combats, and the revision of the declaration concerning

customs of war elaborated in 1874 by the Conference of Brussels,

which has never yet been ratified. The third committee has charge

of the subject of arbitration, mediation, and the like.



The president of the first committee is M. Bernaert, a leading

statesman of Belgium, who has made a most excellent impression on

me from the first; and the two honorary presidents are Count

Munster, German ambassador at Paris, and myself.



The president of the second committee is M. de Martens, the

eminent Russian authority on international law; and the two

honorary presidents, Count Welsersheimb of Austria-Hungary, and

the Duke of Tetuan from Spain.



The third committee receives as its president M. Leon Bourgeois,

who has held various eminent positions in France; the honorary

presidents being Count Nigra, the Italian ambassador at Vienna,

and Sir Julian Pauncefote, the British ambassador at Washington.



There was much discussion and considerable difference of opinion

on many points, but the main breeze sprang up regarding the

publicity of our doings. An admirable speech was made by Baron de

Bildt, who is a son of my former Swedish colleague at Berlin, has

held various important positions at Washington and elsewhere, has

written an admirable history of Queen Christina of Sweden, and is

now minister plenipotentiary at Rome. He spoke earnestly in favor

of considerable latitude in communications to the press from the

authorities of the conference; but the prevailing opinion,

especially of the older men, even of those from constitutional

states, seemed to second the idea of Russia,--that communications

to the press should be reduced to a minimum, comprising merely

the external affairs of the conference. I am persuaded that this

view will get us into trouble; but it cannot be helped at

present.





May 24.



As was to be expected, there has begun some reaction from the

hopes indulged shortly after the conference came together. At our

arrival there was general skepticism; shortly afterward, and

especially when the organization of the arbitration committee was

seen to be so good, there came a great growth of hope; now comes

the usual falling back of many. But I trust that this will not be

permanent. Yesterday there was some talk which, though quiet, was

none the less bitter, to the effect that the purpose of Russia in

calling the conference is only to secure time for strengthening

her armaments; that she was never increasing her forces at a

greater rate, especially in the southwestern part of the empire

and in the Caucasus, and never intriguing more vigorously in all

directions. To one who stated this to me my answer simply was

that bad faith to this extent on the part of Russia is most

unlikely, if not impossible; that it would hand down the Emperor

and his advisers to the eternal execration and contempt of

mankind; and that, in any case, our duty is clear: to go on and

do the best we can; to perfect plans for a permanent tribunal of

arbitration; and to take measures for diminishing cruelty and

suffering in war.



Meeting Count Munster, who, after M. de Staal, is very generally

considered the most important personage here, we discussed the

subject of arbitration. To my great regret, I found him entirely

opposed to it, or, at least, entirely opposed to any

well-developed plan. He did not say that he would oppose a

moderate plan for voluntary arbitration, but he insisted that

arbitration must be injurious to Germany; that Germany is

prepared for war as no other country is or can be; that she can

mobilize her army in ten days; and that neither France, Russia,

nor any other power can do this. Arbitration, he said, would

simply give rival powers time to put themselves in readiness, and

would therefore be a great disadvantage to Germany.



Later came another disappointment. M. de Martens, having read the

memorandum which I left with him yesterday on the subject of

exempting private property, not contraband of war, from seizure

upon the high seas called, and insisted that it would be

impossible, under any just construction of the Mouravieff

programme, to bring the subject before the second committee as we

had hoped to do; that Russia would feel obliged to oppose its

introduction; and that Great Britain, France, and Italy, to say

nothing of other powers, would do the same. This was rather

trying, for I had especially desired to press this long-desired

improvement in international law; and I showed him how persistent

the United States had been as regards this subject throughout our

whole history, how earnest the President and his cabinet are in

pressing it now, and how our delegation are bound, under our

instructions, to bring it before the conference. I insisted that

we should at least have the opportunity to present it, even if it

were afterward declared out of order. To this he demurred, saying

that he feared it would arouse unpleasant debate. I then

suggested that the paper be publicly submitted to our whole body

for special reference to a future conference, and this he took

into consideration. Under other circumstances, I would have made

a struggle in the committee and, indeed, in the open session of

the full conference; but it is clear that what we are sent here

for is, above all, to devise some scheme of arbitration, and that

anything which comes in the way of this, by provoking ill-feeling

or prolonging discussion on other points, will diminish our

chances of obtaining what the whole world so earnestly desires.



During the day our American delegation held two sessions; and, as

a result, a telegram of considerable length to the State

Department was elaborated, asking permission to substitute a new

section in our original instructions regarding an arbitration

tribunal, and to be allowed liberty to make changes in minor

points, as the development of opinion in the conference may

demand. The substitute which we suggested referred especially to

the clash between the original instructions and the Monroe

Doctrine. I was very reluctant to send the despatch; but, on the

whole, it seemed best, and it was adopted unanimously.



In the afternoon, at five, the presidents of all the delegations

went to the palace, by appointment, and were presented to the

young Queen and to the Queen-mother. The former is exceedingly

modest, pretty, and pleasant; and as she came into the room,

about which were ranged that line of solemn, elderly men, it

seemed almost pathetic. She was evidently timid, and it was, at

first, hard work for her; but she got along well with Count

Munster, and when she came to me I soon brought the conversation

upon the subject of the "House in the Wood" by thanking her for

the pains her government had taken in providing so beautiful a

place for us. This new topic seemed to please her, and we had

quite a long talk upon it; she speaking of her visits to the

park, for skating and the like, and I dwelling on the beauty of

the works of art and the views in the park. Then the delegates,

going to the apartments of the Queen-mother, went through a

similar formality with her. She is very stout, but fine-looking,

with a kindly face and manner. Both mother and daughter spoke,

with perfect ease, Dutch, French, German English, and how many

other languages I know not. The young Queen was very simply

dressed, like any other young lady of seventeen, except that she

had a triple row of large pearls about her neck. In the evening,

at 9.30, the entire delegations were received at a great

presentation and ball. The music was very fine, but the most

interesting thing to me was the fact that, as the palace was

built under Louis Bonaparte and Hortense, the main rooms were in

the most thoroughgoing style Empire, not only in their

decorations, but in their furniture and accessories,--clocks,

vases, candelabra, and the like. I have never seen that style,

formerly so despised, but now so fashionable, developed as fully.



After the presentation I met Sir John Fisher, one of the English

delegates, an admiral in the British navy, and found him very

intelligent. He said that he was thoroughly for peace, and had

every reason to be so, since he knew something of the horrors of

war. It appears that in one of the recent struggles in China he

went ashore with eleven hundred men and returned with only about

five hundred; but, to my regret, I found him using the same

argument as regards the sea that Count Munster had made regarding

the land. He said that the navy of Great Britain was and would

remain in a state of complete preparation for war; that a vast

deal depended on prompt action by the navy; and that the truce

afforded by arbitration proceedings would give other powers time,

which they would otherwise not have, to put themselves into

complete readiness. He seemed uncertain whether it was best for

Great Britain, under these circumstances, to support a

thoroughgoing plan of arbitration; but, on the whole, seemed

inclined to try it to some extent. Clearly what Great Britain

wants is a permanent system of arbitration with the United

States; but she does not care much, I think, for such a provision

as regards other powers.



There is considerable curiosity among leading members to know

what the United States really intends to do; and during the day

Sir Julian Pauncefote and others have called to talk over the

general subject.



The London "Times" gives quite correctly a conversation of mine,

of rather an optimistic nature, as to the possibilities and

probabilities of arbitration, and the improvement of the customs

of war; but in another quarter matters have not gone so well: the

"Corriere della Sera" of Milan publishes a circumstantial

interview with me, which has been copied extensively in the

European press, to the effect that I have declared my belief in

the adoption of compulsory arbitration and disarmament. This is a

grotesque misstatement. I have never dreamed of saying anything

of the kind; in fact, have constantly said the contrary; and,

what is more, I have never been interviewed by the correspondent

of that or of any other Continental paper.







CHAPTER XLVI



AS PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN DELEGATION AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE

OF THE HAGUE--II



May 25. This morning a leading delegate of one of the great

European powers called and gave me a very interesting account of

the situation as he sees it.



He stated that the Russian representatives, on arriving here,

gave out that they were not prepared with any plan for a definite

tribunal of arbitration; but that shortly afterward there

appeared some discrepancy on this point between the statements of

the various members of their delegation; and that they now

propose a system of arbitration, mediation, and examination into

any cause of difficulty between nations.



In the evening our secretary spoke of the matter to M. de Staal,

the president of the Russian delegation and of the conference,

and was told that this plan would, within a day or two, be

printed and laid before the whole body.



This is a favorable sign. More and more it looks as if the great

majority of us are beginning to see the necessity of some scheme

of arbitration embracing a court and definite, well-contrived

accessories.



The above-mentioned discrepancy between various statements of the

Russians leads me to think that what Count Munster told me some

days since may have some truth in it--namely, that

Pobedonostzeff, whom I knew well, when minister to Russia, as the

strongest man of moral, religious, and social questions in that

country, is really the author of the documents that were

originally given to the world as emanating from the Russian

Foreign Office, and that he has now added to them this definite

scheme for arbitration. Remembering our old conversations, in

which he dwelt upon the great need of money in order to increase

the stipends of the Russian clergy, and so improve their moral as

well as religious condition, I can understand easily that he may

have greatly at heart a plan which would save a portion of the

enormous expenditure of Russia on war, and enable him to do more

for the improvement of the church.



Dined at the British legation with the minister, my old friend of

St. Petersburg days, Sir Henry Howard, De Martens, the real head

of the Russian delegation, being of the party, and had a long

talk with the latter about Russia and Russians. He told me that

Pobedonostzeff is now becoming old and infirm, and it appears

that there has been a sort of cleaning out of the Foreign Office

and the Ministry of the Interior--a procedure which was certainly

needed in my time.



Later in the evening we went to a reception by Baron van

Hardenbroek, the grand chamberlain, where I met various

interesting persons, especially M. Descamps, the eminent Belgian

delegate, who, in the fervor of his speech yesterday morning,

upset his inkstand and lavished its contents on his neighbors. He

is a devotee of arbitration, and is preparing a summary for the

committee intrusted with that subject. There seemed to be, in

discussing the matter with various delegates at this reception, a

general feeling of encouragement.



During the day Mr. Loeher, a Berlin sculptor, called, and carried

me off to see his plan of a great statue of "Peace" which he

hopes to induce the Emperor Nicholas to erect in Paris. It seems

to me well conceived, all except the main figure, which I could

not induce myself to like. In the anxiety of the sculptor to

avoid any more female figures, and to embody virile aspirations

for peace, he has placed this main figure at the summit of the

monument in something like a long pea-jacket, with an

insufficient mantle at the back, and a crown upon its head.



The number of people with plans, schemes, notions, nostrums,

whimsies of all sorts, who press upon us and try to take our

time, is enormous; and when to this is added the pest of

interviewers and photographers, life becomes serious indeed.





May 26.



At two the committee on arbitration met, and, as it is the

largest of all, its session was held in the main hall under the

dome. The Russian plan was presented, and was found to embrace

three distinct features:



First, elements of a plan of mediation; secondly, a plan for

international arbitration; thirdly, a plan for the international

examination of questions arising between powers, such examination

being conducted by persons chosen by each of the contestants.

This last is a new feature and is known as a commission

internationale d'enquete.



The project for a plan of arbitration submits a number of minor

matters to compulsory arbitration, but the main mass of

differences to voluntary arbitration.



But there was no definite proposal for a tribunal, and there was

an evident feeling of disappointment, which was presently voiced

by Sir Julian Pauncefote, who, in the sort of plain, dogged way

of a man who does not purpose to lose what he came for, presented

a resolution looking definitely to the establishment, here and

now, of an international tribunal of arbitration. After some

discussion, the whole was referred to a subcommittee, to put this

and any other proposals submitted into shape for discussion by

the main committee. In the course of the morning the American

delegation received an answer to its telegram to the State

Department, which was all that could be desired, since it left us

virtually free to take the course which circumstances might

authorize, in view of the main object to be attained. But it came

too late to enable us to elaborate a plan for the meeting above

referred to, and I obtained permission from the president, M.

Leon Bourgeois, to defer the presentation of our scheme until

about the middle of next week.



Just before the session of the main committee, at which the

Russian plan was received, I had a long and very interesting talk

with Mr. van Karnebeek, one of the leading statesmen of the

Netherlands, a former minister of foreign affairs, and the

present chief of the Dutch delegation in the conference. He seems

clear-headed and farsighted, and his belief is that the

conference will really do something of value for arbitration. He

says that men who arrived here apparently indifferent have now

become interested, and that amour propre, if nothing else, will

lead them to elaborate something likely to be useful. He went at

considerable length into the value of an international tribunal,

even if it does nothing more than keep nations mindful of the

fact that there is some way, other than war, of settling

disputes.



A delegate also informed me that in talking with M. de Staal the

latter declared that in his opinion the present conference is

only the first of a series, and that it is quite likely that

another will be held next winter or next spring.



In the evening I made the acquaintance of Mr. Marshall, a

newspaper correspondent, who is here preparing some magazine

articles on The Hague and the conference. He is a very

interesting man on various accounts, and especially at present,

since he has but just returned from the Cuban campaign, where he

was fearfully wounded, receiving two shots which carried away

parts of the vertebral column, a bullet being left in his body.

He seems very cheerful, though obliged to get about on crutches.





May 27.



In the morning, calls from various people urging all kinds of

schemes for arbitration and various other good things for the

human race, including considerable advantages, in many cases, for

themselves.



Best of all, by far, was John Bellows of Gloucester, our old

Quaker friend at St. Petersburg, whom I was exceedingly glad to

take by the hand: he, at least, is a thoroughly good

man--sincere, honest, earnest, and blessed with good sense.



The number of documents, printed and written, coming in upon us

is still enormous. Many are virtually sermons displaying the

evils of war, the blessings of peace, and the necessity of

falling back upon the Bible. Considering the fact that our

earlier sacred books indicate approval by the Almighty of some of

the most bloodthirsty peoples and most cruel wars ever known,

such a recommendation seems lacking in "actuality."



This morning we had another visit from Sir Julian Pauncefote,

president of the British delegation, and discussed with him an

amalgamation of the Russian, British, and American proposals for

an arbitration tribunal. He finds himself, as we all do,

agreeably surprised by the Russian document, which, inadequate as

it is, shows ability in devising a permanent scheme both for

mediation and arbitration.



During the day President Low, who had been asked by our

delegation to bring the various proposals agreed to by us into

definite shape, made his report; it was thoroughly well done,

and, with some slight changes, was adopted as the basis for our

final project of an arbitration scheme. We are all to meet on

Monday, the 29th, for a study of it.



In the evening to the concert given to the conference by the

burgomaster and city council. It was very fine, and the audience

was large and brilliant. There was music by Tschaikovsky, Grieg,

and Wagner, some of which was good, but most of it seemed to me

noisy and tending nowhither; happily, in the midst of it came two

noble pieces, one by Beethoven and the other by Mozart, which

gave a delightful relief.



May 28.



Drove with Dr. Holls to Delft, five miles, and attended service

at the "New Church." The building was noble, but the service

seemed very crude and dismal, nearly the whole of it consisting

of two long sermons separated by hymns, and all unspeakably

dreary.



Afterward we saw the tombs of William of Orange and Grotius, and

they stirred many thoughts. I visited them first nearly forty

years ago, with three persons very dear to me, all of whom are

now passed away. More than ever it is clear to me that of all

books ever written--not claiming divine inspiration--the great

work of Grotius on "War and Peace" has been of most benefit to

mankind. Our work here, at the end of the nineteenth century, is

the direct result of his, at the beginning of the seventeenth.



Afterward to the Prinzenhof, visiting the place where William of

Orange was assassinated. Was glad to see the new statue of

Grotius in front of the church where he lies buried.



May 29.



In the morning President Low and myself walked, and talked over

various proposals for arbitration, especially our own. It looks

much as if we can amalgamate the Russian, British, and original

American plans into a good arrangement for a tribunal. We also

discussed a scheme for the selection, by disagreeing nations, of

"seconding powers," who, before the beginning of hostilities, or

even after, shall attempt to settle difficulties between powers,

or, if unsuccessful, to stop them as soon after war begins as the

honor of the nations concerned may allow. The Germans greatly

favor this plan, since it resembles their tribunal of honor

(Ehrengericht); it was originally suggested to us by our

secretary, Dr. Holls.



In the evening, at six, the American delegation met. We had

before us type-written copies of our whole arbitration project as

elaborated in our previous sessions, and sundry changes having

been made, most of them verbal, the whole, after considerable

discussion, was adopted.



At ten I left, via Hook of Holland and Harwich, for London,

arriving about ten the next morning, and attending to various

matters of business. It was fortunate for me that I could have

for this purpose an almost complete lull in our proceedings, the

first and second committees of the conference being at work on

technical matters, and the third not meeting until next Monday.



In the evening I went to the Lyceum Theatre, saw Henry Irving and

Ellen Terry in Sardou's "Robespierre," and for the first time in


my life was woefully disappointed in them. The play is wretchedly

conceived, and it amazes me that Sardou, who wrote "Thermidor,"

which is as admirable as "Robespierre" is miserable could ever

have attached his name to such a piece.



For the wretchedness of its form there is, no doubt, some excuse

in the fact that it has been done into English, and doubtless

cut, pieced, and altered to suit the Lyceum audiences; but when

one compares the conspiracy part of it with a properly conceived

drama in which a conspiracy is developed, like Schiller's

"Fiesco," the difference is enormously in favor of the latter. As

literature the play in its English dress is below contempt.



As to its historical contents, Sardou resorts to an expedient

which, although quite French in its character, brings the whole

thing down to a lower level than anything in which I had ever

seen Irving before. The center of interest is a young royalist

who, having been present with his mother and sister at the

roll-call of the condemned and the harrowing scenes resulting

therefrom, rushes forth, determined to assassinate Robespierre,

but is discovered by the latter to be his long-lost illegitimate

son, and then occur a series of mystifications suited only to the

lowest boulevard melodrama.



As to the action of the piece, the only thing that showed

Irving's great ability was the scene in the forest of

Montmorency, where, as Robespierre, he reveals at one moment, in

his talk with the English envoy, his ambition, his overestimate

of himself, his suspicion of everybody and everything, his

willingness to be cruel to any extent in order to baffle possible

enemies; and then, next moment, on the arrival of his young

friends, boys and girls, the sentimental, Rousseau side of his

character. This transition was very striking. The changes in the

expression of Irving's face were marvelous--as wonderful as those

in his Louis XI; but that was very nearly all. In everything

else, Coquelin, as I had seen him in Sardou's "Thermidor," was

infinitely better.



Besides this, the piece was, in general, grotesquely

unhistorical. It exhibits Robespierre's colleagues in the

Committee of Public Safety as noisy and dirty street blackguards.

Now, bad as they were, they were not at all of that species, nor

did their deliberations take place in the manner depicted.

Billaud-Varennes is represented as a drunken vagabond sitting on

a table at the committee and declaiming. He was not this at all,

nor was Tallien, vile as he was, anything like the blackguard

shown in this piece.



The final scene, in which Robespierre is brought under accusation

by the Convention, was vastly inferior to the same thing in

"Thermidor"; and, what was worse, instead of paraphrasing or

translating the speeches of Billaud-Varennes, Tallien, and

Robespierre, which he might have found in the "Moniteur," Sardou,

or rather Irving, makes the leading characters yell harangues

very much of the sort which would be made in a meeting of drunken

dock laborers to-day. Irving's part in this was not at all well

done. The unhistorical details now came thick and fast, among

them his putting his head down on the table of the tribune as a

sign of exhaustion, and then, at the close, shooting himself in

front of the tribunal. If he did shoot himself, which is

doubtful, it was neither at that time nor in that place.



But, worst of all, the character of Robespierre was made far too

melodramatic, and was utterly unworthy of Irving, whom, in all

his other pieces, I have vastly admired. He completely

misconceives his hero. Instead of representing him as, from first

to last, a shallow Rousseau sentimentalist, with the proper

mixture of vanity, suspicion, and cruelty, he puts into him a

great deal too much of the ruffian, which was not at all in

Robespierre's character.



The most striking scene in the whole was the roll-call at the

prison. This was perhaps better than that in Sardou's

"Thermidor," and the tableaux were decidedly better.



The scene at the "Festival of the Supreme Being" was also very

striking, and in many respects historical; but, unless I am

greatly mistaken, the performance referred to did not take place

as represented, but in the garden directly in front of the

Tuileries. The family scene at the house of Duplay the carpenter

was exceedingly well managed; old Duplay, smoking his pipe,

listening to his daughters playing on a spinet and singing

sentimental songs of the Rousseau period, was perfect. The old

carpenter and his family evidently felt that the golden age had

at last arrived; that humanity was at the end of its troubles;

and that the world was indebted for it all to their lodger

Robespierre, who sat in the midst of them reading, writing, and

enjoying the coddling and applause lavished upon him. And he and

they were to go to the guillotine within a week!



Incidentally there came a little touch worthy of Sardou; for, as

Robespierre reads his letters, he finds one from his brother, in

which he speaks of a young soldier and revolutionist of ability

whose acquaintance he has just made, whom he very much likes, and

whose republicanism he thoroughly indorses--one Buonaparte. This

might have occurred, and very likely did occur, very much as

shown on the stage; for one of the charges which nearly cost

Bonaparte his life on the Ninth Thermidor was that he was on

friendly terms with the younger Robespierre, who was executed

with his more famous brother.



On the whole, the play was very disappointing. It would certainly

have been hissed at the Porte St. Martin, and probably at any

other Paris theater.



June 1.



Having left London last evening, I arrived at The Hague early

this morning and found, to my great satisfaction, that the

subcommittee of the third committee had unanimously adopted the

American plan of "seconding powers," and that our whole general

plan of arbitration will be to-day in print and translated into

French for presentation. I also find that Sir Julian Pauncefote's

arbitration project has admirable points.



The first article in Sir Julian's proposal states that, with the

desire to facilitate immediate recourse to arbitration by nations

which may fail to adjust by diplomatic negotiations differences

arising between them, the signatory powers agree to organize a

permanent tribunal of international arbitration, accessible at

all times, to be governed by a code, provided by this conference,

so far as applicable and consistent with any special stipulations

agreed to between the contesting parties.



Its second provision is the establishment of a permanent central

office, where the records of the tribunal shall be preserved and

its official business transacted, with a permanent secretary,

archivist, and suitable staff, who shall reside on the spot. This

office shall make arrangements for the assembling of the

tribunal, at the request of contesting parties.



Its third provision is that each of the signatory powers shall

transmit the names of two persons who shall be recognized in

their own country as jurists or publicists of high character and

fitness, and who shall be qualified to act as judges. These

persons shall be members of the tribunal, and a list of their

names shall be recorded in the central office. In case of death

or retirement of any one of these, the vacancy shall be filled up

by new appointment.



Its fourth provision is that any of the signatory powers desiring

to have recourse to the tribunal for the settlement of

differences shall make known such desire to the secretary of the

central office, who shall thereupon furnish the powers concerned

with a list of the members of the tribunal, from which such

powers may select such number of judges as they may think best.

The powers concerned may also, if they think fit, adjoin to these

judges any other person, although his name may not appear on the

list. The persons so selected shall constitute the tribunal for

the purpose of such arbitration, and shall assemble at such date

as may be most convenient for the litigants.



The tribunal shall ordinarily hold its sessions at ----; but it

shall have power to fix its place of session elsewhere, and to

change the same from time to time, as circumstances may suggest.



The fifth provision is that any power, even though not

represented in the present conference, may have recourse to the

tribunal on such terms as may be prescribed by the regulations.



Provision sixth: The government of ----is charged by the

signatory powers, on their behalf, as soon as possible after the

conclusion of this convention, to name a permanent council of

administration, at ----, composed of five members and a

secretary. This council shall organize and establish the central

office, which shall be under its control and direction. It shall

make such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the

office; it shall dispose of all questions that may arise in

relation to the working of the tribunal, or which may be referred

to it by the central office; it shall make all subordinate

appointments, may suspend or dismiss all employees, and shall fix

their salaries and control their expenditure. This council shall

select its president, who shall have a casting-vote. The

remuneration of the members shall be fixed from time to time by

accord between the signatory powers.



Provision seventh: The signatory powers agree to share among them

the expenses pertaining to the administration of the central

office and the council of administration; but the expenses

incident to every arbitration, including the remuneration of the

arbiters, shall be equally borne by the contesting powers.



From a theoretical point of view, I prefer to this our American

plan of a tribunal permanently in session: the judges, in every

particular case, to be selected from this. Thus would be provided

a court of any odd number between three and nine, as the

contesting powers may desire. But from the practical point of

view, even though the Russian plan of requiring the signatory

powers to send to the tribunal a multitude of smaller matters,

such as those connected with the postal service, etc., is carried

out, the great danger is that such a court, sitting constantly as

we propose, would, for some years, have very little to do, and

that soon we should have demagogues and feather-brained

"reformers" ridiculing them as "useless," "eating their heads

off," and "doing nothing"; that then demagogic appeals might lead

one nation after another to withdraw from an arrangement

involving large expense apparently useless; and in view of this

latter difficulty I am much inclined to think that we may, under

our amended instructions, agree to support, in its essential

features as above given, the British proposal, and, with some

reservations, the code proposed by the Russians.



Among the things named by the Russians as subjects which the

agreeing powers must submit to arbitration, are those relating to

river navigation and international canals; and this, in view of

our present difficulties in Alaska and in the matter of the

Isthmus Canal, we can hardly agree to. During the morning Sir

Julian came in and talked over our plan of arbitration as well as

his own and that submitted by Russia. He said that he had seen M.

de Staal, and that it was agreed between them that the latter

should send Sir Julian, at the first moment possible, an

amalgamation of the Russian and British plans, and this Sir

Julian promised that he would bring to us, giving us a chance to

insert any features from our own plan which, in our judgment,

might be important. He seemed much encouraged, as we all are.



Returning to our rooms, I found Count Munster. As usual, he was

very interesting; and, after discussing sundry features of the

Russian plan, he told one or two rather good stories. He said

that during his stay in St Petersburg as minister, early in the

reign of Alexander II, he had a very serious quarrel with Prince

Gortchakoff the minister of foreign affairs, who afterward became

the famous chancellor of the empire.



Count Munster had received one day from a professor at Gottingen

a letter stating that a young German savant, traveling for

scientific purposes in Russia, had been seized and treated as a

prisoner, without any proper cause whatever; that, while he was

engaged in his peaceful botanizing, a police officer, who was

taking a gang of criminals to Siberia, had come along, and one of

his prisoners having escaped, this officer, in order to avoid

censure, had seized the young savant, quietly clapped the number

of the missing man on his back, put him in with the gang of

prisoners, and carried him off along with the rest; so that he

was now held as a convict in Siberia. The count put the letter in

his pocket, thinking that he might have an opportunity to use it,

and a day or two afterward his chance came. Walking on the quay,

he met the Emperor (Alexander II), who greeted him heartily, and

said, "Let me walk with you." After walking and talking some

time, the count told the story of the young German, whereupon the

Emperor asked for proofs of its truth. At this Munster pulled the

letter out of his pocket; and, both having seated themselves on a

bench at the side of the walk, the Emperor read it. On finishing

it, the Emperor said: "Such a thing as this can happen only in

Russia." That very afternoon he sent a special police squad,

post-haste, all the way to Siberia, ordering them to find the

young German and bring him back to St. Petersburg.



Next day Count Munster called at the Foreign Office on current

business, when Gortchakoff came at him in a great rage, asking

him by what right he communicated directly with the Emperor; and

insisting that he had no business to give a letter directly to

the Emperor, that it ought to have gone through the Foreign

Office. Gortchakoff reproached the count bitterly for this

departure from elementary diplomatic etiquette. At this Munster

replied: "I gave the letter to the Emperor because he asked me

for it, and I did not give it to you because I knew perfectly

well that you would pigeonhole it and the Emperor would never

hear of it. I concede much in making any answer at all to your

talk, which seems to me of a sort not usual between gentlemen."

At this Gortchakoff was much milder, and finally almost

obsequious, becoming apparently one of Munster's devoted friends,

evidently thinking that, as Munster had gained the confidence of

the Emperor, he was a man to be cultivated.



The sequel to the story was also interesting. The policemen,

after their long journey to Siberia, found the young German and

brought him to St. Petersburg, where the Emperor received him

very cordially and gave him twenty thousand rubles as an

indemnity for the wrong done him. The young savant told Munster

that he had not been badly treated, that he had been assigned a

very pleasant little cottage, and had perfect freedom to pursue

his scientific researches.



On my talking with the count about certain Russian abuses, and

maintaining that Russia, at least in court circles, had improved

greatly under Alexander III as regarded corruption, he said that

he feared she was now going back, and he then repeated a remark

made by the old Grand Duke Michael, brother of Alexander II, who

said that if any Russian were intrusted with the official care of

a canary he would immediately set up and maintain a coach and

pair out of it.



At six o'clock our American delegation met and heard reports,

especially from Captain Mahan and Captain Crozier, with reference

to the doings in the subcommittees. Captain Mahan reported that

he had voted against forbidding asphyxiating bombs, etc.,

evidently with the idea that such a provision would prove to be

rather harmful than helpful to the cause of peace.



Captain Crozier reported that his subcommittee of committee No. 2

had, at its recent meeting, tried to take up the exemption of

private property from seizure on the high seas in time of war,

but had been declared out of order by the chairman, De Martens,

the leading Russian delegate, who seems determined to prevent the

subject coming before the conference. The question before our

American delegation now was, Shall we try to push this American

proposal before the subcommittee of the second committee, or

before the entire conference at a later period? and the general

opinion was in favor of the latter course. It was not thought

best to delay the arbitration plan by its introduction at

present.



In the evening dined with Minister Newel, and had a very

interesting talk with Van Karnebeek, who had already favorably

impressed me by his clear-headedness and straightforwardness;

also with Messrs. Asser, member of the Dutch Council of State,

and Rahusen, member of the Upper Chamber of the States General,

both of whom are influential delegates.



All three of these men spoke strongly in favor of our plan for

the exemption of private property on the high seas, Van Karnebeek

with especial earnestness. He said that, looking merely at the

material interests of the Netherlands, he might very well favor

the retention of the present system, since his country is little

likely to go into war, and is certain to profit by the carrying

trade in case of any conflict between the great powers; that, of

course, under such circumstances, a large amount of commerce

would come to Holland as a neutral power; but that it was a

question of right and of a proper development of international

law, and that he, as well as the two other gentlemen above named,

was very earnestly in favor of joint action by the powers who are

in favor of our proposal. He thought that the important thing

just now is to secure the cooperation of Germany, which seems to

be at the parting of the ways, and undecided which to take.



In the course of the evening one of my European colleagues, who

is especially familiar with the inner history of the calling of

the conference, told me that the reason why Professor Stengel was

made a delegate was not that he wrote the book in praise of war

and depreciating arbitration, which caused his appointment to be

so unfavorably commented upon, but because, as an eminent

professor of international law, he represented Bavaria; and that

as Bavaria, though represented at St. Petersburg, was not

invited, it was thought very essential that a well-known man from

that kingdom should be put into the general German delegation.



On my asking why Brazil, though represented at St. Petersburg,

was not invited, he answered that Brazil was invited, but showed

no desire to be represented. On my asking him if he supposed this

was because other South American powers were not invited, he said

that he thought not; that it was rather its own indifference and

carelessness, arising from the present unfortunate state of

government in that country. On my saying that the Emperor Dom

Pedro, in his time, would have taken the opportunity to send a

strong delegation, he said: "Yes, he certainly would have done

so; but the present government is a poor sort of thing."



I also had a talk with one of the most eminent publicists of the

Netherlands, on the questions dividing parties in this country,

telling him that I found it hard to understand the line of

cleavage between them. He answered that it is, in the main, a

line between religious conservatives and liberals; the

conservatives embracing the Roman Catholics and high orthodox

Protestants, and the liberals those of more advanced opinions. He

said that socialism plays no great part in Holland; that the

number of its representatives is very small compared with that in

many European states; that the questions on which parties divide

are mainly those in which clerical ideas are more or less

prominent; that the liberal party, if it keeps together, is much

the stronger party of the two, but that it suffers greatly from

its cliques and factions.



On returning home after dinner, I found a cipher despatch from

the Secretary of State informing us that President McKinley

thinks that our American commission ought not to urge any

proposal for "seconding powers"; that he fears lest it may block

the way of the arbitration proposals. This shows that imperfect

reports have reached the President and his cabinet. The fact is

that the proposal of "seconding powers" was warmly welcomed by

the subcommittee when it was presented; that the members very

generally telegraphed home to their governments, and at once

received orders to support it; that it was passed by a unanimous

vote of the subcommittee; and that its strongest advocates were

the men who are most in favor of an arbitration plan. So far from

injuring the prospects of arbitration, it has increased them; it

is very generally spoken of as a victory for our delegation, and

has increased respect for our country, and for anything we may

hereafter present.





June 2.



This morning we sent a cipher telegram to the Secretary of State,

embodying the facts above stated.



The shoals of telegrams, reports of proceedings of societies,

hortatory letters, crankish proposals, and peace pamphlets from

America continue. One of the telegrams which came late last night

was pathetic; it declared that three millions of Christian

Endeavorers bade us "Godspeed," etc., etc.



During the morning De Martens, Low, Holls, and myself had a very

thoroughgoing discussion of the Russian, British, and American

arbitration plans. We found the eminent Russian under very

curious misapprehensions regarding some minor points, one of them

being that he had mistaken the signification of our word

"publicist"; and we were especially surprised to find his use of

the French word "publiciste" so broad that it would include M.

Henri Rochefort, Mr. Stead, or any newspaper writer; and he was

quite as surprised to find that with us it would include only

such men as Grotius, Wheaton, Calvo, and himself.



After a long and intricate discussion we separated on very good

terms, having made, I think, decided progress toward fusing all

three arbitration plans into one which shall embody the merits of

all.



One difficulty we found, of which neither our State Department

nor ourselves had been fully aware. Our original plan required

that the judges for the arbitration tribunal should be nominated

by the highest courts of the respective nations; but De Martens

showed us that Russia has no highest court in our sense of the

word. Then, too, there is Austria-Hungary, which has two supreme

courts of equal authority. This clause, therefore, we arranged to

alter, though providing that the original might stand as regards

countries possessing supreme courts.



At lunch we had Baron de Bildt, Swedish minister at Rome and

chief of the Swedish delegation at the conference, and Baron de

Bille, Danish minister at London and chief delegate from Denmark.

De Bille declared himself averse to a permanent tribunal to be in

constant session, on the ground that, having so little to do, it

would be in danger of becoming an object of derision to the press

and peoples of the world.



We were all glad to find, upon the arrival of the London "Times,"

that our arbitration project seemed to be receiving extensive

approval, and various telegrams from America during the day

indicated the same thing.



It looks more and more as if we are to accomplish something. The

only thing in sight calculated to throw a cloud over the future

is the attitude of the German press against the whole business

here; the most virulent in its attacks being the high Lutheran

conservative--and religious!--journal in Berlin, the

"Kreuz-Zeitung." Still, it is pleasant to see that eminent

newspaper find, for a time, some other object of denunciation

than the United States.





June 3.



In the afternoon drove to Scheveningen and took tea with Count

Munster and his daughter. He was somewhat pessimistic, as usual,

but came out very strongly in favor of the American view as

regards exemption of private property on the high seas. Whether

this is really because Germany would derive profit from it, or

because she thinks this question a serviceable entering wedge

between the United States and Great Britain, there is no telling

at present. I am sorry to say that our hopes regarding it are to

be dashed, so far as the present conference is concerned. Sundry

newspaper letters and articles in the "Times" show clearly that

the English Government is strongly opposed to dealing with it

here and now; and as France and Russia take the same position,

there is no hope for any action, save such as we can take to keep

the subject alive and to secure attention to it by some future

conference.







CHAPTER XLVII



AS PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN DELEGATION AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE

OF THE HAGUE: III--1899



June 4.



We have just had an experience which "adds to the gaiety of

nations." Some days since, representatives of what is called "the

Young Turkish party" appeared and asked to be heard. They

received, generally, the cold shoulder, mainly because the

internal condition of Turkey is not one of the things which the

conference was asked to discuss; but also because there is a

suspicion that these "Young Turks" are enabled to live in luxury

at Paris by blackmailing the Sultan, and that their zeal for

reform becomes fervid whenever their funds run low, and cools

whenever a remittance comes from the Bosphorus. But at last some

of us decided to give them a hearing, informally; the main object

being to get rid of them. At the time appointed, the delegation

appeared in evening dress, and, having been ushered into the

room, the spokesman began as follows, very impressively:



"Your Excellencies, ve are ze Young Turkeys."



This was too much for most of us, and I think that, during our

whole stay at The Hague thus far, we have never undertaken

anything more difficult, physically, than to keep our faces

straight during the harangue which followed.



Later, we went with nearly all the other members of the

conference to Haarlem, in a special train, by invitation of the

burgomaster and town council, to the "Fete Hippique" and the

"Fete des Fleurs." We were treated very well indeed, refreshments

being served on the grand stand during the performances, which

consisted of hurdle races, etc., for which I cared nothing,

followed by a procession of peasants in old chaises of various

periods, and in the costumes of the various provinces of the

Netherlands, which interested me much. The whole closed with a

long train of fine equipages superbly decorated with flowers.



Discussing the question of the immunity of private property, not

contraband of war, on the high seas, I find that the main

argument which our opponents are now using is that, even if the

principle were conceded, new and troublesome questions would

arise as to what really constitutes contraband of war; that ships

themselves would undoubtedly be considered as contraband, since

they can be used in conveying troops, coal, supplies, etc.





June 5.



Having given up the morning of the 5th mainly to work on plans of

arbitration, mediation, and the like, I went to the meeting, at

the "House in the Wood," of the third great committee of the

conference--namely, that on arbitration.



The session went off satisfactorily, our duty being to pass upon

the report from the subcommittee which had put the various

propositions into shape for our discussion. The report was

admirably presented by M. Descamps, and, after considerable

discussion of details, was adopted in all essential features. The

matters thus discussed and accepted for presentation to the

conference as a whole related:



(1) To a plan for tendering "good offices."



(2) To a plan for examining into international differences.



(3) To the "special mediation" plan.



The last was exceedingly well received, and our delegation has

obtained much credit for it. It is the plan of allowing any two

nations drifting into war to appoint "seconding nations," who,

like "seconds" in a duel, shall attempt to avert the conflict;

and, if this be unsuccessful, shall continue acting in the same

capacity, and endeavor to arrest the conflict at the earliest

moment possible.



Very general good feeling was shown, and much encouragement

derived from the fact that these preliminary matters could be

dealt with in so amicable and business-like a spirit.



Before the meeting I took a long walk in the garden back of the

palace with various gentlemen, among them Mr. van Karnebeek, who

discussed admirably with me the question of the exemption of

private property from seizure on the high seas. He agreed with me

that even if the extreme doctrine now contended for--namely, that

which makes ships, coal, provisions, and very nearly everything

else, contraband--be pressed, still a first step, such as the

exemption of private property from seizure, would be none the

less wise, leaving the subordinate questions to be dealt with as

they arise.



I afterward called with Dr. Holls at the house of the burgomaster

of The Hague, and thanked him for his kindness in tendering us

the concert last Saturday, and for various other marks of

consideration.



On the whole, matters continue to look encouraging as regards

both mediation and arbitration.





June 6.



In the morning Sir Julian Pauncefote called, and again went over

certain details in the American, British, and Russian plans of

arbitration, discussing some matters to be stricken out and

others to be inserted. He declared his readiness to strike out a

feature of his plan to which from the first, I have felt a very

great objection--namely, that which, after the tribunal is

constituted, allows the contesting parties to call into it and

mix with it persons simply chosen by the contestants ad hoc. This

seems to me a dilution of the idea of a permanent tribunal, and a

means of delay and of complications which may prove unfortunate.

It would certainly be said that if the contestants were to be

allowed to name two or more judges from outside the tribunal,

they might just as well nominate all, and thus save the expense

attendant upon a regularly constituted international court chosen

by the various governments.



Later in the day I wrote a private letter to the Secretary of

State suggesting that our American delegation be authorized to

lay a wreath of silver and gold upon the tomb of Grotius at

Delft, not only as a tribute to the man who set in motion the

ideas which, nearly three hundred years later, have led to the

assembling of this conference, but as an indication of our

gratitude to the Netherlands Government for its hospitality and

the admirable provision it has made for our work here, and also

as a sign of good-will toward the older governments of the world

on the occasion of their first meeting with delegates from the

new world, in a conference treating of matters most important to

all nations.



In the evening to Mr. van Karnebeek's reception, and there met

Mr. Raffalovitch, one of the Russian secretaries of the

conference, who, as councilor of the Russian Empire and

corresponding member of the French Institute, has a European

reputation, and urged him to aid in striking out the clause in

the plan which admits judges other than those of the court. My

hope is that it will disappear in the subcommittee and not come

up in the general meeting of the third great committee.





June 8.



The American delegation in the afternoon discussed at length the

proposals relating to the Brussels Conference rules for the more

humane carrying on of war. Considerable difference of opinion has

arisen in the section of the conference in which the preliminary

debates are held, and Captain Crozier, our representative, has

been in some doubt as to the ground to be taken between these

opposing views. On one side are those who think it best to go at

considerable length into more or less minute restrictions upon

the conduct of invaders and invaded. On the other side, M.

Bernaert of Belgium, one of the two most eminent men from that

country, and others, take the ground that it would be better to

leave the whole matter to the general development of humanity in

international law. M. de Martens insists that now is the time to

settle the matter, rather than leave it to individuals who, in

time of war, are likely to be more or less exasperated by

accounts of atrocities and to have no adequate time for deciding

upon a policy. After considerable discussion by our delegation,

the whole matter went over.



In the evening to a great reception at the house of Sir Henry

Howard, British minister at this court. It was very brilliant,

and the whole afforded an example of John Bull's good sense in

providing for his representatives abroad, and enabling them to

exercise a social influence on the communities where they are

stationed, which rapidly becomes a political influence with the

governments to which they are accredited. Sir Henry is provided

with a large, attractive house, means to entertain amply, and has

been kept in the service long enough to know everybody and to

become experienced in the right way of getting at the men he

wishes to influence, and of doing the things his government needs

to have done. Throughout the whole world this is John Bull's wise

way of doing things. At every capital I have visited, including

Washington, Constantinople, St. Petersburg, Rome, Paris, Berlin,

and Vienna, the British representative is a man who has been

selected with reference to his fitness, kept in the service long

enough to give him useful experience, and provided with a good,

commodious house and the means to exercise social and, therefore,

political influence. The result is that, although, in every

country in the world, orators and editors are always howling at

John Bull, he everywhere has his way: to use our vernacular, he

"gets there," and can laugh in his sleeve at the speeches against

him in public bodies, and at the diatribes against him in

newspapers. The men who are loudest in such attacks are generally

the most delighted to put their legs under the British

ambassador's mahogany, or to take their daughters to his

receptions and balls, and then quietly to follow the general line

of conduct which he favors.





June 9.



In the morning an interesting visit from M. de Staal, president

of the conference. We discussed arbitration plans, Brussels rules

and Geneva rules, and, finally, our social debts to the Dutch

authorities.



As to the general prospects of arbitration, he expressed the

belief that we can, by amalgamating the British, Russian, and

American plans, produce a good result



During the day, many members of the conference having gone to

Rotterdam to see the welcoming of the Queen in that city, I took

up, with especial care, the Brussels rules for the conduct of

war, and the amendments of them now proposed in the conference,

some of which have provoked considerable debate. The more I read

the proposals now made, the more admirable most of them seem to

be, and the more it seems to me that we ought, with a few

exceptions, to adopt them. Great Britain declines to sanction

them as part of international law, but still agrees to adopt them

as a general basis for her conduct in time of war; and even this

would be a good thing for us, if we cannot induce our government

to go to the length of making them fully binding.



At six o'clock Dr. Holls, who represents us upon the subcommittee

on arbitration, came in with most discouraging news. It now

appears that the German Emperor is determined to oppose the whole

scheme of arbitration, and will have nothing to do with any plan

for a regular tribunal, whether as given in the British or the

American scheme. This news comes from various sources, and is

confirmed by the fact that, in the subcommittee, one of the

German delegates, Professor Zorn of Konigsberg, who had become

very earnest in behalf of arbitration, now says that he may not

be able to vote for it. There are also signs that the German

Emperor is influencing the minds of his allies--the sovereigns of

Austria, Italy, Turkey, and Roumania--leading them to oppose it.



Curiously enough, in spite of this, Count Nigra, the Italian

ambassador at Vienna and head of the Italian delegation, made a

vigorous speech showing the importance of the work in which the

committee is engaged, urging that the plan be perfected, and

seeming to indicate that he will go on with the representatives

who favor it. This, coming from perhaps the most earnest ally of

Germany, is noteworthy.



At the close of the session Sir Julian Pauncefote informed Dr.

Holls that he was about to telegraph his government regarding the

undoubted efforts of the German Emperor upon the sovereigns above

named, and I decided to cable our State Department, informing

them fully as to this change in the condition of affairs.



At eight went to the dinner of our minister, Mr. Newel and found

there three ambassadors, De Staal, Munster, and Pauncefote, as

well as M. Leon Bourgeois, president of the French delegation;

Sir Henry Howard, the British minister; Baron de Bildt, the

Swedish minister; and some leading Netherlands statesmen. Had a

long talk with M. de Staal and with Sir Julian Pauncefote

regarding the state of things revealed this afternoon in the

subcommittee on arbitration. M. de Staal has called a meeting of

the heads of delegations for Saturday afternoon. Both he and Sir

Julian are evidently much vexed by the unfortunate turn things

have taken. The latter feels, as I do, that the only thing to be

done is to go on and make the plan for arbitration as perfect as

possible, letting those of the powers who are willing to do so

sign it. I assured him and De Staal that we of the United States

would stand by them to the last in the matter.



Late in the evening went to a reception of M. de Beaufort, the

Netherlands minister of foreign affairs, and discussed current

matters with various people, among them Count Nigra, whom I

thanked for his eloquent speech in the afternoon, and Baron de

Bildt, who feels as I do, that the right thing for us is to go

on, no matter who falls away.





June 10.



This morning I gave to studies of the various reports sent in

from the subcommittees, especially those on arbitration and on

the Brussels Conference rules. Both have intensely interested me,

my main attention being, of course, centered on the former; but

the Brussels rules seem to me of much greater importance now than

at first, and my hope is that we shall not only devise a good

working plan of arbitration, but greatly humanize the laws of

war.



At four o'clock in the afternoon met the four other ambassadors

and two or three other heads of delegations, at the rooms of M.

de Staal, to discuss the question of relaxing the rules of

secrecy as regards the proceedings of committees, etc. The whole

original Russian plan of maintaining absolute secrecy has

collapsed, just as the representatives from constitutional

countries in the beginning said it would. Every day there are

published minute accounts in Dutch, French, and English journals

which show that, in some way, their representatives obtain enough

information to enable them, with such additional things as they

can imagine, to make readable reports. The result is that various

gentlemen in the conference who formerly favored a policy of

complete secrecy find themselves credited with speeches which

they did not make, and which they dislike to be considered

capable of making.



After a great deal of talk, it was decided to authorize the

chairman of each committee to give to the press complete reports,

so far as possible, keeping in the background the part taken by

individuals.



At six the American delegation met, and the subject of our

instructions regarding the presentation of the American view of

the immunity of private property on the high seas in time of war

was taken up. It was decided to ask some of the leading

supporters of this view to meet us at luncheon at 12.30 on

Monday, in order to discuss the best way of overcoming the

Russian plan of suppressing the matter, and to concert means for

getting the whole subject before the full conference.





June 11.



Instead of going to hear the Bishop of Hereford preach on

"Peace," I walked with Dr. Holls to Scheveningen, four miles, to

work off a nervous headache and to invite Count Munster to our

luncheon on Monday, when we purpose to take counsel together

regarding private property on the high seas. He accepted, but was

out of humor with nearly all the proceedings of the conference.

He is more than ever opposed to arbitration, and declares that,

in view of the original Russian programme under which we were

called to meet, we have no right to take it up at all, since it

was not mentioned. He was decidedly pessimistic regarding the

continuance of the sessions, asking me when I thought it would

all end; and on my answering that I had not the slightest idea,

he said that he was entirely in the dark on the subject; that

nobody could tell how long it would last, or how it would break

off.





June 12.



At half-past twelve came our American luncheon to Count Munster,

Mr. van Karnebeek, and Baron de Bildt, each of whom is at the

head of his delegation,--our purpose being to discuss with them

the best manner of getting the subject of immunity of private

property at sea, not contraband, before the conference, these

gentlemen being especially devoted to such a measure.



All went off very well, full interchange of views took place, and

the general opinion was that the best way would be for us, as the

only delegation instructed on the subject, to draw up a formal

memorial asking that the question be brought before the

conference, and sending this to M. de Staal as our president.



Curious things came out during our conversation Baron de Bildt

informed me that, strongly as he favored the measure, and

prepared as he was to vote for it, he should have to be very

careful in discussing it publicly, since his instructions were to

avoid, just as far as possible, any clash between the opinions

expressed by the Swedish representatives and those of the great

powers. Never before have I so thoroughly realized the difficult

position which the lesser powers in Europe hold as regards really

serious questions.



More surprising was the conversation of Count Munster, he being

on one side of me and Mr. van Karnebeek on the other. Bearing in

mind that the Emperor William during his long talk with me just

before I left Berlin in referring to the approaching Peace

Congress had said that he was sending Count Munster because what

the conference would most need would be "common sense," and

because, in his opinion, Count Munster had "lots of it," some of

the count's utterances astonished me. He now came out, as he did

the day before in his talk with me, utterly against arbitration,

declaring it a "humbug," and that we had no right to consider it,

since it was not mentioned in the first proposals from Russia,

etc., etc.



A little later, something having been said about telegraphs and

telephones, he expressed his belief that they are a curse as

regards the relations between nations; that they interfere with

diplomacy, and do more harm than good. This did not especially

surprise me, for I had heard the same opinions uttered by others;

but what did surprise me greatly was to hear him say, when the

subject of bacteria and microbes was casually mentioned, that

they were "all a modern humbug."



It is clear that, with all his fine qualities,--and he is really

a splendid specimen of an old-fashioned German nobleman devoted

to the diplomatic service of his country, --he is saturated with

the ideas of fifty years ago.



Returning from a drive to Scheveningen with Major Burbank of the

United States army, I sketched the first part of a draft for a

letter from our delegation to M. de Staal, and at our meeting at

six presented it, when it met with general approval. President

Low had also sketched a draft which it was thought could be

worked very well into the one which I had offered, and so we two

were made a subcommittee to prepare the letter in full.





June 13.



This morning come more disquieting statements regarding Germany.

There seems no longer any doubt that the German Emperor is

opposing arbitration, and, indeed, the whole work of the

conference, and that he will insist on his main allies, Austria

and Italy, going with him. Count Nigra, who is personally devoted

to arbitration, allowed this in talking with Dr. Holls; and the

German delegates--all of whom, with the exception of Count

Munster, are favorably inclined to a good arbitration plan--show

that they are disappointed.



I had learned from a high imperial official, before I left

Berlin, that the Emperor considered arbitration as derogatory to

his sovereignty, and I was also well aware, from his

conversation, that he was by no means in love with the conference

idea; but, in view of his speech at Wiesbaden, and the petitions

which had come in to him from Bavaria, I had hoped that he had

experienced a "change of heart."



Possibly he might have changed his opinion had not Count Munster

been here, reporting to him constantly against every step taken

by the conference.



There seems danger of a catastrophe. Those of us who are faithful

to arbitration plans will go on and do the best we can; but there

is no telling what stumbling-blocks Germany and her allies may

put in our way; and, of course, the whole result, without their

final agreement, will seem to the world a failure and, perhaps, a

farce.



The immediate results will be that the Russian Emperor will

become an idol of the "plain people" throughout the world, the

German Emperor will be bitterly hated, and the socialists, who

form the most dreaded party on the continent of Europe, will be

furnished with a thoroughly effective weapon against their

rulers.



Some days since I said to a leading diplomatist here, "The

ministers of the German Emperor ought to tell him that, should he

oppose arbitration, there will be concentrated upon him an amount

of hatred which no minister ought to allow a sovereign to incur."

To this he answered, "That is true; but there is not a minister

in Germany who dares tell him."





June 14.



This noon our delegation gave a breakfast to sundry members of

the conference who are especially interested in an effective plan

of arbitration, the principal of these being Count Nigra from

Italy; Count Welsersheimb, first delegate of Austria; M. Descamps

of Belgium; Baron d'Estournelles of France; and M. Asser of the

Netherlands. After some preliminary talk, I read to them the

proposal, which Sir Julian had handed me in the morning, for the

purpose of obviating the objection to the council of

administration in charge of the court of arbitration here in The

Hague, which was an important feature of his original plan, but

which had been generally rejected as involving expensive

machinery. His proposal now is that, instead of a council

specially appointed and salaried to watch over and provide for

the necessities of the court, such council shall simply be made

up of the ministers of sundry powers residing here,--thus doing

away entirely with the trouble and expense of a special council.



This I amended by adding the Netherlands minister of foreign

affairs as ex-officio president, there being various reasons for

this, and among these the fact that, without some such provision,

the Netherlands would have no representative in the council.



The plan and my amendment were well received, and I trust that

our full and friendly discussion of these and various matters

connected with them will produce a good effect in the committees.



Count Nigra expressed himself to me as personally most earnestly

in favor of arbitration, but it was clear that his position was

complicated by the relations of his country to Germany as one of

the Triple Alliance; and the same difficulty was observable in

the case of Count Welsersheimb, the representative of Austria,

the third ally in the combination of which Germany is the head.



In the course of our breakfast, Baron d'Estournelles made a

statement which I think impressed every person present. It was

that, as he was leaving Paris, Jaures, the famous socialist, whom

he knows well, said to him, "Go on; do all you can at The Hague,

but you will labor in vain: you can accomplish nothing there,

your schemes will fail, and we shall triumph," or words to that

effect. So clear an indication as this of the effect which a

failure of the conference to produce a good scheme of arbitration

will have in promoting the designs of the great international

socialist and anarchist combinations cannot fail to impress every

thinking man.



Dined in the evening with the French minister at this court, and

very pleasantly. There were present M. Leon Bourgeois, the French

first delegate, and the first delegates from Japan, China,

Mexico, and Turkey, with subordinate delegates from other

countries. Sitting next the lady at the right of the host, I

found her to be the wife of the premier, M. Piersoon, minister of

finance, and very agreeable. I took in to dinner Madame Behrends,

wife of the Russian charge, evidently a very thoughtful and

accomplished woman, who was born, as she told me, of English

parents in the city of New York when her father and mother were

on their way to England. I found her very interesting, and her

discussions of Russia, as well as of England and the Netherlands,

especially good.



In the smoking-room I had a long talk with M. Leon Bourgeois,

who, according to the papers, is likely to be appointed minister

of foreign affairs in the new French cabinet. He dwelt upon the

difficulties of any plan for a tribunal, but seemed ready to do

what he could for the compromise plan, which is all that, during

some time past, we have hoped to adopt.





June 15.



Early this morning Count Munster called, wishing to see me

especially, and at once plunged into the question of the immunity

of private property from seizure on the high seas. He said that

he had just received instructions from his government to join us

heartily in bringing the question before the conference; that his

government, much as it inclines to favor the principle, could not

yet see its way to commit itself fully; that its action must, of

course, depend upon the conduct of other powers in the matter, as

foreshadowed by discussions in the conference, but that he was to

aid us in bringing it up.



I told him I was now preparing a draft of a memorial to the

conference giving the reasons why the subject ought to be

submitted, and that he should have it as soon as completed.



This matter being for the time disposed of, we took up the state

of the arbitration question, and the consequences of opposition

by Germany and her two allies to every feasible plan.



He was very much in earnest, and declared especially against

compulsory arbitration. To this I answered that the plan thus far

adopted contemplated entirely voluntary arbitration, with the

exception that an obligatory system was agreed upon as regards

sundry petty matters in which arbitration would assist all the

states concerned; and that if he disliked this latter feature,

but would agree to the others, we would go with him in striking

it out, though we should vastly prefer to retain it.



He said, "Yes; you have already stricken out part of it in the

interest of the United States," referring to the features

concerning the Monroe Doctrine, the regulation of canals, rivers,

etc.



"Very true," I answered; "and if there are any special features

which affect unfavorably German policy or interests, move to

strike them out, and we will heartily support you."



He then dwelt in his usual manner on his special hobby, which is

that modern nations are taking an entirely false route in

preventing the settlement of their difficulties by trained

diplomatists, and intrusting them to arbitration by men

inexperienced in international matters, who really cannot be

unprejudiced or uninfluenced; and he spoke with especial contempt

of the plan for creating a bureau, composed, as he said, of

university professors and the like, to carry on the machinery of

the tribunal.



Here I happened to have a trump card. I showed him Sir Julian

Pauncefote's plan to substitute a council composed of all the

ministers of the signatory powers residing at The Hague, with my

amendment making the Dutch minister of foreign affairs its

president. This he read and said he liked it; in fact, it seemed

to remove a mass of prejudice from his mind.



I then spoke very earnestly to him--more so than ever

before--about the present condition of affairs. I told him that

the counselors in whom the Emperor trusted--such men as himself

and the principal advisers of his Majesty--ought never to allow

their young sovereign to be exposed to the mass of hatred,

obloquy, and opposition which would converge upon him from all

nations in case he became known to the whole world as the

sovereign who had broken down the conference and brought to

naught the plan of arbitration. I took the liberty of telling him

what the Emperor said to me regarding the count himself--namely,

that what the conference was most likely to need was good common

sense, and that he was sending Count Munster because he possessed

that. This seemed to please him, and I then went on to say that

he of all men ought to prevent, by all means, placing the young

Emperor in such a position. I dwelt on the gifts and graces of

the young sovereign, expressed my feeling of admiration for his

noble ambitions, for his abilities, for the statesmanship he had

recently shown, for his grasp of public affairs, and for his way

of conciliating all classes, and then dwelt on the pity of making

such a monarch an object of hatred in all parts of the world.



He seemed impressed by this, but said the calling of the

conference was simply a political trick--the most detestable

trick ever practised. It was done, he said mainly to embarrass

Germany, to glorify the young Russian Emperor, and to put Germany

and nations which Russia dislikes into a false position. To this

I answered, "If this be the case, why not trump the Russian

trick? or, as the poker-players say, 'Go them one better,' take

them at their word, support a good tribunal of arbitration more

efficient even than the Russians have dared to propose; let your

sovereign throw himself heartily into the movement and become a

recognized leader and power here; we will all support him, and to

him will come the credit of it.



"Then, in addition to this, support us as far as you can as

regards the immunity of private property on the high seas, and

thus you will gain another great point; for, owing to her

relations to France, Russia has not dared commit herself to this

principle as otherwise she doubtless would have done, but, on the

contrary, has opposed any consideration of it by the conference.



"Next, let attention be called to the fact--and we will gladly

aid in making the world fully aware of it--that Germany, through

you, has constantly urged the greatest publicity of our

proceedings, while certain other powers have insisted on secrecy

until secrecy has utterly broken down, and then have made the

least concession possible. In this way you will come out of the

conference triumphant, and the German Emperor will be looked upon

as, after all, the arbiter of Europe. Everybody knows that France

has never wished arbitration, and that Russian statesmen are

really, at heart, none too ardent for it. Come forward, then, and

make the matter thoroughly your own; and, having done this,

maintain your present attitude strongly as regards the two other

matters above named,--that is, the immunity from seizure of

private property on the high seas, and the throwing open of our

proceedings,--and the honors of the whole conference is yours."



He seemed impressed by all this, and took a different tone from

any which has been noted in him since we came together. I then

asked him if he had heard Baron d'Estournelles's story. He said

that he had not. I told it to him, as given in my diary

yesterday; and said, "You see there what the failure to obtain a

result which is really so much longed for by all the peoples of

the world will do to promote the designs of the socialistic

forces which are so powerful in all parts of the Continent, and

nowhere more so than in Germany and the nations allied with her."



This, too, seemed to impress him. I then went on to say, "This is

not all. By opposing arbitration, you not only put a club into

the hands of socialists, anarchists, and all the other

anti-social forces, but you alienate the substantial middle class

and the great body of religious people in all nations. You have

no conception of the depth of feeling on this subject which

exists in my own country, to say nothing of others; and if

Germany stands in the way, the distrust of her which Americans

have felt, and which as minister and ambassador at Berlin I have

labored so hard to dispel, will be infinitely increased. It will

render more and more difficult the maintenance of proper

relations between the two countries. Your sovereign will be

looked upon as the enemy of all nations, and will be exposed to

every sort of attack and calumny, while the young Emperor of

Russia will become a popular idol throughout the world, since he

will represent to the popular mind, and even to the minds of

great bodies of thinking and religious people, the effort to

prevent war and to solve public questions as much as possible

without bloodshed; while the Emperor of Germany will represent to

their minds the desire to solve all great questions by force.

Mind, I don't say this is a just view: I only say that it is the

view sure to be taken, and that by resisting arbitration here you

are playing the game of Russia, as you yourself have stated

it--that is, you are giving Russia the moral support of the whole

world at the expense of the neighboring powers, and above all of

Germany."



I then took up an argument which, it is understood, has had much

influence with the Emperor,--namely, that arbitration must be in

derogation of his sovereignty,--and asked, "How can any such

derogation be possible? Your sovereign would submit only such

questions to the arbitration tribunal as he thought best; and,

more than all that, you have already committed yourselves to the

principle. You are aware that Bismarck submitted the question of

the Caroline Islands for arbitration to the Pope, and the first

Emperor William consented to act as arbiter between the United

States and Great Britain in the matter of the American

northwestern boundary. How could arbitration affect the true

position of the sovereign? Take, for example, matters as they now

stand between Germany and the United States. There is a vast mass

of petty questions which constantly trouble the relations between

the two countries. These little questions embitter debates,

whether in your Reichstag on one hand, or in our Congress on the

other, and make the position of the Berlin and Washington

governments especially difficult. The American papers attack me

because I yield too much to Germany, the German papers attack Von

Bulow because he yields too much to America, and these little

questions remain. If Von Bulow and I were allowed to sit down and

settle them, we could do so at short notice; but behind him

stands the Reichstag, and behind our Secretary of State and

myself stands the American Congress."



I referred to such questions as the tonnage dues, the additional

tariff on bounty-promoted sugar, Samoa, the most-favored-nation

clause, in treaties between Germany and the United States, in

relation to the same clause in sundry treaties between the United

States and other powers, and said, "What a blessing it would be

if all these questions, of which both governments are tired, and

which make the more important questions constantly arising

between the two countries so difficult to settle, could be sent

at once to a tribunal and decided one way or the other! In

themselves they amount to little. It is not at all unlikely that

most of them--possibly all of them--would be decided in favor of

Germany; but the United States would acquiesce at once in the

decision by a tribunal such as is proposed. And this is just what

would take place between Germany and other nations. A mass of

vexatious questions would be settled by the tribunal, and the

sovereign and his government would thus be relieved from

parliamentary chicanery based, not upon knowledge, but upon party

tactics or personal grudges or inherited prejudices."



He seemed now more inclined to give weight to these

considerations, and will, I hope, urge his government to take a

better view than that which for some time past has seemed to be

indicated by the conduct of its representatives here.



In the afternoon I went to the five-o'clock tea of the Baroness

d'Estournelles, found a great crowd there, including the leading

delegates, and all anxious as to the conduct of Germany. Meeting

the Baroness von Suttner who has been writing such earnest books

in behalf of peace, I urged her to write with all her might to

influence public prints in Austria, Italy, and Germany in behalf

of arbitration, telling her that we are just arriving at the

parting of the ways, and that everything possible must be done

now, or all may be lost. To this she responded very heartily, and

I have no doubt will use her pen with much effect.



In the evening went to a great reception at the house of the

Austrian ambassador, M. Okolicsanyi. There was a crush. Had a

long talk with Mr. Stead, telling him D'Estournelles's story, and

urging him to use it in every way to show what a boon the failure

of arbitration would be to the anti-social forces in all parts of

Europe.



In the intervals during the day I busied myself in completing the

memorial to the conference regarding the immunity from seizure of

private property at sea. If we cannot secure it now, we must at

least pave the way for its admission by a future international

conference.







CHAPTER XLVIII



AS PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN DELEGATION AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE

OF THE HAGUE: IV--1899



June 16. This morning Count Munster called and seemed much

excited by the fact that he had received a despatch from Berlin

in which the German Government--which, of course, means the

Emperor--had strongly and finally declared against everything

like an arbitration tribunal. He was clearly disconcerted by this

too literal acceptance of his own earlier views, and said that he

had sent to M. de Staal insisting that the meeting of the

subcommittee on arbitration, which had been appointed for this

day (Friday), should be adjourned on some pretext until next

Monday; "for," said he, "if the session takes place to-day, Zorn

must make the declaration in behalf of Germany which these new

instructions order him to make, and that would be a misfortune."

I was very glad to see this evidence of change of heart in the

count, and immediately joined him in securing the adjournment he

desired. The meeting of the subcommittee has therefore been

deferred, the reason assigned, as I understand, being that Baron

d'Estournelles is too much occupied to be present at the time

first named. Later Count Munster told me that he had decided to

send Professor Zorn to Berlin at once in order to lay the whole

matter before the Foreign Office and induce the authorities to

modify the instructions. I approved this course strongly,

whereupon he suggested that I should do something to the same

purpose, and this finally ended in the agreement that Holls

should go with Zorn.



In view of the fact that Von Bulow had agreed that the German

delegates should stand side by side with us in the conference, I

immediately prepared a letter of introduction and a personal

letter to Bulow for Holls to take, and he started about five in

the afternoon. This latter is as follows:                         

                   

(Copy.) (Personal.)



                                               June 16, 1899

DEAR BARON VON BULOW:



I trust that, in view of the kindly relations which exist between

us, succeeding as they do similar relations begun twenty years

ago with your honored father, you will allow me to write you

informally, but fully and frankly, regarding the interests of

both our governments in the peace conference. The relations

between your delegates and ours have, from the first, been of the

kindest; your assurances on this point have been thoroughly

carried out. But we seem now to be at "the parting of the ways,"

and on the greatest question submitted to us,--the greatest, as I

believe, that any conference or any congress has taken up in our

time,--namely, the provision for a tribunal of arbitration.



It is generally said here that Germany is opposed to the whole

thing, that she is utterly hostile to anything like arbitration,

and that she will do all in her power, either alone or through

her allies, to thwart every feasible plan of providing for a

tribunal which shall give some hope to the world of settling some

of the many difficulties between nations otherwise than by

bloodshed.



No rational man here expects all wars to be ended by anything

done here; no one proposes to submit to any such tribunal

questions involving the honor of any nation or the inviolability

of its territory, or any of those things which nations feel

instinctively must be reserved for their own decision. Nor does

any thinking man here propose obligatory arbitration in any case,

save, possibly, in sundry petty matters where such arbitration

would be a help to the ordinary administration of all

governments; and, even as to these, they can be left out of the

scheme if your government seriously desires it.



The great thing is that there be a provision made or easily

calling together a court of arbitration which shall be seen of

all nations, indicate a sincere desire to promote peace, and, in

some measure, relieve the various peoples of the fear which so

heavily oppresses them all--the dread of an outburst of war at

any moment.



I note that it has been believed by many that the motives of

Russia in proposing this conference were none too good,--indeed,

that they were possibly perfidious; but, even if this be granted,

how does this affect the conduct of Germany? Should it not rather

lead Germany to go forward boldly and thoughtfully, to accept the

championship of the idea of arbitration, and to take the lead in

the whole business here?



Germany, if she will do this, will certainly stand before the

whole world as the leading power of Europe; for she can then say

to the whole world that she has taken the proposal of Russia au

serieux; has supported a thoroughly good plan of arbitration; has

done what Russia and France have not been willing to do,--favored

the presentation to the conference of a plan providing for the

immunity of private property from seizure on the high seas during

war,--and that while, as regards the proceedings of the

conference, Russia has wished secrecy, Germany has steadily, from

the first, promoted frankness and openness.



With these three points in your favor, you can stand before the

whole world as the great Continental power which has stood up f

or peace as neither Russia nor France has been able to do. On the

other hand, if you do not do this, if you put a stumbling-block

in the way of arbitration, what results? The other powers will go

on and create as good a tribunal as possible, and whatever

failure may come will be imputed to Germany and to its Emperor.

In any case, whether failure or success may come, the Emperor of

Russia will be hailed in all parts of the world as a deliverer

and, virtually, as a saint, while there will be a wide-spread

outburst of hatred against the German Emperor.



And this will come not alone from the anti-social forces which

are hoping that the conference may fail, in order that thereby

they may have a new weapon in their hands, but it will also come

from the middle and substantial classes of other nations.



It is sure to make the relations between Germany and the United

States, which have been of late improving infinitely more bitter

than they have ever before been and it is no less sure to provoke

the most bitter hatred of the German monarchy in nearly all other

nations.



Should his advisers permit so noble and so gifted a sovereign to

incur this political storm of obloquy, this convergence of hatred

upon him? Should a ruler of such noble ambitions and such

admirable powers be exposed to this? I fully believe that he

should not, and that his advisers should beg him not to place

himself before the world as the antagonist of a plan to which

millions upon millions in all parts of the world are devoted.



From the United States come evidences of a feeling wide-spread

and deep on this subject beyond anything I have ever known. This

very morning I received a prayer set forth by the most

conservative of all Protestant religious bodies--namely, the

American branch of the Anglican Church--to be said in all

churches, begging the Almighty to favor the work of the peace

conference; and this is what is going on in various other

American churches, and in vast numbers of households. Something

of the same sort is true in Great Britain and, perhaps in many

parts of the Continent.



Granted that expectations are overwrought, still this fact

indicates that here is a feeling which cannot be disregarded.



Moreover, to my certain knowledge, within a month, a leading

socialist in France has boasted to one of the members of this

conference that it would end in failure; that the monarchs and

governments of Europe do not wish to diminish bloodshed; that

they would refuse to yield to the desire of the peoples for

peace, and that by the resentment thus aroused a new path to

victory would be open to socialism.



Grant, too, that this is overstated, still such a declaration is

significant.



I know it has been said that arbitration is derogatory to

sovereignty. I really fail to see how this can be said in

Germany. Germany has already submitted a great political question

between herself and Spain to arbitration, and the Emperor William

I was himself the arbiter between the United States and Great

Britain in the matter of our northwestern boundary.



Bear in mind again that it is only VOLUNTARY arbitration that is

proposed, and that it will always rest with the German Emperor to

decide what questions he will submit to the tribunal and what he

will not.



It has also been said that arbitration proceedings would give the

enemies of Germany time to put themselves in readiness for war;

but if this be feared in any emergency, the Emperor and his

government are always free to mobilize the German army at once.



As you are aware, what is seriously proposed here now, in the way

of arbitration, is not a tribunal constantly in session, but a

system under which each of the signatory powers shall be free to

choose, for a limited time, from an international court, say two

or more judges who can go to The Hague if their services are

required, but to be paid only while actually in session here;

such payment to be made by the litigating parties.



As to the machinery, the plan is that there shall be a dignified

body composed of the diplomatic representatives of the various

signatory powers, to sit at The Hague, presided over by the

Netherlands minister of foreign affairs, and to select and to

control such secretaries and officers as may be necessary for the

ordinary conduct of affairs.



Such council would receive notice from powers having differences

with each other which are willing to submit the questions between

them to a court, and would then give notice to the judges

selected by the parties. The whole of the present plan, except

some subordinate features of little account, which can easily be

stricken out, is voluntary. There is nothing whatever obligatory

about it. Every signatory power is free to resort to such a

tribunal or not, as it may think best. Surely a concession like

this may well be made to the deep and wide sentiment throughout

the world in favor of some possible means of settling

controversies between nations other than by bloodshed.



Pardon me for earnestly pressing upon you these facts and

considerations. I beg that you will not consider me as going

beyond my province. I present them to you as man to man, not only

in the interest of good relations between Germany and the United

States, but of interests common to all the great nations of the

earth,--of their common interest in giving something like

satisfaction to a desire so earnest and wide-spread as that which

has been shown in all parts of the world for arbitration.



I remain, dear Baron von Bulow,

Most respectfully and sincerely yours,

                (Sgd.) ANDREW D. WHITE.





P. S. Think how easily, if some such tribunal existed, your

government and mine could refer to it the whole mass of minor

questions which our respective parliamentary bodies have got

control of, and entangled in all sorts of petty prejudices and

demagogical utterances; for instance, Samoa, the tonnage dues,

the sugar-bounty question, the most-favored-nation clause, etc.,

etc., which keep the two countries constantly at loggerheads. Do

you not see that submission of such questions to such a tribunal

as is now proposed, so far from being derogatory to sovereignty,

really relieves the sovereign and the Foreign Office of the most

vexatious fetters and limitations of parliamentarianism. It is

not at all unlikely that such a court would decide in your favor;

and if so, every thoughtful American would say, "Well and good;

it appears that, in spite of all the speeches in Congress, we

were wrong." And the matter would then be ended with the

good-will of all parties.                     

(Sgd.) A.D.W.





It is indeed a crisis in the history of the conference, and

perhaps in the history of Germany. I can only hope that Bulow

will give careful attention to the considerations which Munster

and myself press upon him.



Later in the day Sir Julian Pauncefote called, evidently much

vexed that the sitting of the subcommittee had been deferred, and

even more vexed since he had learned from De Staal the real

reason. He declared that he was opposed to stringing out the

conference much longer; that the subcommittee could get along

perfectly well without Dr. Zorn; that if Germany did not wish to

come in, she could keep out; etc., etc. He seemed to forget that

Germany's going out means the departure of Austria and Italy, to

say nothing of one or two minor powers, and therefore the

bringing to naught of the conference. I did not think it best to

say anything about Molls's departure, but soothed him as much as

I could by dwelling on the success of his proposal that the

permanent council here shall be composed of the resident

diplomatic representatives.



The other members of our commission, and especially President


Low, were at first very much opposed to Dr. Holls's going, on the

ground that it might be considered an interference in a matter

pertaining to Germany; but I persisted in sending him, agreeing

to take all the responsibility, and declaring that he should go

simply as a messenger from me, as the American ambassador at

Berlin, to the imperial minister of foreign affairs.



June 17.



The morning was given largely to completing my draft of our

memorial to the conference regarding the immunity of private

property in time of war from seizure on the high seas.



In the afternoon drove to Scheveningen to make sundry official

visits, and in the evening to the great festival given by the

Netherlands Government to the conference.



Its first feature was a series of tableaux representing some of

the most famous pictures in the Dutch galleries the most

successful of all being Rembrandt's "Night Watch." Jan Steen's

"Wedding Party" was also very beautiful. Then came peasant dances

given, in the midst of the great hall, by persons in the costumes

of all the different provinces. These were characteristic and

interesting, some of them being wonderfully quaint.



The violinist of the late King, Johannes Wolff, played some solos

in a masterly way.



The music by the great military band, especially the hymn of

William of Nassau and the Dutch and Russian national anthems, was

splendidly rendered, and the old Dutch provincial music played in

connection with the dances and tableaux was also noteworthy.



It was an exceedingly brilliant assemblage, and the whole

festival from first to last a decided success.





June 18, Sunday.



Went to Leyden to attend service at St. Peter's. Both the church

and its monuments are interesting. Visited also the church of St.

Pancras, a remarkable specimen of Gothic architecture, and looked

upon the tomb of Van der Werf, the brave burgomaster who defended

the town against the Spaniards during the siege.



At the university I was much interested in the public hall where

degrees are conferred, and above all in the many portraits of

distinguished professors. Lingered next in the botanical gardens

back of the university, which are very beautiful.



Then to the Museum of Antiquities, which is remarkably rich in

Egyptian and other monuments. Roman art is also very fully

represented.



Thence home, and, on arriving, found, of all men in the world,

Thomas B. Reed, Speaker of our House of Representatives. Mr.

Newel, our minister, took us both for a drive to Scheveningen,

and Mr. Reed's conversation was exceedingly interesting; he is

well read in history and, apparently, in every field of English

literature. There is a bigness, a heartiness, a shrewdness, and a

genuineness about him which greatly attract me.





June 19.



Called on M. de Staal to show him Holls's telegram from Berlin,

which is encouraging. De Staal thinks that we may have to give up

the tenth section of the arbitration plan, which includes

obligatory arbitration in sundry minor matters; but while I shall

be very sorry to see this done, we ought to make the sacrifice if

it will hold Germany, Italy, and Austria to us.



A little later received a hearty telegram from the Secretary of

State authorizing our ordering the wreath of silver and gold and

placing it on the tomb of Grotius. Telegraphed and wrote Major

Allen at Berlin full directions on the subject. I am determined

that the tribute shall be worthy of our country, of its object,

and of the occasion.



In the afternoon took Speaker Reed, with his wife and daughter,

through the "House in the Wood," afterward through the grounds,

which are more beautiful than ever, and then to Delft, where we

visited the tombs of William the Silent and Grotius, and finally

the house in which William was assassinated. It was even more

interesting to me than during either of my former visits, and was

evidently quite as interesting to Mr. Reed.



At six attended a long meeting of the American delegation, which

elaborated the final draft of our communication to M. de Staal on

the immunity of private property on the high seas. Various

passages were stricken out, some of them--and, indeed, one of the

best--in deference to the ideas of Captain Mahan, who, though he

is willing, under instructions from the government, to join in

presenting the memorial, does not wish to sign anything which can

possibly be regarded as indicating a personal belief in the

establishment of such immunity. His is the natural view of a

sailor; but the argument with which he supports it does not at

all convince me. It is that during war we should do everything

possible to weaken and worry the adversary, in order that he may

be the sooner ready for peace; but this argument proves too much,

since it would oblige us, if logically carried out, to go back to

the marauding and atrocities of the Thirty Years' War.





June 20.



Went to the session of one of the committees at the "House in the

Wood," and showed Mr. van Karnebeek our private-property

memorial, which he read, and on which he heartily complimented

us.



I then made known to him our proposal to lay a wreath on the tomb

of Grotius, and with this he seemed exceedingly pleased, saying

that the minister of foreign affairs, M. de Beaufort, would be

especially delighted, since he is devoted to the memory of

Grotius, and delivered the historical address when the statue in

front of the great church at Delft was unveiled



A little later submitted the memorial; as previously agreed upon,

to Count Munster, who also approved it.



Holls telegraphs me from Berlin that he has been admirably

received by the chancellor, Prince Hohenlohe, and by Baron von

Bulow, and that he is leaving for Hamburg to see the Emperor.



At four P.M. to a meeting of the full conference to receive

report on improvements and extension of the Red Cross rules, etc.

This was adopted in a happy-go-lucky unparliamentary way, for the

eminent diplomatist who presides over the conference still

betrays a Russian lack of acquaintance with parliamentary

proceedings. So begins the first full movement of the conference

in the right direction; and it is a good beginning.



Walked home through the beautiful avenues of the park with Mr.

van Karnebeek and Baron d'Estournelles, who is also a charming

man. He has been a minister plenipotentiary, but is now a member

of the French Chamber of Deputies and of the conference.





June 21.



Early in the morning received a report from Holls, who arrived

from Hamburg late last night. His talks with Bulow and Prince

Hohenlohe had been most encouraging. Bulow has sent to the

Emperor my long private letter to himself, earnestly urging the

acceptance by Germany of our plan of arbitration. Prince

Hohenlohe seems to have entered most cordially into our ideas,

giving Holls a card which would admit him to the Emperor, and

telegraphing a request that his Majesty see him. But the Emperor

was still upon his yacht, at sea, and Holls could stay no longer.

Bulow is trying to make an appointment for him to meet the

Emperor at the close of the week.



Early in the afternoon went with Minister Newel and Mr. Low to

call on M. de Beaufort regarding plans for the Grotius

celebration, on July 4, at Delft. It was in general decided that

we should have the ceremony in the great church at eleven o

'clock, with sundry speeches, and that at half-past twelve the

American delegation should give a luncheon to all the invited

guests in the town hall opposite.



Holls tells me that last night, at the dinner of the president of

the Austrian delegation, he met Munster, who said to him, "I can

get along with Hohenlohe, and also with Bulow, but not with those

d--d lawyers in the Foreign Office" ("Mit Hohenlohe kann tch

auskommen, mit Bulow auch, aber mit diesen verdammten Juristen im

Auswartigen Amt, nicht").





June 22.



Up at four o'clock and at ten attended a session of the first

section at the "House in the Wood." Very interesting were the

discussions regarding bullets and asphyxiating bombs. As to the

former, Sir John Ardagh of the British delegation repelled

earnestly the charges made regarding the British bullets used in

India, and offered to substitute for the original proposal one

which certainly would be much more effective in preventing

unnecessary suffering and death; but the Russians seemed glad to

score a point against Great Britain, and Sir John's proposal was

voted down, its only support being derived from our own

delegation. Captain Crozier, our military delegate, took an

active part in supporting Sir John Ardagh, but the majority

against us was overwhelming.



As to asphyxiating bombs, Captain Mahan spoke at length against

the provision to forbid them: his ground being that not the

slightest thing had yet been done looking to such an invention;

that, even if there had been, their use would not be so bad as

the use of torpedoes against ships of war; that asphyxiating men

by means of deleterious gases was no worse than asphyxiating them

with water; indeed, that the former was the less dangerous of the

two, since the gases used might simply incapacitate men for a

short time, while the blowing up of a ship of war means death to

all or nearly all of those upon it.



To this it was answered--and, as it seemed to me, with

force--that asphyxiating bombs might be used against towns for

the destruction of vast numbers of non-combatants, including

women and children, while torpedoes at sea are used only against

the military and naval forces of the enemy. The original proposal

was carried by a unanimous vote, save ours. I am not satisfied

with our attitude on this question; but what can a layman do when

he has against him the foremost contemporary military and naval

experts? My hope is that the United States will yet stand with

the majority on the record.



I stated afterward in a bantering way to Captain Mahan, as well

as others, that while I could not support any of the arguments

that had been made in favor of allowing asphyxiating bombs, there

was one which somewhat appealed to me--namely, that the dread of

them might do something to prevent the rush of the rural

population to the cities, and the aggregation of the poorer

classes in them, which is one of the most threatening things to

modern society, and also a second argument that such bombs would

bring home to warlike stay-at-home orators and writers the

realities of war.



At noon received the French translation of our memorial to De

Staal, but found it very imperfect throughout, and in some parts

absolutely inadmissible; so I worked with Baron de Bildt,

president of the Swedish delegation here, all the afternoon in

revising it.



At six the American delegation met and chose me for their orator

at the approaching Grotius festival at Delft. I naturally feel

proud to discharge a duty of this kind, and can put my heart into

it, for Grotius has long been to me almost an object of idolatry,

and his main works a subject of earnest study. There are few men

in history whom I so deeply venerate. Twenty years ago, when

minister at Berlin, I sent an eminent American artist to Holland

and secured admirable copies of the two best portraits of the

great man. One of these now hangs in the Law Library of Cornell

University, and the other over my work-table at the Berlin

Embassy.



June 23.



At work all the morning on letters and revising final draft of

memorial on immunity of private property at sea, and lunched

afterward at the "House in the Wood" to talk it over with Baron

de Bildt.



At the same table met M. de Martens, who has just returned by

night to his work here, after presiding a day or two over the

Venezuela arbitration tribunal at Paris. He told me that Sir

Richard Webster, in opening the case, is to speak for sixteen

days, and De Martens added that he himself had read our entire

Venezuelan report, as well as the other documents on the subject

which form quite a large library. And yet we do not include men

like him in "the working-classes"!



In the evening to a reception at the house of M. de Beaufort,

minister of foreign affairs, and was cordially greeted by him and

his wife, both promising that they would accept our invitation to

Delft. I took in to the buffet the wife of the present Dutch

prime minister, who also expressed great interest in our

proposal, and declared her intention of being present.



Count Zanini, the Italian minister and delegate here, gave me a

comical account of two speeches in the session of the first

section this morning; one being by a delegate from Persia, Mirza

Riza Khan, who is minister at St. Petersburg. His Persian

Excellency waxed eloquent over the noble qualities of the Emperor

of Russia, and especially over his sincerity as shown by the fact

that when his Excellency tumbled from his horse at a review, his

Majesty sent twice to inquire after his health. The whole effect

upon the conference was to provoke roars of laughter.



But the great matter of the day was the news, which has not yet

been made public, that Prince Hohenlohe, the German chancellor,

has come out strongly for the arbitration tribunal, and has sent

instructions here accordingly. This is a great gain, and seems to

remove one of the worst stumbling-blocks. But we will have to pay

for this removal, probably, by giving up section 10 of the

present plan, which includes a system of obligatory arbitration

in various minor matters,--a system which would be of use to the

world in many ways. While the American delegation, as stated in

my letter which Holls took to Bulow, and which has been forwarded

to the Emperor, will aid in throwing out of the arbitration plan

everything of an obligatory nature, if Germany insists upon it, I

learn that the Dutch Government is much opposed to this

concession, and may publicly protest against it.



A curious part of the means used in bringing about this change of

opinion was the pastoral letter, elsewhere referred to, issued by

the Protestant Episcopal bishop of Texas, calling for prayers

throughout the State for the success of the conference in its

efforts to diminish the horrors of war. This pastoral letter, to

which I referred in my letter to Minister von Bulow, I intrusted

to Holls, authorizing him to use it as he thought fit. He showed

it to Prince Hohenlohe, and the latter, although a Roman

Catholic, was evidently affected by it, and especially by the

depth and extent of the longing for peace which it showed. It is

perhaps an interesting example of an indirect "answer to prayer,"

since it undoubtedly strengthened the feelings in the prince

chancellor's mind which led him to favor arbitration.





June 24.



Sent to M. de Staal, as president of the conference, the memorial

relating to the exemption of private property, not contraband of

war, from capture on the high seas. Devoted the morning to

blocking out my Grotius address, and afterward drove with Holls

to Delft to look over the ground for our Fourth-of-July festival.

The town hall is interesting and contains, among other portraits,

one which is evidently a good likeness of Grotius; the only

difficulty is that, for our intended luncheon, the rooms, though

beautiful, seem inadequate.



Thence to the church, and after looking over that part of it near

the monuments, with reference to the Grotius ceremony, went into

the organ-loft with the organist. There I listened for nearly an

hour while he and Holls played finely on that noble instrument;

and as I sat and looked down over the church and upon the distant

monuments, the old historic scenes of four hundred years ago came

up before me, with memories almost overpowering of my first visit

thirty-five years ago. And all then with me are now dead.





June 25.



At nine in the morning off with Holls to Rotterdam, and on

arriving took the tram through the city to the steamboat wharf,

going thence by steamer to Dort. Arrived, just before the close

of service, at the great church where various sessions of the

synod were held. The organ was very fine; the choir-stalls, where

those wretched theologians wrangled through so many sessions and

did so much harm to their own country and others, were the only

other fine things in the church, and they were much dilapidated.

I could not but reflect bitterly on the monstrous evils provoked

by these men who sat so long there spinning a monstrous theology

to be substituted for the teachings of Christ himself.



Thence back to The Hague and to Scheveningen, and talked over

conference matters with Count Munster. Received telegrams from

Count von Bulow in answer to mine congratulating him on his

promotion, also one from Baron von Mumm, the German minister at

Luxemburg, who goes temporarily to Washington.





June 26.



At work all the morning on my Grotius address Lunched at the

"House in the Wood," and walked to town with sundry delegates. In

the afternoon went to a "tea" at the house of Madame Boreel and

met a number of charming people; but the great attraction was the

house, which is that formerly occupied by John De Witt--that from

which he went to prison and to assassination. Here also Motley

lived, and I was shown the room in which a large part of his

history was written, and where Queen Sophia used to discuss Dutch

events and personages with him.



The house is beautiful, spacious, and most charmingly decorated,

many of the ornaments and paintings having been placed there in

the time of De Witt.





June 27.



At all sorts of work during the morning, and then, on invitation

of President Low, went with the other members of the delegation

to Haarlem, where we saw the wonderful portraits by Frans Hals,

which impressed me more than ever, and heard the great organ. It

has been rebuilt since I was there thirty-five years ago; but it

is still the same great clumsy machine, and very poorly

played,--that is, with no spirit, and without any effort to

exhibit anything beyond the ordinary effects for which any little

church organ would do as well.



In the evening dined with Count Zanini, the Italian minister and

delegate, and discussed French matters with Baron d'Estournelles.

He represents the best type of French diplomatist, and is in

every way attractive.



Afterward to Mr. van Karnebeek's reception, meeting various

people in a semi-satisfactory way.





June 29.



In the morning, in order to work off the beginnings of a

headache, I went to Rotterdam and walked until noon about the

streets and places, recalling my former visit, which came very

vividly before me as I gazed upon the statue of Erasmus, and

thought upon his life here. No man in history has had more

persistent injustice done him. If my life were long enough I

would gladly use my great collection of Erasmiana in illustrating

his services to the world. To say nothing of other things, the

modern "Higher Criticism" has its roots in his work.





June 30.



Engaged on the final revision of my Grotius speech, and on

various documents.



At noon to the "House in the Wood" for lunch, and afterward took

a walk in the grounds with Beldiman, the Roumanian delegate, who

explained to me the trouble in Switzerland over the vote on the

Red Cross Conference.



It appears that whereas Switzerland initiated the Red Cross

movement, has ever since cherished it, and has been urged by

Italy and other powers to take still further practical measures

for it, the Dutch delegation recently interposed, secured for one

of their number the presidency of the special conference, and

thus threw out my Berlin colleague, Colonel Roth, who had been

previously asked to take the position and had accepted it, with

the result that the whole matter has been taken out of the hands

of Switzerland, where it justly belonged, and put under the care

of the Netherlands. This has provoked much ill feeling in

Switzerland, and there is especial astonishment at the fact that

when Beldiman moved an amendment undoing this unjust arrangement

it was, by some misunderstanding lost, and that therefore there

has been perpetuated what seems much like an injustice against

Switzerland. I promised to exert myself to have the matter

rectified so far as the American delegation was concerned, and

later was successful in doing so.



In the evening dined at Minister Newel's. Sat between Minister

Okolicsanyi of the Austrian delegation, and Count Welsersheimb,

the chairman of that delegation, and had interesting talks with

them, with the Duke of Tetuan, and others. It appears that the

Duke, who is a very charming, kindly man, has, like myself, a

passion both for cathedral architecture and for organ music; he

dwelt much upon Burgos, which he called the gem of Spanish

cathedrals.



Thence to the final reception at the house of M. de Beaufort,

minister of foreign affairs, who showed me a contemporary

portrait of Grotius which displays the traits observable in the

copies which Burleigh painted for me twenty years ago at

Amsterdam and Leyden. Talked with Sir Julian Pauncefote regarding

the Swiss matter; he had abstained from voting for the reason

that he had no instructions in the premises.





July 2.



In the morning Major Allen, military attache of our embassy at

Berlin, arrived, bringing the Grotius wreath. Under Secretary

Hay's permission, I had given to one of the best Berlin

silversmiths virtually carte blanche, and the result is most

satisfactory. The wreath is very large, being made up, on one

side, of a laurel branch with leaves of frosted silver and

berries of gold, and, on the other, of an oak branch with silver

leaves and gold acorns, both boughs being tied together at the

bottom by a large knot of ribbon in silver gilded, bearing the

arms of the Netherlands and the United States on enameled

shields, and an inscription as follows:





     To the Memory of HUGO GROTIUS;

           In Reverence and Gratitude,

      From the United States of America;

  On the Occasion of the International Peace Conference           

            of The Hague.

           July 4th, 1899.





It is a superb piece of work, and its ebony case, with silver

clasps, and bearing a silver shield with suitable inscription, is

also perfect: the whole thing attracts most favorable attention.







 CHAPTER XLIX



AS PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN DELEGATION AT THE PEACE CONFERENCE

OF THE HAGUE: V--1899



July 4.



On this day the American delegation invited their colleagues to

celebrate our national anniversary at the tomb of Grotius, first

in the great church, and afterward in the town hall of Delft.

Speeches were made by the minister of foreign affairs of the

Netherlands De Beaufort; by their first delegate, Van Karnebeek;

by Mr. Asser, one of their leading jurists; by the burgomaster of

Delft; and by Baron de Bildt, chairman of the Swedish delegation

and minister at Rome, who read a telegram from the King of Sweden

referring to Grotius's relations to the Swedish diplomatic

service; as well as by President Low of Columbia University and

myself: the duty being intrusted to me of laying the wreath upon

Grotius's tomb and making the address with reference to it. As

all the addresses are to be printed, I shall give no more

attention to them here. A very large audience was present,

embracing the ambassadors and principal members of the

conference, the Netherlands ministers of state, professors from

the various universities of the Netherlands, and a large body of

other invited guests.



The music of the chimes, of the organ, and of the royal choir of

one hundred voices was very fine; and, although the day was

stormy, with a high wind and driving rain, everything went off

well.



After the exercises in the church, our delegation gave a

breakfast, which was very satisfactory. About three hundred and

fifty persons sat down to the tables at the town hall, and one

hundred other guests, including the musicians, at the leading

restaurant in the place. In the afternoon the Americans gathered

at the reception given by our minister, Mr. Newel, and his wife,

and in the evening there was a large attendance at an "American

concert" given by the orchestra at the great hall in

Scheveningen.



July 5.



Early in the morning to the second committee of the conference,

where I spoke in behalf of the Beldiman resolution, doing justice

to Switzerland as regards the continuance of the Red Cross

interests in Swiss hands; and on going to a vote we were

successful.



Then, the question of a proper dealing with our memorial

regarding the immunity of private property on the high seas

coming up, I spoke in favor of referring it to the general

conference, and gave the reasons why it should not simply be

dropped out as not coming within the subjects contemplated in the

call to the conference. Though my speech was in French, it went

off better than I expected.



In the afternoon, at the full conference, the same subject came

up; and then, after a preface in French, asking permission to

speak in English, I made my speech, which, probably, three

quarters of all the delegates understood, but, at my request, a

summary of it was afterward given in French by Mr. van Karnebeek.



The occasion of this speech was my seconding the motion, made in

a very friendly manner by M. de Martens, to refer the matter to a

future conference; but I went into the merits of the general

subject to show its claims upon the various nations, etc., etc.,

though not, of course, as fully as I would have done had the

matter been fully under discussion. My speech was very well

received, and will, I hope, aid in keeping the subject alive.



In the afternoon drove to Ryswyck, to the house of M. Cornets de

Groot, the living representative of the Grotius family. The house

and grounds were very pleasant, but the great attraction was a

collection of relics of Grotius, including many manuscripts from

his own hand, --among these a catechism for his children, written

in the prison of Loewenstein; with official documents, signed and

sealed, connected with the public transactions of his time; also

letters which passed between him and Oxenstiern, the great

Swedish chancellor, some in Latin and some in other languages;

besides sundry poems. There were also a multitude of portraits,

engravings, and documents relating to Olden-Barneveld and others

of Grotius's contemporaries.



The De Groot family gave us a most hearty reception, introducing

their little girl, who is the latest-born descendant of Grotius,

and showing us various household relics of their great ancestor,

including cups, glasses, and the like. Mr. De Groot also gave me

some curious information regarding him which I did not before

possess; and, among other things, told me that when Grotius's

body was transferred, shortly after his death, from Rostock to

Delft, the coffin containing it was stoned by a mob at Rotterdam;

also that at the unveiling of the statue of Grotius in front of

the church at Delft, a few years ago, the high-church Calvinists

would not allow the children from their church schools to join

the other children in singing hymns. The old bitterness of the

extreme Calvinistic party toward their great compatriot was thus

still exhibited, and the remark was made at the time, by a member

of it, that the statue was perfectly true to life, since "its

back was turned toward the church"; to which a reply was made

that "Grotius's face in the statue, like his living face, was

steadily turned toward justice." This latter remark had reference

to the fact that a court is held in the city hall, toward which

the statue is turned.



In the evening to a dinner given by Mr. Piersoon, minister of

finance and prime minister of the Netherlands, to our delegation

and to his colleagues of the Dutch ministry. Everything passed

off well, Mr. Piersoon proposing a toast to the health of the

President of the United States, to which I replied in a toast to

the Queen of the Netherlands. In the course of his speech Mr.

Piersoon thanked us for our tribute to Grotius, and showed really

deep feeling on the subject. There is no doubt that we have

struck a responsive chord in the hearts of all liberal and

thoughtful men and women of the Netherlands; from every quarter

come evidences of this.



A remark of his, regarding arbitration, especially pleased us. He

said that the arbitration plan, as it had come from the great

committee, was like a baby:--apparently helpless, and of very

little value, unable to do much, and requiring careful nursing;

but that it had one great merit:--IT WOULD GROW.



This I believe to be a very accurate statement of the situation.

The general feeling of the conference becomes better and better.

More and more the old skepticism has departed, and in place of it

has come a strong ambition to have a share in what we are

beginning to believe may be a most honorable contribution to the

peace of the world. I have never taken part in more earnest

discussions than those which during the last two weeks have

occupied us, and especially those relating to arbitration.



I think I may say, without assuming too much, that our Grotius

celebration has been a contribution of some value to this growth

of earnestness. It has, if I am not greatly mistaken, revealed to

the conference, still more clearly than before, the fact that it

is a historical body intrusted with a matter of vast importance

and difficulty, and that we shall be judged in history with

reference to this fact.





July 6.



At 5.30 P.M. off in special train with the entire conference to

Amsterdam. On arriving, we found a long train of court carriages

which took us to the palace, the houses on each side throughout

the entire distance being decorated with flags and banners, and

the streets crowded with men, women, and children. We were indeed

a brave show, since all of us, except the members of our American

delegation, wore gorgeous uniforms with no end of ribbons, stars,

and insignia of various offices and orders.



On reaching our destination, we were received by the Queen and

Queen-mother, and shortly afterward went in to dinner. With the

possible exception of a lord mayor's feast at the Guildhall, it

was the most imposing thing of the kind that I have ever seen.

The great banqueting-hall, dating from the glorious days of the

Dutch Republic, is probably the largest and most sumptuous in

continental Europe, and the table furniture, decorations, and

dinner were worthy of it. About two hundred and fifty persons,

including all the members of the conference and the higher

officials of the kingdom, sat down, the Queen and Queen-mother at

the head of the table, and about them the ambassadors and

presidents of delegations. My own place, being very near the

Majesties, gave me an excellent opportunity to see and hear

everything. Toward the close of the banquet the young Queen arose

and addressed us, so easily and naturally that I should have

supposed her speech extemporaneous had I not seen her consulting

her manuscript just before rising. Her manner was perfect, and

her voice so clear as to be heard by every one in the hall.

Everything considered, it was a remarkable effort for a young

lady of seventeen. At its close an excellent reply was made by

our president, M. de Staal; and soon afterward, when we had

passed into the great gallery, there came an even more striking

exhibition of the powers of her youthful Majesty, for she

conversed with every member of the conference, and with the

utmost ease and simplicity. To me she returned thanks for the

Grotius tribute, and in very cordial terms, as did later also the

Queen-mother; and I cannot but believe that they were sincere,

since, three months later, at the festival given them at Potsdam,

they both renewed their acknowledgments in a cordial way which

showed that their patriotic hearts were pleased. Various leading

men of the Netherlands and of the conference also thanked us, and

one of them said, "You Americans have taught us a lesson; for,

instead of a mere display of fireworks to the rabble of a single

city, or a ball or concert to a few officials, you have, in this

solemn recognition of Grotius, paid the highest compliment

possible to the entire people of the Netherlands, past, present,

and to come."





July 7.



In the morning to the great hall of the "House in the Wood,"

where the "editing committee" (comite de redaction) reported to

the third committee of the conference the whole arbitration plan.

It struck me most favorably, --indeed, it surprised me, though I

have kept watch of every step. I am convinced that it is better

than any of the plans originally submitted, not excepting our

own. It will certainly be a gain to the world.



At the close of the session we adjourned until Monday, the 17th,

in order that the delegates may get instructions from their

various governments regarding the signing of the protocols,

agreements, etc.





July 8.



In the evening dined with M. de Mier, the Mexican minister at

Paris and delegate here, and had a very interesting talk with M.

Raffalovitch, to whom I spoke plainly regarding the only road to

disarmament. I told him that he must know as well as any one that

there is a vague dread throughout Europe of the enormous growth

of Russia, and that he must acknowledge that, whether just or

not, it is perfectly natural. He acquiesced in this, and I then

went on to say that the Emperor Nicholas had before him an

opportunity to do more good and make a nobler reputation than any

other czar had ever done, not excepting Alexander II with his

emancipation of the serfs; that I had thought very seriously of

writing, at the close of the conference, to M. Pobedonostzeff,

presenting to him the reasons why Russia might well make a

practical beginning of disarmament by dismissing to their homes,

or placing on public works, say two hundred thousand of her

soldiers; that this would leave her all the soldiers she needs,

and more; that he must know, as everybody knows, that no other

power dreams of attacking Russia or dares to do so; that there

would be no disadvantage in such a dismissal of troops to

peaceful avocations, but every advantage; and that if it were

done the result would be that, in less than forty years, Russia

would become, by this husbanding of her resources, the most

powerful nation on the eastern continent, and able to carry out

any just policy which she might desire. I might have added that

one advantage of such a reduction would certainly be less

inclination by the war party at St. Petersburg to plunge into

military adventures. (Had Russia thus reduced her army she would

never have sunk into the condition in which she finds herself now

(1905), as I revise these lines. Instead of sending Alexeieff to

make war, she would have allowed De Witte to make peace--peace on

a basis of justice to Japan, and a winter access to the Pacific,

under proper safeguards, for herself.)



Raffalovitch seemed to acquiesce fully in my view, except as to

the number of soldiers to be released, saying that fifty or sixty

thousand would do perfectly well as showing that Russia is in

earnest.



He is one of the younger men of Russia, but has very decided

ability, and this he has shown not only in his secretaryship of

the conference, but in several of his works on financial and

other public questions published in Paris, which have secured for

him a corresponding membership of the French Institute.



It is absolutely clear in my mind that, if anything is to be done

toward disarmament, a practical beginning must be made by the

Czar; but the unfortunate thing is that with, no doubt, fairly

good intentions, he is weak and ill informed. The dreadful

mistake he is making in violating the oath sworn by his

predecessors and himself to Finland is the result of this

weakness and ignorance; and should he attempt to diminish his

overgrown army he would, in all probability, be overborne by the

military people about him, and by petty difficulties which they

would suggest, or, if necessary, create. It must be confessed

that there is one danger in any attempted disarmament, and this

is that the military clique might, to prevent it, plunge the

empire into a war.



The Emperor is surrounded mainly by inferior men. Under the shade

of autocracy men of independent strength rarely flourish. Indeed,

I find that the opinion regarding Russian statesmen which I

formed in Russia is confirmed by old diplomatists, of the best

judgment, whom I meet here. One of them said to me the other day:

"There is no greater twaddle than all the talk about far-seeing

purposes and measures by Russian statesmen. They are generally

weak, influenced by minor, and especially by personal,

considerations, and inferior to most men in similar positions in

the other great governments of Europe. The chancellor, Prince

Gortchakoff, of whom so much has been said, was a weak, vain man,

whom Bismarck found it generally very easy to deal with."



As to my own experience, I think many of those whom I saw were

far from the best of their kind with whom I have had to do. I

have never imagined a human being in the position of minister of

the interior of a great nation so utterly futile as the person

who held that place at St. Petersburg in my time; and the same

may be said of several others whom I met there in high places.

There are a few strong men, and, unfortunately, Pobedonostzeff is

one of them. Luckily, De Witte, the minister of finance, is

another.



July 10.



The evil which I dreaded, as regards the formation of public

opinion in relation to the work of our conference, is becoming

realized. The London "Spectator," just received, contains a most

disheartening article, "The Peace Conference a Failure," with an

additional article, more fully developed, to the same effect.

Nothing could be more unjust; but, on account of the

"Spectator's" "moderation," it will greatly influence public

opinion, and doubtless prevent, to some extent, the calling of

future conferences needed to develop the good work done in this.

Fortunately the correspondent of the "Times" gives a better

example, and shows, in his excellent letters, what has been

accomplished here. The "New York Herald," also, is thus far

taking the right view, and maintaining it with some earnestness.





July 17.



This morning, at ten, to the "House in the Wood" to hear Mr. van

Karnebeek's report on disarmament, checking invention, etc.,

before the session of committee No. 1. It was strongly attacked,

and was left in shreds: the whole subject is evidently too

immature and complicated to be dealt with during the present

conference.



In the afternoon came up an especially interesting matter in the

session of the arbitration committee, the occasion being a report

of the subcommittee. Among the points which most interested us as

Americans was a provision for an appeal from the decision of the

arbitration tribunal on the discovery of new facts.



De Martens of Russia spoke with great force against such right of

appeal, and others took ground with him. Holls really

distinguished himself by a telling speech on the other

side--which is the American side, that feature having been

present in our original instructions; Messrs. Asser and Karnebeek

both spoke for it effectively, and the final decision was

virtually in our favor, for Mr. Asser's compromise was adopted,

which really gives us the case.



The Siamese representatives requested that the time during which

an appeal might be allowed should be six instead of three months,

which we had named; but it was finally made a matter of

adjustment between the parties.





July 18.



The American delegation met at ten, when a cable message from the

State Department was read authorizing us to sign the protocol.





July 19.



Field day in the arbitration committee. A decided sensation was

produced by vigorous speeches by my Berlin colleague, Beldiman,

of the Roumanian delegation, and by Servian, Greek, and other

delegates, against the provision for commissions d'enquete,--De

Martens, Descamps, and others making vigorous speeches in behalf

of them. It looked as if the Balkan states were likely to

withdraw from the conference if the commission d'enquete feature

was insisted upon: they are evidently afraid that such "examining

commissions" may be sent within their boundaries by some of their

big neighbors--Russia, for example--to spy out the land and start

intrigues. The whole matter was put over.



In the evening to Count Munster's dinner at Scheveningen, and had

a very interesting talk on conference matters with Sir Julian

Pauncefote, finding that in most things we shall be able to stand

together as the crisis approaches.





July 20.



For several days past I have been preparing a possible speech to

be made in signing the protocol, etc., which, if not used for

that purpose, may be published, and, perhaps, aid in keeping

public opinion in the right line as regards the work of the

conference after it has closed.



In the afternoon to the "House in the Wood," the committee on

arbitration meeting again. More speeches were made by the

Bulgarians and Servians, who are still up in arms, fearing that

the commissionn d'enquete means intervention by the great states

in their affairs. Speeches to allay their fears were made by

Count Nigra, Dr. Zorn, Holls, and Leon Bourgeois. Zorn spoke in

German with excellent effect, as did Holls in English; Nigra was

really impressive; and Bourgeois, from the chair, gave us a

specimen of first-rate French oratory. He made a most earnest

appeal to the delegates of the Balkan states, showing them that

by such a system of arbitration as is now proposed the lesser

powers would be the very first to profit, and he appealed to

their loyalty to humanity. The speech was greatly and justly

applauded.



The Balkan delegates are gradually and gracefully yielding.





July 21.



In the morning to the "House in the Wood," where a plenary

session of the conference was held. It was a field day on

explosive, flattening and expanding bullets, etc. Our Captain

Crozier, who evidently knows more about the subject than anybody

else here, urged a declaration of the principle that balls should

be not more deadly or cruel than is absolutely necessary to put

soldiers hors de combat; but the committee had reported a

resolution which, Crozier insists, opens the door to worse

missiles than those at present used. Many and earnest speeches

were made. I made a short speech, moving to refer the matter back

to the committee, with instructions to harmonize and combine the

two ideas in one article--that is, the idea which the article now

expresses, and Crozier's idea of stating the general principle to

which the bullets should conform--namely, that of not making a

wound more cruel than necessary; but the amendment was lost.



July 22.



Sir Julian Pauncefote called to discuss with us the signing of

the Acte Final. There seems to be general doubt as to what is the

best manner of signing the conventions, declarations, etc., and

all remains in the air.



In the morning the American delegation met and Captain Mahan

threw in a bomb regarding article 27, which requires that when

any two parties to the conference are drifting into war, the

other powers should consider it a duty (devoir) to remind them of

the arbitration tribunal, etc. He thinks that this infringes the

American doctrine of not entangling ourselves in the affairs of

foreign states, and will prevent the ratification of the

convention by the United States Senate. This aroused earnest

debate, Captain Mahan insisting upon the omission of the word

"devoir," and Dr. Holls defending the article as reported by the

subcommittee, of which he is a member, and contending that the

peculiar interests of America could be protected by a

reservation. Finally, the delegation voted to insist upon the

insertion of the qualifying words, "autant que les circonstances

permettent," but this decision was afterward abandoned.





July 23.



Met at our Minister Newel's supper Sir Henry Howard, who told me

that the present Dutch ministry, with Piersoon at its head and De

Beaufort as minister of foreign affairs, is in a very bad way;

that its "subserviency to Italy," in opposition to the demands of

the Vatican for admittance into the conference, and its

difficulties with the socialists and others, arising from the

police measures taken against Armenian, Finnish, New Turkish, and

other orators who have wished to come here and make the

conference and the city a bear-garden , have led both the extreme

parties--that is, the solid Roman Catholic party on one side, and

the pretended votaries of liberty on the other--to hate the

ministry equally. He thinks that they will join hands and oust

the ministry just as soon as the conference is over.



Some allowance is to be made for the fact that Sir Henry is a

Roman Catholic: while generally liberal, he evidently looks at

many questions from the point of view of his church.[9]





[9] As it turned out, he was right: the ministry was ousted, but

not so soon as he expected, for the catastrophe did not arrive

until about two years later. Then came in a coalition of high

Calvinists and Roman Catholics which brought in the Kuyper

ministry.





July 24.



For some days--in fact, ever since Captain Mahan on the 22d

called attention to article 27 of the arbitration convention as

likely to be considered an infringement of the Monroe

Doctrine--our American delegation has been greatly perplexed. We

have been trying to induce the French, who proposed article 27,

and who are as much attached to it as is a hen to her one chick,

to give it up, or, at least, to allow a limiting or explanatory

clause to be placed with it. Various clauses of this sort have

been proposed. The article itself makes it the duty of the other

signatory powers, when any two nations are evidently drifting

toward war, to remind these two nations that the arbitration

tribunal is open to them. Nothing can be more simple and natural;

but we fear lest, when the convention comes up for ratification

in the United States Senate, some over-sensitive patriot may seek

to defeat it by insisting that it is really a violation of

time-honored American policy at home and abroad--the policy of

not entangling ourselves in the affairs of foreign nations, on

one side, and of not allowing them to interfere in our affairs,

on the other.



At twelve this day our delegation gave a large luncheon at the

Oude Doelen--among those present being Ambassadors De Staal,

Count Nigra, and Sir Julian Pauncefote, Bourgeois, Karnebeek,

Basily, Baron d'Estournelles, Baron de Bildt, and others--to

discuss means of getting out of the above-mentioned difficulty. A

most earnest effort was made to induce the French to allow some

such modification as has been put into other articles--namely,

the words, "autant que possible," or some limiting clause to the

same effect; but neither Bourgeois nor D'Estournelles,

representing France, would think of it for a moment. Bourgeois,

as the head of the French delegation, spoke again and again, at

great length. Among other things, he gave us a very long

disquisition on the meaning of "devoir" as it stands in the

article--a disquisition which showed that the Jesuits are not the

only skilful casuists in the world.



I then presented my project of a declaration of the American

doctrine to be made by us on signing. It had been scratched off

with a pencil in the morning, hastily; but it was well received

by Bourgeois, D'Estournelles, and all the others.



Later we held a meeting of our own delegation, when, to my

project of a declaration stating that nothing contained in any

part of the convention signed here should be considered as

requiring us to intrude, mingle, or entangle ourselves in

European politics or internal affairs, Low made an excellent

addition to the effect that nothing should be considered to

require any abandonment of the traditional attitude of the United

States toward questions purely American; and, with slight verbal

changes, this combination was adopted.





July 25.



All night long I have been tossing about in my bed and thinking

of our declaration of the Monroe Doctrine to be brought before

the conference to-day. We all fear that the conference will not

receive it, or will insist on our signing without it or not

signing at all.



On my way to The Hague from Scheveningen I met M. Descamps, the

eminent professor of international law in the University of

Louvain, and the leading delegate in the conference as regards

intricate legal questions connected with the arbitration plan. He

thought that our best way out of the difficulty was absolutely to

insist on a clause limiting the devoir imposed by article 27, and

to force it to a vote. He declared that, in spite of the French,

it would certainly be carried. This I doubt. M. Descamps knows,

perhaps, more of international law than of the temper of his

associates.



In the afternoon to the "House in the Wood," where the "Final

Act" was read. This is a statement of what has been done, summed

up in the form of three conventions, with sundry declarations,

voeux, etc. We had taken pains to see a number of the leading

delegates, and all, in their anxiety to save the main features of

the arbitration plan, agreed that they would not oppose our

declaration. It was therefore placed in the hands of

Raffalovitch, the Russian secretary, who stood close beside the

president, and as soon as the "Final Act" had been recited he

read this declaration of ours. This was then brought before the

conference in plenary session by M. de Staal, and the conference

was asked whether any one bad any objection, or anything to say

regarding it. There was a pause of about a minute, which seemed

to me about an hour. Not a word was said,--in fact, there was

dead silence,--and so our declaration embodying a reservation in

favor of the Monroe Doctrine was duly recorded and became part of

the proceedings.



Rarely in my life have I had such a feeling of deep relief; for,

during some days past, it has looked as if the arbitration

project, so far as the United States is concerned, would be

wrecked on that wretched little article 27.



I had before me notes of a speech carefully prepared, stating our

reasons and replying to objections, to be used in case we were

attacked, but it was not needed. In the evening I was asked by

Mr. Lavino, the correspondent of the London "Times," to put the

gist of it into an "interview" for the great newspaper which he

serves, and to this I consented; for, during the proceedings this

afternoon in the conference, Sir Julian Pauncefote showed great

uneasiness. He was very anxious that we should withdraw the

declaration altogether, and said, "It will be charged against you

that you propose to evade your duties while using the treaty to

promote your interests"; but I held firm and pressed the matter,

with the result above stated. I feared that he would object in

open conference; but his loyalty to arbitration evidently

deterred him. However, he returned to the charge privately, and I

then promised to make a public statement of our reasons for the

declaration, and this seemed to ease his mind. The result was a

recasting of my proposed speech, and this Mr. Lavino threw into

the form of a long telegram to the "Times."





July 26.



At ten to a meeting of our American delegation, when another

bombshell was thrown among us--nothing less than the question

whether the Pope is to be allowed to become one of the signatory

powers; and this question has now taken a very acute form. Italy

is, of course, utterly opposed to it, and Great Britain will not

sign if any besides those agreed upon by the signatory powers are

allowed to come in hereafter, her motive being, no doubt, to

avoid trouble in regard to the Transvaal.



Mr. Low stated that in the great committee the prevailing opinion

seemed to be that the signatory powers had made a sort of

partnership, and that no new partners could be added without the

consent of all. This is the natural ground, and entirely tenable.



I would have been glad to add the additional requirement that no

power should be admitted which would not make arbitration

reciprocal--that is, no power which, while aiding to arbitrate

for others, would not accept arbitration between itself and

another power. This would, of course, exclude the Vatican; for,

while it desires to judge others, it will allow no interests of

its own, not even the most worldly and trivial, to be submitted

to any earthly tribunal.



The question now came up in our American delegation as to signing

the three conventions in the Acte Final--namely, those relating

to arbitration, to the extension of the Geneva rules, and to the

laws and customs of war. We voted to sign the first, to send the

second to Washington without recommendation, and to send the

third with a recommendation that it be there signed. The reason

for sending the second to Washington without recommendation is

that Captain Mahan feels that, in its present condition, it may

bring on worse evils than it prevents. He especially and, I

think, justly objects to allowing neutral hospital ships to take

on board the wounded and shipwrecked in a naval action, with

power to throw around them the safeguards of neutrality and carry

them off to a neutral port whence they can again regain their own

homes and resume their status as combatants.



The reason for submitting the third to Washington, with a

recommendation to sign it there, is that considerable work will

be required in conforming our laws of war to the standard

proposed by the conference, and that it is best that the

Washington authorities look it over carefully.



I was very anxious to sign all three conventions, but the first

is the great one, and I yielded my views on the last two.



The powers are to have until the 31st of December, if they wish

it, before signing.





July 27.



Early in the morning to a meeting of our American delegation, Mr.

van Karnebeek being present. We agreed to sign the arbitration

convention, attaching to our signatures a reservation embodying

our declaration of July 25 regarding the maintenance of our

American policy--the Monroe Doctrine. A telegram was received

from the State Department approving of this declaration. The

imbroglio regarding the forcing of the Pope into the midst of the

signatory powers continues. The ultramontanes are pushing on

various delegates, especially sundry Austrians and Belgians, who

depend on clerical support for their political existence, and, in

some cases, for their daily bread; and the result is that M.

Descamps, one of the most eminent international lawyers in

Europe, who has rendered great services during the conference,

but who holds a professorship at the University of Louvain, and

can hold it not one moment longer than the Jesuits allow him, is

making a great display of feeling on the subject. Italy, of

course, continues to take the strongest ground against the

proposal to admit his Holiness as an Italian sovereign.



Our position is, as was well stated in the great committee by Mr.

Low, that the contracting parties must all consent before a new

party can come in; and this under one of the simplest principles

of law. We ought also to add that any power thus admitted shall

not only consent to arbitrate on others, but to be arbitrated

upon. This, of course, the Vatican monsignori will never do. They

would see all Europe deluged in blood before they would submit

the pettiest question between the kingdom of Italy and themselves

to arbitration by lay powers. All other things are held by them

utterly subordinate to the restoration of the Pope's temporal

power, though they must know that if it were restored to him

to-morrow he could not hold it. He would be overthrown by a

revolution within a month, even with all the troops which France

or Austria could send to support him; and then we should have the

old miserable state of things again in Italy, with bloodshed,

oppression, and exactions such as took place throughout the first

half of this century, and, indeed, while I was in Italy, under

the old papal authority, in 1856.



In the afternoon to the "House in the Wood" to go over documents

preliminary to signing the "Final Act."





July 28.



In the afternoon in plenary session of the conference, hearing

the final reports as to forms of signing, etc.



To-day appears in the London "Times" the interview which its

correspondent had with me yesterday. It develops the reasons for

our declaration, and seems to give general satisfaction. Sir

Julian Pauncefote told Holls that he liked it much.



The committee on forms of the "Final Act," etc., has at last,

under pressure of all sorts, agreed that the question of

admitting non-signatory powers shall be decided by the signatory

powers, hereafter, through the ordinary medium of diplomatic

correspondence. This is unfortunate for some of the South

American republics, but it will probably in some way inure to the

benefit of the Vatican monsignori.





July 29.



The last and culminating day of the conference.



In the morning the entire body gathered in the great hall of the

"House in the Wood," and each delegation was summoned thence to

sign the protocol, conventions, and declarations. These were laid

out on a long table in the dining-room of the palace, which is

adorned with very remarkable paintings of mythological subjects

imitating bas-reliefs.



All these documents had the places for each signature prepared

beforehand, and our seals, in wax, already placed upon the pages

adjoining the place where each signature was to be. At the

request of the Foreign Office authorities for my seal, I had sent

a day or two beforehand the seal ring which Goldwin Smith gave me

at the founding of Cornell University. It is an ancient carnelian

intaglio which he obtained in Rome, and bears upon its face,

exquisitely engraved, a Winged Victory. This seal I used during

my entire connection with Cornell University, and also as a

member of the Electoral College of the State of New York at

General Grant's second election, when, at the request of the

president of that body, Governor Woodford, it was used in sealing

certificates of the election, which were sent, according to law,

to certain high officials of our government.



I affixed my signature to the arbitration convention, writing in,

as agreed, the proviso that our signatures were subject to the

Monroe Doctrine declaration made in open session of the

conference on July 25. The other members of the American

delegation then signed in proper order. But the two other

conventions we left unsigned. It was with deep regret that I

turned away from these; but the majority of the delegation had

decreed it, and it was difficult to see what other course we

could pursue. I trust that the Washington authorities will

rectify the matter by signing them both.



We also affixed our signatures to the first of the

"declarations."



At three P.M. came the formal closing of the conference. M. de

Staal made an excellent speech, as did Mr. van Karnebeek and M.

de Beaufort, the Netherlands minister of foreign affairs. To

these Count Munster, the presiding delegate from Germany, replied

in French, and apparently extemporaneously. It must have been

pain and grief to him, for he was obliged to speak respectfully,

in the first place, of the conference, which for some weeks he

had affected to despise; and, secondly, of arbitration and the

other measures proposed, which, at least during all the first

part of the conference, he had denounced as a trick and a humbug;

and, finally, he had to speak respectfully of M. de Staal, to

whom he has steadily shown decided dislike. He did the whole

quite well, all things considered; but showed his feelings

clearly, as regarded M. de Staal, by adding to praise of him

greater praise for Mr. van Karnebeek, who has been the main

managing man in the conference in behalf of the Netherlands

Government.



Then to the hotel and began work on the draft of a report,

regarding the whole work of the conference, to the State

Department. I was especially embarrassed by the fact that the

wording of it must be suited to the scruples of my colleague,

Captain Mahan. He is a man of the highest character and of great

ability, whom I respect and greatly like; but, as an old naval

officer, wedded to the views generally entertained by older

members of the naval and military service, he has had very

little, if any, sympathy with the main purposes of the

conference, and has not hesitated to declare his disbelief in

some of the measures which we were especially instructed to

press. In his books he is on record against the immunity of

private property at sea, and in drawing up our memorial to the

conference regarding this latter matter, in making my speech with

reference to it in the conference, and in preparing our report to

the State Department, I have been embarrassed by this fact. It

was important to have unanimity, and it could not be had, so far

as he was concerned, without toning down the whole thing, and,

indeed, leaving out much that in my judgment the documents

emanating from us on the subject ought to contain. So now, in

regard to arbitration, as well as the other measures finally

adopted, his feelings must be considered. Still, his views have

been an excellent tonic; they have effectively prevented any

lapse into sentimentality. When he speaks the millennium fades

and this stern, severe, actual world appears.



I worked until late at night, and then went to Scheveningen

almost in despair.





July 30.



Returned to The Hague early in the morning, and went on again

with the report, working steadily through the day upon it. For

the first time in my life I have thus made Sunday a day of work.

Although I have no conscientious scruples on the subject, it was

bred into me in my childhood and boyhood that Sunday should be

kept free from all manner of work; and so thoroughly was this

rule inculcated that I have borne it in mind ever since, often

resisting very pressing temptation to depart from it.



But to-day there was no alternative, and the whole time until

five o'clock in the afternoon was given to getting my draft

ready.



At five P.M. the American delegation came together, and, to my

surprise, received my report with every appearance of

satisfaction. Mr. Low indicated some places which, in his

opinion, needed modification; and to this I heartily agreed, for

they were generally places where I was myself in doubt.



My draft having thus been presented, I turned it over to Mr. Low,

who agreed to bring it to-morrow morning with such modifications,

omissions, and additions as seemed best to him. The old proverb,

" 'T is always darkest just before daylight," seems exemplified

in the affairs of to-day, since the kind reception given to my

draft of the report, and the satisfaction expressed regarding it,

form a most happy and unexpected sequel to my wretched distrust

regarding the whole matter last night.





July 31.



The American delegation met at eleven in the morning and

discussed my draft. Mr. Low's modifications and additions were

not many and were mainly good. But he omitted some things which I

would have preferred to retain: these being in the nature of a

plea in behalf of arbitration, or, rather, an exhibition of the

advantages which have been secured for it by the conference; but,

between his doubts and Captain Mahan's opposition, I did not care

to contest the matter, and several pages were left out.



At six in the afternoon came the last meeting of our delegation.

The reports, duly engrossed,--namely, the special reports, signed

by Captain Mahan and Captain Crozier, from the first and second

committees of the conference; the special report made by myself,

Mr. Low, and Dr. Holls as members of the third committee; and the

general report covering our whole work, drawn almost entirely by

me, but signed by all the members of the commission,--were

presented, re-read, and signed, after which the delegation

adjourned, sine die.





August 1.



After some little preliminary work on matters connected with the

winding up of our commission, went with my private secretary, Mr.

Vickery, to Amsterdam, visiting the old church, the palace, the

Zoological Gardens, etc. Thence to Gouda and saw the

stained-glass windows in the old church there, which I have so

long desired to study.





August 3.



At 8.30 left The Hague and went by rail, via Cologne and

Ehreinbreitstein, to Homburg, arriving in the evening.





August 5.



This morning resumed my duties as ambassador at Berlin.



There was one proceeding at the final meeting of the conference

which I have omitted, but which really ought to find a place in

this diary. Just before the final speeches, to the amazement of

all and almost to the stupefaction of many, the president, M. de

Staal, handed to the secretary, without comment, a paper which

the latter began to read. It turned out to be a correspondence

which had taken place, just before the conference, between the

Queen of the Netherlands and the Pope.



The Queen's letter--written, of course, by her ministers, in the

desire to placate the Catholic party, which holds the balance of

power in the Netherlands--dwelt most respectfully on the high

functions of his Holiness, etc., etc., indicating, if not saying,

that it was not the fault of her government that he was not

invited to join in the conference.



The answer from the Pope was a masterpiece of Vatican skill. In

it he referred to what he claimed was his natural position as a

peacemaker on earth, dwelling strongly on this point.



The reading of these papers was received in silence, and not a

word was publicly said afterward regarding them, though in

various quarters there was very deep feeling. It was felt that

the Dutch Government had taken this means of forestalling local

Dutch opposition, and that it was a purely local matter of

political partizanship that ought never to have been intruded

upon a conference of the whole world.



I had no feeling of this sort, for it seemed to me well enough

that the facts should be presented; but a leading representative

of one of the great Catholic powers, who drove home with us, was

of a different mind. This eminent diplomatist from one of the

strongest Catholic countries, and himself a Catholic, spoke in

substance as follows: "The Vatican has always been, and is

to-day, a storm-center. The Pope and his advisers have never

hesitated to urge on war, no matter how bloody, when the

slightest of their ordinary worldly purposes could be served by

it. The great religious wars of Europe were entirely stirred up

and egged on by them; and, as everybody knows, the Pope did

everything to prevent the signing of the treaty of Munster, which

put an end to the dreadful Thirty Years' War, even going so far

as to declare the oaths taken by the plenipotentiaries at that

congress of no effect.



"All through the middle ages and at the Renaissance period the

Popes kept Italy in turmoil and bloodshed for their own family

and territorial advantages, and they kept all Europe in turmoil,

for two centuries after the Reformation,--in fact, just as long

as they could,--in the wars of religion. They did everything they

could to stir up the war between Austria and Prussia in 1866,

thinking that Austria, a Catholic power, was sure to win; and

then everything possible to stir up the war of France against

Prussia in 1870 in order to accomplish the same purpose of

checking German Protestantism; and now they are doing all they

can to arouse hatred, even to deluge Italy in blood, in the vain

attempt to recover the temporal power, though they must know that

they could not hold it for any length of time even if they should

obtain it.



"They pretend to be anxious to 'save souls,' and especially to

love Poland and Ireland; but they have for years used those

countries as mere pawns in their game with Russia and Great

Britain, and would sell every Catholic soul they contain to the

Greek and English churches if they could thereby secure the

active aid of those two governments against Italy. They have

obliged the Italian youth to choose between patriotism and

Christianity, and the result is that the best of these have

become atheists. Their whole policy is based on stirring up

hatred and promoting conflicts from which they hope to draw

worldly advantage.



"In view of all this, one stands amazed at the cool statements of

the Vatican letter."



These were the words of an eminent Roman Catholic representative

of a Roman Catholic power, and to them I have nothing to add.



In looking back calmly over the proceedings of the conference, I

feel absolutely convinced that it has accomplished a great work

for the world.



The mere assembling of such a body for such a purpose was a

distinct gain; but vastly more important is the positive outcome

of its labors.



First of these is the plan of arbitration. It provides a court

definitely constituted; a place of meeting easily accessible; a

council for summoning it always in session; guarantees for

perfect independence; and a suitable procedure.



Closely connected with this is the provision for "international

commissions of inquiry," which cannot fail to do much in clearing

up issues likely to lead to war between nations. Thus we may

hope, when there is danger of war, for something better than that

which the world has hitherto heard--the clamor of interested

parties and the shrieks of sensation newspapers. The natural

result will be, as in the Venezuelan difficulty between the

United States and Great Britain, that when a commission of this

sort has been set at work to ascertain the facts, the howling of

partizans and screaming of sensation-mongers will cease, and the

finding of the commission be calmly awaited.



So, too, the plans adopted for mediation can hardly fail to aid

in keeping off war. The plans for "special mediation" and

"seconding powers," which emanated entirely from the American

delegation, and which were adopted unanimously by the great

committee and by the conference, seem likely to prove in some

cases an effective means of preventing hostilities, and even of

arresting them after they have begun. Had it been in operation

during our recent war with Spain, it would probably have closed

it immediately after the loss of Cervera's fleet, and would have

saved many lives and much treasure.



Secondly, the extension of the Geneva rules, hitherto adopted for

war on land, to war also on the sea is a distinct gain in the

cause of mercy.



Thirdly, the amelioration and more careful definition of the laws

of war must aid powerfully in that evolution of mercy and right

reason which has been going on for hundreds of years, and

especially since the great work of Grotius.



In addition to these gains may well be mentioned the

declarations, expressions of opinion, and utterance of wishes for

continued study and persevering effort to make the

instrumentalities of war less cruel and destructive.



It has been said not infrequently that the conference missed a

great opportunity when it made the resort to arbitration

voluntary and not obligatory. Such an objection can come only

from those who have never duly considered the problem concerned.

Obligatory arbitration between states is indeed possible in

various petty matters, but in many great matters absolutely

impossible. While a few nations were willing to accept it in

regard to these minor matters,--as, for example, postal or

monetary difficulties and the like,--not a single power was

willing to bind itself by a hard-and-fast rule to submit all

questions to it--and least of all the United States.



The reason is very simple: to do so would be to increase the

chances of war and to enlarge standing armies throughout the

world. Obligatory arbitration on all questions would enable any

power, at any moment, to bring before the tribunal any other

power against which it has, or thinks it has, a grievance. Greece

might thus summon Turkey; France might summon Germany; the

Papacy, Italy; England, Russia; China, Japan; Spain, the United

States, regarding matters in which the deepest of human

feelings--questions of religion, questions of race, questions

even of national existence--are concerned. To enforce the

decisions of a tribunal in such cases would require armies

compared to which those of the present day are a mere bagatelle,

and plunge the world into a sea of troubles compared to which

those now existing are as nothing. What has been done is to

provide a way, always ready and easily accessible, by which

nations can settle most of their difficulties with each other.

Hitherto, securing a court of arbitration has involved first the

education of public opinion in two nations; next, the action of

two national legislatures; then the making of a treaty; then the

careful selection of judges on both sides; then delays by the

jurists thus chosen in disposing of engagements and duties to

which they are already pledged-all these matters requiring much

labor and long time; and this just when speedy action is most

necessary to arrest the development of international anger. Under

the system of arbitration now presented, the court can be brought

into session at short notice--easily, as regards most nations,

within a few weeks, at the farthest. When to these advantages are

added the provisions for delaying war and for improving the laws

of war, the calm judgment of mankind will, I fully believe,

decide that the conference has done a work of value to the world.



There is also another gain--incidental, but of real and permanent

value; and this is the inevitable development of the Law of

Nations by the decisions of such a court of arbitration composed

of the most eminent jurists from all countries. Thus far it has

been evolved from the writings of scholars often conflicting,

from the decisions of national courts biased by local patriotism,

from the practices of various powers, on land and sea, more in

obedience to their interests than to their sense of justice; but

now we may hope for the growth of a great body of international

law under the best conditions possible, and ever more and more in

obedience to the great impulse given by Grotius in the direction

of right reason and mercy.







CHAPTER L



HINTS FOR REFORMS IN THE DIPLOMATIC SERVICE



In view of a connection with the diplomatic service of the United

States begun nearly fifty years ago and resumed at various posts

and periods since, I have frequently been asked for my opinion of

it, as compared with that of other nations, and also what

measures I would suggest for its improvement. Hitherto this

question has somewhat embarrassed me: answering it fully might

have seemed to involve a plea for my own interests; so that,

while I have pointed out, in public lectures and in letters to

men of influence, sundry improvements, I have not hitherto

thought it best to go fully into the subject.



But what I now say will not see the light until my diplomatic

career is finished forever, and I may claim to speak now for what

seems to me the good of the service and of the country. I shall

make neither personal complaint of the past nor personal plea for

the future. As to the past, my experience showed me years ago

what I had to expect if I continued in the service--insufficient

salary, unfit quarters, inadequate means of discharging my

duties, and many other difficulties which ought not to have

existed, but which I knew to exist when I took office, and of

which I have therefore no right to complain. As to the future, I

can speak all the more clearly and earnestly because even my

enemies, if I have any, must confess that nothing which is now to

be done can inure to my personal benefit.



As to the present condition, then, of our diplomatic service, it

seems to me a mixture of good and evil. It is by no means so bad

as it once was, and by no means so good as it ought to be and as

it could very easily be made. There has been great improvement in

it since the days of the Civil War. The diplomatic service of no

other country, probably, was so disfigured by eminently unworthy

members as was our own during the quarter of a century preceding

the inauguration of President Lincoln, and, indeed, during a part

of the Lincoln administration itself.



During one presidential term previous to that time our ministers

at three of the most important centers of Europe were making

unedifying spectacles of themselves, whenever it was possible for

them to do so, before the courts to which they were accredited.

On one occasion of court festivity, one of them, in a gorgeous

uniform such as American ministers formerly wore, ran howling

through the mud in the streets of St. Petersburg, the high

personages of the empire looking out upon him from the windows of

the Winter Palace. Sundry other performances of his, to which I

have referred in the account of my Russian mission, were quite as

discreditable.



Another American representative, stationed at Berlin during that

same period, disgraced his country by notorious drunkenness; and

though some of our countrymen at that capital sought to keep him

sober for his first presentation to the King, they were

unsuccessful. Happily, his wild conduct did not culminate abroad;

for a murder which he committed in a drunken fit did not occur

until after his return to our country. A third American

representative at that period published regularly, in his home

newspaper, such scurrilous letters regarding the authorities of

the country to which he was accredited, his colleagues in the

diplomatic service, and, indeed, the country itself, that,

according to common report, his early return home was caused by

his desire to escape the consequences. These were the worst, but

there were others utterly unfit,--men who not only spoke no other

language used in diplomatic intercourse, but could not even speak

with fairly grammatical decency their own. As to the early days

of Mr. Lincoln's administration, there is a well-authenticated

story that, a gentleman having expostulated with the Secretary of

State, Mr. Seward, for sending to a very important diplomatic

post a man whose conduct was the reverse of exemplary, Mr. Seward

replied, "Sir, some persons are sent abroad because they are

needed abroad, and some are sent because they are NOT wanted at

home."



It is a great pleasure to note that since the war both of the

political parties have greatly improved in this respect, and that

the standard of diplomatic appointments has become much higher.

It is a duty as well as a pleasure to acknowledge here that no

President of the United States has ever taken more pains to make

the diplomatic and consular services what they should be than a

representative of the party to which I have always been

opposed--President Cleveland. Especially encouraging is the fact

that public opinion has become sensitive on this subject, and

that the only recent case of gross misconduct by an American

minister in foreign parts was immediately followed by his recall.



And it ought also to be said, even regarding our diplomatic

system in the past, that sundry sneers of the pessimists do our

country wrong. It is certain that no other country has been

steadily represented in Great Britain by a series of more

distinguished citizens than has our own,--beginning with John

Adams, and including the gentleman who at present holds the

position of ambassador to the Court of St. James. Much may also

be said to the credit of our embassies and legations generally at

the leading capitals of Europe. As to unfortunate exceptions,

those who are acquainted with diplomatists in different parts of

the world know that, whatever may have been the failings of the

United States in this respect, she has not been the only nation

which has made mistakes in selecting foreign representatives.



Our service at the present day is, in some respects, excellent;

but it is badly organized, insufficiently provided for, and, as a

rule, has not the standing which every patriotic American should

wish for it.



I have frequently received letters from bright, active-minded

young men stating that they were desirous of fitting themselves

for a diplomatic career, and asking advice regarding the best way

of doing so; but I have felt obliged to warn every one of them

that, strictly speaking, there is no American diplomatic service;

that there is no guarantee of employment to them, even if they

fit themselves admirably; no security in their tenure of office,

even if they were appointed; and little, if any, probability of

their promotion, however excellent their record. Moreover, I have

felt obliged to tell them that the service, such as it is,

especially as regards ambassadors and ministers, is a service

with a property qualification; that it is not a democratic

service resting upon merit, but an aristocratic service resting

largely upon wealth,--a very important--indeed,

essential--qualification for it being that any American who

serves as ambassador must, as a rule, be able to expend, in

addition to his salary, at least from twelve to twenty thousand

dollars a year, and that the demands upon ministers

plenipotentiary are but little less.



And yet, if Congress would seriously give attention to the

matter, calling before a proper committee those of its own

members, and others, who are well acquainted with the necessities

of the service, and would take common-sense advice, it could

easily be made one of the best, and quite possibly the best, in

the world. The most essential and desirable improvements which I

would present are as follows:



I. As regards the first and highest grade in the diplomatic

service, that of ambassadors, I would have at least one half

their whole number appointed from those who have distinguished

themselves as ministers plenipotentiary, and the remaining posts

filled, as at present, from those who, in public life or in other

important fields, have won recognition at home as men fit to

maintain the character and represent the interests of their

country abroad.



II. As regards the second grade in the service,--namely, that of

ministers plenipotentiary,--I would observe the same rule as in

appointing ambassadors, having at least a majority of these at

the leading capitals appointed from such as shall have especially

distinguished themselves at the less important capitals, and a

majority of the ministers plenipotentiary at these less important

capitals appointed from those who shall have distinguished

themselves as ministers resident, or as secretaries of embassy or

of legation.



III. As to the third grade in our service, that of ministers

resident, I would observe the general rule above suggested for

the appointment of ambassadors and ministers plenipotentiary;

that is, I would appoint a majority of them from among those who

shall have rendered most distinguished service as first

secretaries of embassy or of legation. When once appointed I

would have them advanced, for distinguished service, from the

less to the more important capitals, and, so far as possible,

from the ranks of ministers resident to those of ministers

plenipotentiary.



IV. As to the lower or special or temporary grades, whether that

of diplomatic agent or special charge d'affaires or commissioner,

I would have appointments made from the diplomatic or consular

service, or from public life in general, or from fitting men in

private life, as the President or the Secretary of State might

think the most conducive to the public interest.



V. I would have two grades of secretaries of legation, and three

grades of secretaries of embassy. I would have the lowest grade

of secretaries appointed on the recommendation of the Secretary

of State from those who have shown themselves, on due

examination, best qualified in certain leading subjects, such as

international law, the common law, the civil law, the history of

treaties, and general modern history, political economy, a

speaking knowledge of French, and a reading knowledge of at least

one other foreign language. I would make the examination in all

the above subjects strict, and would oblige the Secretary of

State to make his selection of secretaries of legation from the

men thus presented. But, in view of the importance of various

personal qualifications which fit men to influence their

fellow-men, and which cannot be ascertained wholly by

examination, I would leave the Secretary of State full liberty of

choice among those who have honorably passed the examinations

above required. The men thus selected and approved I would have

appointed as secretaries of lower grades,--that is, third

secretaries of embassy and second secretaries of legation,--and

these, when once appointed, should be promoted, for good service,

to the higher secretaryships of embassy and legation, and from

the less to the more important capitals, under such rules as the

State Department might find most conducive to the efficiency of

the service. No secretaries of any grade should thereafter be

appointed who had not passed the examinations required for the

lowest grade of secretaries as above provided; but all who had

already been in the service during two years should be eligible

for promotion, without any further examination, from whatever

post they might be occupying.



VI. I would attach to every embassy three secretaries, to every

legation two, and to every post of minister resident at least

one.



One of the thoroughly wise arrangements of every British embassy

or legation--an arrangement which has gone for much in Great

Britain's remarkable series of diplomatic successes throughout

the world--is to be seen in her maintaining at every capital a

full number of secretaries and attaches, who serve not only in

keeping the current office work in the highest efficiency, but

who become, as it were, the ANTENNAE of the ambassador or

minister--additional eyes and ears to ascertain what is going on

among those most influential in public affairs. Every embassy or

legation thus equipped serves also as an actual and practical

training-school for the service.



VII. I would appoint each attache from the ranks of those

especially recommended, and certified to in writing by leading

authorities in the department to which he is expected to supply

information: as, for example, for military attaches, the War

Department; for naval attaches, the Navy Department; for

financial attaches, the Treasury Department; for commercial

attaches, the Department of Commerce; for agricultural attaches,

the Department of Agriculture; but always subject to the approval

of the Secretary of State as regards sundry qualifications hinted

at above, which can better be ascertained by an interview than by

an examination.



I would have a goodly number of attaches of these various sorts,

and, in our more important embassies, one representing each of

the departments above named. Every attache, if fit for his place,

would be worth far more than his cost to our government, for he

would not only add to the influence of the embassy or legation,

but decidedly to its efficiency. As a rule, all of them could

also be made of real use after the conclusion of their foreign

careers: some by returning to the army or navy and bringing their

knowledge to bear on those branches of the service; some by

taking duty in the various departments at Washington, and aiding

to keep our government abreast of the best practice in other

countries; some by becoming professors in universities and

colleges, and thus aiding to disseminate useful information; some

by becoming writers for the press, thus giving us, instead of

loose guesses and haphazard notions, information and suggestions

based upon close knowledge of important problems and of their

solution in countries other than our own



From these arrangements I feel warranted in expecting a very

great improvement in our diplomatic service. Thus formed, it

would become, in its main features, like the military and naval

services, and, indeed, in its essential characteristics as to

appointment and promotion, like any well-organized manufacturing

or commercial establishment. It would absolutely require

ascertained knowledge and fitness in the lowest grades, and would

give promotion for good service from first to last. Yet it would

not be a cast-iron system: a certain number of men who had shown

decided fitness in various high public offices, or in important

branches of public or private business, could be appointed,

whenever the public interest should seem to require it, as

ministers resident, ministers plenipotentiary, and ambassadors,

without having gone through examination or regular promotion.



But the system now proposed, while thus allowing the frequent

bringing in of new and capable men from public life at home,

requires that a large proportion of each grade above that of

secretary, save a very small number of diplomatic agents,

commissioners, and the like, shall be appointed from those

thoroughly trained for the service, and that all secretaries,

without exception, shall be thoroughly trained and fitted. Scope

would thus be given to the activity of both sorts of men, and the

whole system made sufficiently elastic to meet all necessities.



In the service thus organized, the class of ambassadors and

ministers fitted by knowledge of public affairs at home for

important negotiations, but unacquainted with diplomatic life or

foreign usages and languages, would be greatly strengthened by

secretaries who had passed through a regular course of training

and experience. An American diplomatic representative without

diplomatic experience, on reaching his post, whether as

ambassador or minister, would not find--as was once largely the

case--secretaries as new as himself to diplomatic business, but

men thoroughly prepared to aid him in the multitude of minor

matters, ignorance of which might very likely cripple him as

regards very important business: secretaries so experienced as to

be able to set him in the way of knowing, at any court, who are

the men of real power, and who mere parasites and pretenders,

what relations are to be cultivated and what avoided, which are

the real channels of influence, and which mere illusions leading

nowhither. On the other hand, the secretaries thoroughly trained

would doubtless, in their conversation with a man fresh from

public affairs at home, learn many things of use to them.



Thus, too, what is of great importance throughout the entire

service, every ambassador, minister plenipotentiary, or minister

resident would possess, or easily command, large experience of

various men in various countries. At the same time, each would be

under most powerful incentives to perfect his training, widen his

acquaintance, and deepen his knowledge--incentives which, under

the old system,--which we may hope is now passing away,--with its

lack of appointment for ascertained fitness, lack of promotion

for good service, and lack of any certainty of tenure, do not

exist.



The system of promotion for merit throughout the service is no

mere experiment; the good sense of all the leading nations in the

world, except our own, has adopted it, and it works well. In our

own service the old system works badly; excellent men, both in

its higher and lower grades, have been frequently crippled by

want of proper experience or aid. We have, indeed, several

admirable secretaries--some of them fit to be ambassadors or

ministers, but all laboring under conditions the most depressing

--such as obtain in no good business enterprise. During my stay

as minister at St. Petersburg, the secretary of legation, a man

ideally fitted for the post, insisted on resigning. On my

endeavoring to retain him, he answered as follows: "I have been

over twelve years in the American diplomatic service as

secretary; I have seen the secretaries here, from all other

countries, steadily promoted until all of them still remaining in

the service are in higher posts, several of them ministers, and

some ambassadors. I remain as I was at the beginning, with no

promotion, and no probability of any. I feel that, as a rule, my

present colleagues, as well as most officials with whom I have to

do, seeing that I have not been advanced, look upon me as a

failure. They cannot be made to understand how a man who has

served so long as secretary has been denied promotion for any

reason save inefficiency. I can no longer submit to be thus

looked down upon, and I must resign."



While thus having a system of promotion based upon efficiency, I

would retain during good behavior, up to a certain age, the men

who have done thoroughly well in the service. Clearly, when we

secure an admirable man,--recognized as such in all parts of the

world,--like Mr. Wheaton, Mr. Bancroft, Mr. Charles Francis

Adams, Mr. Marsh, Mr. Townsend Harris, Mr. Washburne, Mr. Lowell,

Mr. Bayard, Mr. Phelps, and others who have now passed away, not

to speak of many now living, we should keep him at his post as

long as he is efficient, without regard to his politics. This is

the course taken very generally by other great nations, and

especially by our sister republic of Great Britain (for Great

Britain is simply a republic with a monarchical figurehead

lingering along on good behavior): she retains her

representatives in these positions, and promotes them without any

regard to their party relations. During my first official

residence at Berlin, although the home government at London was

of the Conservative party, it retained at the German capital, as

ambassador, Lord Ampthill, a Liberal; and, as first secretary,

Sir John Walsham, a Tory. From every point of view, the long

continuance in diplomatic positions of the most capable men would

be of great advantage to our country.



But, as the very first thing to be done, whether our diplomatic

service remains as at present or be improved, I would urge, as a

condition precedent to any thoroughly good service, that there be

in each of the greater capitals of the world at which we have a

representative, a suitable embassy or legation building or

apartment, owned or leased for a term of years by the American

Government Every other great power, and many of the smaller

nations, have provided such quarters for their representatives,

and some years ago President Cleveland recommended to Congress a

similar policy. Under the present system the head of an American

embassy or mission abroad is at a wretched disadvantage. In many

capitals he finds it at times impossible to secure a proper

furnished apartment; and, in some, very difficult to find any

suitable apartment at all, whether furnished or unfurnished. Even

if he finds proper rooms, they are frequently in an unfit quarter

of the town, remote from the residences of his colleagues, from

the public offices, from everybody and everything related to his

work. His term of office being generally short, he is usually

considered a rather undesirable tenant, and is charged

accordingly. Besides this, the fitting and furnishing of such an

apartment is a very great burden, both as regards trouble and

expense. I have twice thus fitted and furnished a large apartment

in Berlin, and in each case this represented an expenditure of

more than the salary for the first year. Within my own knowledge,

two American ministers abroad have impoverished their families by

expenditures of this kind. But this is not the worst. The most

serious result of the existing system concerns our country. I

have elsewhere shown how, in one very important international

question at St. Petersburg, our mistaken policy in this respect

once cost the United States a sum which would have forever put

that embassy, and, indeed, many others besides, on the very best

footing. If an American ambassador is to exercise a really strong

influence for the United States as against other nations he must

be properly provided for as regards his residence and

support,--not provided for, indeed, so largely as some

representatives of other nations; for I neither propose nor

desire that the American representative shall imitate the pomp of

certain ambassadors of the greater European powers. But he ought

to be enabled to live respectably, and to discharge his duties

efficiently. There should be, in this respect, what Thomas

Jefferson acknowledged in the Declaration of Independence as a

duty,--"a decent regard for the opinions of mankind." The present

condition of things is frequently humiliating. In the greater

capitals of Europe the general public know the British, French,

Austrian, Italian, and all other important embassies or

legations, except that of our country. The American embassy or

legation has no settled home, is sometimes in one quarter of the

town, sometimes in another, sometimes almost in an attic,

sometimes almost in a cellar, generally inadequate in its

accommodations, and frequently unfortunate in its surroundings.

Both my official terms at St. Petersburg showed me that one

secret of the great success of British diplomacy, in all parts of

the world, is that especial pains are taken regarding this point,

and that, consequently, every British embassy is the center of a

wide-spread social influence which counts for very much indeed in

her political influence. The United States, as perhaps the

wealthiest nation in existence,--a nation far-reaching in the

exercise of its foreign policy, with vast and increasing

commercial and other interests throughout the world,--should, in

all substantial matters, be equally well provided for. Take our

recent relations with Turkey. We have insisted on the payment of

an indemnity for the destruction of American property, and we

have constantly a vast number of Americans of the very best sort,

and especially our missionaries, who have to be protected

throughout the whole of that vast empire. Each of the other great

powers provides its representative at Constantinople with a

residence honorable, suitable, and within a proper inclosure for

its protection; but the American minister lives anywhere and

everywhere,--in such premises, over shops and warehouses, as can

be secured,--and he is liable, in case of trouble between the two

nations, to suffer personal violence and to have his house sacked

by a Turkish mob. No foreign people, and least of all an Oriental

people, can highly respect a diplomatic representative who, by

his surroundings, seems not to be respected by his own people.

The American Government can easily afford the expenditure needed

to provide proper houses or apartments for its entire diplomatic

corps, but it can hardly afford NOT to provide these. Full

provision for them would not burden any American citizen to the

amount of the half of a Boston biscuit. Leaving matters in their

present condition is, in the long run, far more costly. I once

had occasion to consider this matter in the light of economy, and

found that the cost of the whole diplomatic service of the United

States during an entire year was only equal to the expenditure in

one of our recent wars during four hours; so that if any member

of the diplomatic service should delay a declaration of war

merely for the space of a day, he would defray the cost of the

service for about six years.



Mr. Charles Francis Adams, by his admirable diplomatic dealing

with the British Foreign Office at the crisis of our Civil War,

prevented the coming out of the later Confederate cruisers to

prey upon our commerce, and, in all probability, thus averted a

quarrel with Great Britain which would have lengthened our Civil

War by many years, and doubtless have cost us hundreds of

millions.



General Woodford, our recent minister at Madrid, undoubtedly

delayed our war with Spain for several months, and skilful

diplomatic intervention brought that war to a speedy close just

as soon as our military and naval successes made it possible.



The cases are also many where our diplomatic representatives have

quieted ill feelings which would have done great harm to our

commerce. These facts show that the diplomatic service may well

be called "The Cheap Defense of Nations."



When, in addition to this, an American recalls such priceless

services to civilization, and to the commerce of our country and

of the world, as those rendered by Mr. Townsend Harris while

American minister in Japan, the undoubted saving through a long

series of years of many lives and much property by our ministers

in such outlying parts of the world as Turkey and China, the

promotion of American commercial and other interests, and the

securing of information which has been precious to innumerable

American enterprises, it seems incontestable that our diplomatic

service ought not to be left in its present slipshod condition.

It ought to be put on the best and most effective footing

possible, so that everywhere the men we send forth to support and

advance the manifold interests of our country shall be thoroughly

well equipped and provided for. To this end the permanent

possession of a suitable house or apartment in every capital is

the foremost and most elementary of necessities.



And while such a provision is the first thing, it would be wise

to add, as other nations do, a moderate allowance for furniture,

and for keeping the embassy or legation properly cared for during

the interim between the departure of one representative and the

arrival of another.



If this were done, the prestige of the American name and the

effectiveness of the service would be vastly improved, and

diplomatic posts would be no longer so onerous and, indeed,

ruinous as they have been to some of the best men we have sent

abroad.



And in order fully to free my mind I will add that, while the

provision for a proper embassy or legation building is the first

of all things necessary, it might also be well to increase

somewhat the salaries of our representatives abroad. These may

seem large even at present; but the cost of living has greatly

increased since they were fixed, and the special financial

demands upon an ambassador or minister at any of the most

important posts are always far beyond the present salary. It is

utterly impossible for an American diplomatic representative to

do his duty upon the salary now given, even while living on the

most moderate scale known in the diplomatic corps. To attempt to

do so would deprive him of all opportunity to exercise that

friendly, personal, social influence which is so important an

element in his success.



To sum up my suggestions as to this part of the subject, I should

say: First, that, as a rule, there should be provided at each

diplomatic post where the United States has a representative a

spacious and suitable house, either bought by our government or

taken on a long lease; and that there should be a small

appropriation each year for maintaining it as regards furniture,

care, etc. Secondly, that American representatives of the highest

grade--namely, ambassadors--should have a salary of at least

$25,000 a year; and that diplomatic representatives of lower

grade should have their salaries raised in the same proportion.

Thirdly, that an additional number of secretaries and attaches

should be provided in the manner and for the reasons above

recommended.



If the carrying out of these reforms should require an

appropriation to the diplomatic service fifty per cent. higher

than it now is,--which is an amount greater than would really be

required by all the expenditures I propose, including interest

upon the purchase money of appropriate quarters for our

representatives abroad,--the total additional cost to each

citizen of the United States would be less than half a cent each

year.



The first result of these and other reforms which I have

indicated, beginning with what is of the very first

importance,--provision for a proper house or apartment in every

capital,--would certainly be increased respect for the United

States and increased effectiveness of its foreign

representatives.



As to the other reforms, such as suitable requirements for

secretaryships, and proper promotion throughout the whole

service, they would vastly increase its attractiveness, in all

its grades, to the very men whom the country most needs. They

would open to young men in our universities and colleges a most

honorable career, leading such institutions to establish courses

of instruction with reference to such a service--courses which

were established long since in Germany, but which have arrived

nearest perfection in two of our sister republics--at the

University of Zurich in Switzerland, and in the ecole Libre des

Sciences Politiques in Paris.



It seems certain that a diplomatic service established and

maintained in the manner here indicated would not only vastly

increase the prestige and influence of the United States among

her sister nations, but, purely from a commercial point of view,

would amply repay us. To have in diplomatic positions at the

various capitals men thoroughly well fitted not only as regards

character and intellect, but also as regards experience and

acquaintance, and to have them so provided for as to become the

social equals of their colleagues, would be, from every point of

view, of the greatest advantage to our country materially and

politically, and would give strength to our policy throughout the

world.



And, finally, to a matter worth mentioning only because it has at

sundry times and in divers manners been comically argued and

curiously misrepresented--the question as to a diplomatic

uniform.



As regards any principle involved, I have never been able to see

any reason, a priori, why, if we have a uniform for our military

service and another for our naval service, we may not have one

for our diplomatic service. It has, indeed, been asserted by

sundry orators dear to the galleries, as well as by various

"funny-column" men, that such a uniform is that of a lackey; but

this assertion loses force when one reflects on the solemn fact

that "plain evening dress," which these partizans of Jeffersonian

simplicity laud and magnify, and which is the only alternative to

a uniform, is worn by table-waiters the world over.



Yet, having conceded so much, truth compels me to add that,

having myself never worn anything save "plain evening dress" at

any court to which I have been accredited, or at any function

which I have attended, I have never been able to discover the

slightest disadvantage to my country or myself from that fact.



Colleagues of mine, clad in resplendent uniforms, have, indeed,

on more than one occasion congratulated me on being allowed a

more simple and comfortable costume; and though such expressions

are, of course, to be taken with some grains of allowance, I have

congratulated myself with the deepest sincerity on my freedom

from what seems to me a most tiresome yoke.



The discussion of a question of such vast importance--to the

censors above referred to--would be inadequate were mention not

made of a stumbling-block which does not seem to have been

adequately considered by those who propose a return to the

earlier practice of our Republic --and this is, that the uniform

is, at any European court, but a poor thing unless it bears some

evidence of distinguished service, in the shape of stars,

crosses, ribbons, and the like. A British ambassador, or minister

plenipotentiary, in official uniform, but without the ribbon or

star of the Bath or other honorable order, would appear to little

advantage indeed. A representative of the French Republic would

certainly prefer to wear the plainest dress rather than the most

splendid uniform unadorned by the insignia of the Legion of

Honor, and, in a general way, the same may be said of the

representatives of all nations which approve the wearing of a

diplomatic uniform.



But our own Republic bestows no such "decorations," and allows

none of its representatives, during their term of office, to

receive them; so that, if put into uniform, these representatives

must appear to the great mass of beholders as really of inferior

quality, undistinguished by any adornments which indicate good

service.



All this difficulty our present practice avoids. The American

ambassador, or minister, is known at once by the fact that he

alone wears plain evening dress; and this fact, as well as the

absence of decorations, being recognized as in simple conformity

with the ideas and customs of his country, rather adds to his

prestige than diminishes it, as far as I have been able to

discover. Perhaps the well-known case of Lord Castlereagh at the

Congress of Vienna is in point. In the midst of the throng of his

colleagues, all of them most gorgeously arrayed in uniforms,

stars, and decorations of every sort, he appeared in the simplest

evening attire; and the attention of Metternich being called to

this fact, that much experienced, infinitely bespangled statesman

answered, "Ma foi! il est bien distingue."



Of course we ought to give due weight to the example set by

Benjamin Franklin when presented to Louis XVI, and the fact that

his simple shoe-strings nearly threw the court chamberlains into

fainting-fits, and that his plain dress had an enormous influence

on public opinion; but, alas! we have also to take account of the

statement by an eminent critic to the effect that Franklin, at

his previous presentation to Louis XV, had worn court dress, and

that he wore similar gorgeous attire at various other public

functions, with the inference that he was prevented from doing

so, when received by Louis XVI, only by the fact that somehow his

court dress was inaccessible.[10]





[10] See Sainte-Beuve, "Causeries du Lundi," Vol. VII, Article of

November 29, 1852.





All these facts, conflicting, but more or less pertinent, being

duly considered, I would have the rule regarding dress remain as

it is, save in the rare cases when the sovereign of a country, at

some special function, requests some modification of it. In such

case the Secretary of State might, one would suppose, be allowed

to grant a dispensation from the ordinary rule without any danger

to American liberty.



For the more profound considerations which this vast subject

suggests, the judicious reader may well consult "Sartor

Resartus."

