




PART VII





Of Systems of Moral Philosophy


Consisting of Four Section





Section I





Of the Questions which ought to be examined in a Theory of Moral


Sentiments





    If we examine the most celebrated and remarkable of the


different theories which have been given concerning the nature


and origin of our moral sentiments, we shall find that almost all


of them coincide with some part or other of that which I have


been endeavouring to give an account of; and that if every thing


which has already been said be fully considered, we shall be at


no loss to explain what was the view or aspect of nature which


led each particular author to form his particular system. From


some one or other of those principles which I have been


endeavouring to unfold, every system of morality that ever had


any reputation in the world has, perhaps, ultimately been


derived. As they are all of them, in this respect, founded upon


natural principles, they are all of them in some measure in the


right. But as many of them are derived from a partial and


imperfect view of nature, there are many of them too in some


respects in the wrong.


    In treating of the principles of morals there are two


questions to be considered. First, wherein does virtue consist?


Or what is the tone of temper, and tenour of conduct, which


constitutes the excellent and praise-worthy character, the


character which is the natural object of esteem, honour, and


approbation? And, secondly, by what power or faculty in the mind


is it, that this character, whatever it be, is recommended. to


us? Or in other words, how and by what means does it come to


pass, that the mind prefers one tenour of conduct to another,


denominates the one right and the other wrong; considers the one


as the object of approbation, honour, and reward, and the other


of blame, censure, and punishment?


    We examine the first question when we consider whether virtue


consists in benevolence, as Dr Hutcheson imagines; or in acting


suitably to the different relations we stand in, as Dr Clarke


supposes; or in the wise and prudent pursuit of our own real and


solid happiness, as has been the opinion of others.


    We examine the second question, when we consider, whether the


virtuous character, whatever it consists in, be recommended to us


by self-love, which makes us perceive that this character, both


in ourselves and others, tends most to promote our own private


interest; or by reason, which points out to us the difference


between one character and another, in the same manner as it does


that between truth and falsehood; or by a peculiar power of


perception, called a moral sense, which this virtuous character


gratifies and pleases, as the contrary disgusts and displeases


it; or last of all, by some other principle in human nature, such


as a modification of sympathy, or the like.


    I shall begin with considering the systems which have been


formed concerning the first of these questions, and shall proceed


afterwards to examine those concerning the second.





Section II





Of the different Accounts which have been given of the Nature of


Virtue





    The different accounts which have been given of the nature of


virtue, or of the temper of mind which constitutes the excellent


and praise-worthy character, may be reduced to three different


classes. According to some, the virtuous temper of mind does not


consist in any one species of affections, but in the proper


government and direction of all our affections, which may be


either virtuous or vicious according to the objects which they


pursue, and the degree of vehemence with which they pursue them.


According to these authors, therefore, virtue consists in


propriety.


    According to others, virtue consists in the judicious pursuit


of our own private interest and happiness, or in the proper


government and direction of those selfish affections which aim


solely at this end. In the opinion of these authors, therefore,


virtue consists in prudence.


    Another set of authors make virtue consist in those


affections only which aim at the happiness of others, not in


those which aim at our own. According to them, therefore,


disinterested benevolence is the only motive which can stamp upon


any action the character of virtue.


    The character of virtue, it is evident, must either be


ascribed indifferently to all our affections, when under proper


government and direction; or it must be confined to some one


class or division of them. The great division of our affections


is into the selfish and the benevolent. If the character of


virtue, therefore, cannot be ascribed indifferently to all our


affections, when under proper government and direction, it must


be confined either to those which aim directly at our own private


happiness, or to those which aim directly at that of others. If


virtue, therefore, does not consist in propriety, it must consist


either in prudence or in benevolence. Besides these three, it is


scarce possible to imagine that any other account can be given of


the nature of virtue. I shall endeavour to show hereafter how all


the other accounts, which are seemingly different from any of


these, coincide at bottom with some one or other of them.





Chap. I





Of those Systems which make Virtue consist in Propriety





    According to Plato, to Aristotle, and to Zeno, virtue


consists in the propriety of conduct, or in the suitableness of


the affection from which we act to the object which excites it.





    I. In the system of Plato(1*) the soul is considered as


something like a little state or republic, composed of three


different faculties or orders.


    The first is the judging faculty, the faculty which


determines not only what are the proper means for attaining any


end, but also what ends are fit to be pursued, and what degree of


relative value we ought to put upon each. This faculty Plato


called, as it is very properly called, reason, and considered it


as what had a right to be the governing principle of the whole.


Under this appellation, it is evident, he comprehended not only


that faculty by which we judge of truth and falsehood, but that


by which we judge of the propriety or impropriety of desires and


affections.


    The different passions and appetites, the natural subjects of


this ruling principle, but which are so apt to rebel against


their master, he reduced to two different classes or orders. The


first consisted of those passions, which are founded in pride and


resentment, or in what the schoolmen called the irascible part of


the soul; ambition, animosity, the love of honour, and the dread


of shame, the desire of victory, superiority, and revenge; all


those passions, in short, which are supposed either to rise from,


or to denote what, by a metaphor in our language, we commonly


call spirit or natural fire. The second consisted of those


passions which are founded in the love of pleasure, or in what


the schoolmen called the concupiscible part of the soul. It


comprehended all the appetites of the body, the love of ease and


security, and of all sensual gratifications.


    It rarely happens that we break in upon that plan of conduct,


which the governing principle prescribes, and which in all our


cool hours we had laid down to ourselves as what was most proper


for us to pursue, but when prompted by one or other of those two


different sets of passions; either by ungovernable ambition and


resentment, or by the importunate solicitations of present ease


and pleasure. But though these two orders of passions are so apt


to mislead us, they are still considered as necessary parts of


human nature: the first having been given to defend us against


injuries, to assert our rank and dignity in the world, to make us


aim at what is noble and honourable, and to make us distinguish


those who act in the same manner; the second, to provide for the


support and necessities of the body.


    In the strength, acuteness, and perfection of the governing


principle was placed the essential virtue of prudence, which,


according to Plato, consisted in a just and clear discernment,


founded upon general and scientific ideas, of the ends which were


proper to be pursued, and of the means which were proper for


attaining them.


    When the first set of passions, those of the irascible part


of the soul, had that degree of strength and firmness, which


enabled them, under the direction of reason, to despise all


dangers in the pursuit of what was honourable and noble; it


constituted the virtue of fortitude and magnanimity. This order


of passions, according to this system, was of a more generous and


noble nature than the other. They were considered upon many


occasions as the auxiliaries of reason, to check and restrain the


inferior and brutal appetites. We are often angry at ourselves,


it was observed, we often become the objects of our own


resentment and indignation, when the love of pleasure prompts to


do what we disapprove of; and the irascible part of our nature is


in this manner called in to assist the rational against the


concupiscible.


    When all those three different parts of our nature were in


perfect concord with one another, when neither the irascible nor


concupiscible passions ever aimed at any gratification which


reason did not approve of, and when reason never commanded any


thing, but what these of their own accord were willing to


perform: this happy composure, this perfect and complete harmony


of soul, constituted that virtue which in their language is


expressed by a word which we commonly translate temperance, but


which might more properly be translated good temper, or sobriety


and moderation of mind.


    Justice, the last and greatest of the four cardinal virtues,


took place, according to this system, when each of those three


faculties of the mind confined itself to its proper office,


without attempting to encroach upon that of any other; when


reason directed and passion obeyed, and when each passion


performed its proper duty, and exerted itself towards its proper


object easily and without reluctance, and with that degree of


force and energy, which was suitable to the value of what it


pursued. In this consisted that complete virtue, that perfect


propriety of conduct, which Plato, after some of the ancient


Pythagoreans, denominated Justice.


    The word, it is to be observed, which expresses justice in


the Greek language, has several different meanings; and as the


correspondent word in all other languages, so far as I know, has


the same, there must be some natural affinity among those various


significations. In one sense we are said to do justice to our


neighbour when we abstain from doing him any positive harm, and


do not directly hurt him, either in his person, or in his estate,


or in his reputation. This is that justice which I have treated


of above, the observance of which may be extorted by force, and


the violation of which exposes to punishment. In another sense we


are said not to do justice to our neighbour unless we conceive


for him all that love, respect, and esteem, which his character,


his situation, and his connexion with ourselves, render suitable


and proper for us to feel, and unless we act accordingly. It is


in this sense that we are said to do injustice to a man of merit


who is connected with us, though we abstain from hurting him in


every respect, if we do not exert ourselves to serve him and to


place him in that situation in which the impartial spectator


would be pleased to see him. The first sense of the word


coincides with what Aristotle and the Schoolmen call commutative


justice, and with what Grotius calls the justitia expletrix,


which consists in abstaining from what is another's, and in doing


voluntarily whatever we can with propriety be forced to do. The


second sense of the word coincides with what some have called


distributive justice,(2*) and with the justitia attributrix of


Grotius, which consists in proper beneficence, in the becoming


use of what is our own, and in the applying it to those purposes


either of charity or generosity, to which it is most suitable, in


our situation, that it should be applied. In this sense justice


comprehends all the social virtues: There is yet another sense in


which the word justice is sometimes taken, still more extensive


than either of the former, though very much a-kin to the last;


and which runs too, so far as I know, through all languages. It


is in this last sense that we are said to be unjust, when we do


not seem to value any particular object with that degree of


esteem, or to pursue it with that degree of ardour which to the


impartial spectator it may appear to deserve or to be naturally


fitted for exciting. Thus we are said to do injustice to a poem


or a picture, when we do not admire them enough, and we are said


to do them more than justice when we admire them too much. In the


same manner we are said to do injustice to ourselves when we


appear not to give sufficient attention to any particular object


of self-interest. In this last sense, what is called justice


means the same thing with exact and perfect propriety of conduct


and behaviour, and comprehends in it, not only the offices of


both commutative and distributive justice, but of every other


virtue, of prudence, of fortitude, of temperance. It is in this


last sense that Plato evidently understands what he calls


justice, and which, therefore, according to him, comprehends in


it the perfection of every sort of virtue.


    Such is the account given by Plato of the nature of virtue,


or of that temper of mind which is the proper object of praise


and approbation. It consists, according to him, in that state of


mind in which every faculty confines itself within its proper


sphere without encroaching upon that of any other, and performs


its proper office with that precise degree of strength and vigour


which belongs to it. His account, it is evident, coincides in


every respect with what we have said above concerning the


propriety of conduct.





    II. Virtue, according to Aristotle,(3*) consists in the habit


of mediocrity according to right reason. Every particular virtue,


according to him, lies in a kind of middle between two opposite


vices, of which the one offends from being too much, the other


from being too little affected by a particular species of


objects. Thus the virtue of fortitude or courage lies in the


middle between the opposite vices of cowardice and of


presumptuous rashness, of which the one offends from being too


much, and the other from being too little affected by the objects


of fear. Thus too the virtue of frugality lies in a middle


between avarice and profusion, of which the one consists in an


excess, the other in a defect of the proper attention to the


objects of self-interest. Magnanimity, in the same manner, lies


in a middle between the excess of arrogance and the defect of


pusillanimity, of which the one consists in too extravagant, the


other in too weak a sentiment of our own worth and dignity. It is


unnecessary to observe that this account of virtue corresponds


too pretty exactly with what has been said above concerning the


propriety and impropriety of conduct.


    According to Aristotle,(4*) indeed, virtue did not so much


consist in those moderate and right affections, as in the habit


of this moderation. In order to understand this, it is to be


observed, that virtue may be considered either as the quality of


an action, or as the quality of a person. Considered as the


quality of an action, it consists, even according to Aristotle,


in the reasonable moderation of the affection from which the


action proceeds, whether this disposition be habitual to the


person or not. Considered as the quality of a person, it consists


in the habit of this reasonable moderation, in its having become


the customary and usual disposition of the mind. Thus the action


which proceeds from an occasional fit of generosity is


undoubtedly a generous action, but the man who performs it, is


not necessarily a generous person, because it may be the single


action of the kind which he ever performed. The motive and


disposition of heart, from which this action was performed, may


have been quite just and proper: but as this happy mood seems to


have been the effect rather of accidental humour than of any


thing steady or permanent in the character, it can reflect no


great honour on the performer. When we denominate a character


generous or charitable, or virtuous in any respect, we mean to


signify that the disposition expressed by each of those


appellations is the usual and customary disposition of the


person. But single actions of any kind, how proper and suitable


soever, are of little consequence to show that this is the case.


If a single action was sufficient to stamp the character of any


virtue upon the person who performed it, the most worthless of


mankind. might lay claim to all the virtues; since there is no


man who has not, upon some occasions, acted with prudence,


justice, temperance, and fortitude. But though single actions,


how laudable soever, reflect very little praise upon the person


who performs them, a single vicious action performed by one whose


conduct is usually very regular, greatly diminishes and sometimes


destroys altogether our opinion of his virtue. A single action of


this kind sufficiently shows that his habits are not perfect, and


that he is less to be depended upon, than, from the usual train


of his behaviour, we might have been apt to imagine.


    Aristotle too,(5*) when he made virtue to consist in


practical habits, had it probably in his view to oppose the


doctrine of Plato, who seems to have been of opinion that just


sentiments and reasonable judgments concerning what was fit to be


done or to be avoided, were alone sufficient to constitute the


most perfect virtue. Virtue, according to Plato, might be


considered as a species of science, and no man, he thought, could


see clearly and demonstratively what was right and what was


wrong, and not act accordingly. Passion might make us act


contrary to doubtful and uncertain opinions, not to plain and


evident judgments. Aristotle, on the contrary, was of opinion,


that no conviction of the understanding was capable of getting


the better of inveterate habits, and that good morals arose not


from knowledge but from action.





    III. According to Zeno,(6*) the founder of the Stoical


doctrine, every animal was by nature recommended to its own care,


and was endowed with the principle of self-love, that it might


endeavour to preserve, not only its existence, but all the


different parts of its nature, in the best and most perfect state


of which they were capable.


    The self-love of man embraced, if I may say so, his body and


all its different members, his mind and all its different


faculties and powers, and desired the preservation and


maintenance of them all in their best and most perfect condition.


Whatever tended to support this state of existence was,


therefore, by nature pointed out to him as fit to be chosen; and


whatever tended to destroy it, as fit to be rejected. Thus


health, strength, agility and ease of body as well as the eternal


conveniencies which could promote these; wealth, power, honours,


the respect and esteem of those we live with; were naturally


pointed out to us as things eligible, and of which the possession


was preferable to the want. On the other hand, sickness,


infirmity, unwieldiness, pain of body, as well as all the eternal


inconveniencies which tend to occasion or bring on any of them;


poverty, the want of authority, the contempt or hatred of those


we live with; were, in the same manner, pointed out to us as


things to be shunned and avoided. In each of those two opposite


classes of objects, there were some which appeared to be more the


objects either of choice or rejection, than others in the same


class. Thus, in the first class, health appeared evidently


preferable to strength, and strength to agility; reputation to


power, and power to riches. And thus too, in the second class,


sickness was more to be avoided than unwieldiness of body,


ignominy than poverty, and poverty than the loss of power. Virtue


and the propriety of conduct consisted in choosing and rejecting


all different objects and circumstances according as they were by


nature rendered more or less the objects of choice or rejection;


in selecting always from among the several objects of choice


presented to us, that which was most to be chosen, when we could


not obtain them all; and in selecting too, out of the several


objects of rejection offered to us, that which was least to be


avoided, when it was not in our power to avoid them all. By


choosing and rejecting with this just and accurate discernment,


by thus bestowing upon every object the precise degree of


attention it deserved, according to the place which it held in


this natural scale of things, we maintained, according to the


Stoics, that perfect rectitude of conduct which constituted the


essence of virtue. This was what they called to live


consistently, to live according to nature, and to obey those laws


and directions which nature, or the Author of nature, had


prescribed for our conduct.


    So far the Stoical idea of propriety and virtue is not very


different from that of Aristotle and the ancient Peripatetics.


    Among those primary objects which nature had recommended to


us as eligible, was the prosperity of our family, of our


relations, of our friends, of our country, of mankind, and of the


universe in general. Nature, too, had taught us, that as the


prosperity of two was preferable to that of one, that of many, or


of all, must be infinitely more so. That we ourselves were but


one, and that consequently wherever our prosperity was


inconsistent with that, either of the whole, or of any


considerable part of the whole, it ought, even in our own choice,


to yield to what was so vastly preferable. As all the events in


this world were conducted by the providence of a wise, powerful,


and good God, we might be assured that whatever happened tended


to the prosperity and perfection of the whole. If we ourselves,


therefore, were in poverty, in sickness, or in any other


calamity, we ought, first of all, to use our utmost endeavours,


so far as justice and our duty to others would allow, to rescue


ourselves from this disagreeable circumstance. But if, after all


we could do, we found this impossible, we ought to rest satisfied


that the order and perfection of the universe required that we


should in the mean time continue in this situation. And as the


prosperity of the whole should, even to us, appear preferable to


so insignificant a part as ourselves, our situation, whatever it


was, ought from that moment to become the object of our liking,


if we would maintain that complete propriety and rectitude of


sentiment and conduct in which consisted the perfection of our


nature. If, indeed, any opportunity of extricating ourselves


should offer, it became our duty to embrace it. The order of the


universe, it was evident, no longer required our continuance in


this situation, and the great Director of the world plainly


called upon us to leave it, by so clearly pointing out the road


which we were to follow. It was the same case with the adversity


of our relations, our friends, our country. If, without violating


any more sacred obligation, it was in our power to prevent or put


an end to their calamity, it undoubtedly was our duty to do so.


The propriety of action, the rule which Jupiter had given us for


the direction of our conduct, evidently required this of us. But


if it was altogether out of our power to do either, we ought then


to consider this event as the most fortunate which could possibly


have happened; because we might be assured that it tended most to


the prosperity and order of the whole, which was what we


ourselves, if we were wise and equitable, ought most of all to


desire. It was our own final interest considered as a part of


that whole, of which the prosperity ought to be, not only the


principal, but the sole object of our desire.


    'In what sense,' says Epictetus, 'are some things said to be


according to our nature, and others contrary to it? It is in that


sense in which we consider ourselves as separated and detached


from all other things. For thus it may be said to be according to


the nature of the foot to be always clean. But if you consider it


as a foot, and not as something detached from the rest of the


body, it must behove it sometimes to trample in the dirt, and


sometimes to tread upon thorns, and sometimes, too, to be cut off


for the sake of the whole body; and if it refuses this, it is no


longer a foot. Thus, too, ought we to conceive with regard to


ourselves. What are you? A man. If you consider yourself as


something separated and detached, it is agreeable to your nature


to live to old age, to be rich, to be in health. But if you


consider yourself as a man, and as a part of a whole, upon


account of that whole, it will behove you sometimes to be in


sickness, sometimes to be exposed to the inconveniency of a sea


voyage, sometimes to be in want; and at last, perhaps, to die


before your time. Why then do you complain? Do not you know that


by doing so, as the foot ceases to be a foot, so you cease to be


a man?'(7*)


    A wise man never complains of the destiny of Providence, nor


thinks the universe in confusion when he is out of order. He does


not look upon himself as a whole, separated and detached from


every other part of nature, to be taken care of by itself and for


itself. He regards himself in the light in which he imagines the


great genius of human nature, and of the world, regards him. He


enters, if I may say so, into the sentiments of that divine


Being, and considers himself as an atom, a particle, of an


immense and infinite system, which must and ought to be disposed


of, according to the conveniency of the whole. Assured of the


wisdom which directs all the events of human life, whatever lot


befalls him, he accepts it with joy, satisfied that, if he had


known all the connections and dependencies of the different parts


of the universe, it is the very lot which he himself would have


wished for. If it is life, he is contented to live; and if it is


death, as nature must have no further occasion for his presence


here, he willingly goes where he is appointed. I accept, said a


cynical philosopher, whose doctrines were in this respect the


same as those of the Stoics, I accept, with equal joy and


satisfaction, whatever fortune can befall me. Riches or poverty,


pleasure or pain, health or sickness, all is alike: nor would I


desire that the Gods should in any respect change my destination.


If I was to ask of them any thing beyond what their bounty has


already bestowed, it should be that they would inform me


before-hand what it was their pleasure should be done with me,


that I might of my own accord place myself in this situation, and


demonstrate the cheerfulness with which I embraced their


allotment. If I am going to sail, says Epictetus, I chuse the


best ship and the best pilot, and I wait for the fairest weather


that my circumstances and duty will allow. Prudence and


propriety, the principles which the Gods have given me for the


direction of my conduct, require this of me; but they require no


more: and if, notwithstanding, a storm arises, which neither the


strength of the vessel nor the skill of the pilot are likely to


withstand, I give myself no trouble about the consequence. All


that I had to do is done already. The directors of my conduct


never command me to be miserable, to be anxious, desponding, or


afraid. Whether we are to be drowned, or to come to a harbour, is


the business of Jupiter, not mine. I leave it entirely to his


determination, nor ever break my rest with considering which way


he is likely to decide it, but receive whatever comes with equal


indifference and security.


    From this perfect confidence in that benevolent wisdom which


governs the universe, and from this entire resignation to


whatever order that wisdom might think proper to establish, it


necessarily followed, that, to the Stoical wise man, all the


events of human life must be in a great measure indifferent. His


happiness consisted altogether, first, in the contemplation of


the happiness and perfection of the great system of the universe,


of the good government of the great republic of Gods and men, of


all rational and sensible beings; and, secondly, in discharging


his duty, in acting properly in the affairs of this great


republic whatever little part that wisdom had assigned to him.


The propriety or impropriety of his endeavours might be of great


consequence to him. Their success or disappointment could be of


none at all; could excite no passionate joy or sorrow, no


passionate desire or aversion. If he preferred some events to


others, if some situations were the objects of his choice and


others of his rejection, it was not because he regarded the one


as in themselves in any respect better than the other, or thought


that his own happiness would be more complete in what is called


the fortunate than in what is regarded as the distressful


situation; but because the propriety of action, the rule which


the Gods had given him for the direction of his conduct, required


him to chuse and reject in this manner. All his affections were


absorbed and swallowed up in two great affections; in that for


the discharge of his own duty, and in that for the greatest


possible happiness of all rational and sensible beings. For the


gratification of this latter affection, he rested with the most


perfect security upon the wisdom and power of the great


Superintendant of the universe. His sole anxiety was about the


gratification of the former; not about the event, but about the


propriety of his own endeavours. Whatever the event might be, he


trusted to a superior power and wisdom for turning it to promote


that great end which he himself was most desirous of promoting.


    This propriety of chusing and rejecting, though originally


pointed out to us, and as it were recommended and introduced to


our acquaintance by the things, and for the sake of the things,


chosen and rejected; yet when we had once become thoroughly


acquainted with it, the order, the grace, the beauty which we


discerned in this conduct, the happiness which we felt resulted


from it, necessarily appeared to us of much greater value than


the actual obtaining of all the different objects of choice, or


the actual avoiding of all those of rejection. From the


observation of this propriety arose the happiness and the glory;


from the neglect of it, the misery and the disgrace of human


nature.


    But to a wise man, to one whose passions were brought under


perfect subjection to the ruling principles of his nature, the


exact observation of this propriety was equally easy upon all


occasions. Was he in prosperity, he returned thanks to Jupiter


for having joined him with circumstances which were easily


mastered, and in which there was little temptation to do wrong.


Was he in adversity, he equally returned thanks to the director


of this spectacle of human life, for having opposed to him a


vigorous athlete, over whom, though the contest was likely to be


more violent, the victory was more glorious, and equally certain.


Can there be any shame in that distress which is brought upon us


without any fault of our own, and in which we behave with perfect


propriety? There can, therefore, be no evil, but, on the


contrary, the greatest good and advantage. A brave man exults in


those dangers in which, from no rashness of his own, his fortune


has involved him. They afford an opportunity of exercising that


heroic intrepidity, whose exertion gives the exalted delight


which flows from the consciousness of superior propriety and


deserved admiration. One who is master of all his exercises has


no aversion to measure his strength and activity with the


strongest. And, in the same manner, one who is master of all his


passions, does not dread any circumstance in which the


Superintendant of the universe may think proper to place him. The


bounty of that divine Being has provided him with virtues which


render him superior to every situation. If it is pleasure, he has


temperance to refrain from it; if it is pain, he has constancy to


bear it; if it is danger or death, he has magnanimity and


fortitude to despise it. The events of human life can never find


him unprepared, or at a loss how to maintain that propriety of


sentiment and conduct which, in his own apprehension, constitutes


at once his glory and his happiness.


    Human life the Stoics appear to have considered as a game of


great skill; in which, however, there was a mixture of chance, or


of what is vulgarly understood to be chance. In such games the


stake is commonly a trifle, and the whole pleasure of the game


arises from playing well, from playing fairly, and playing


skilfully. If notwithstanding all his skill, however, the good


player should, by the influence of chance, happen to lose, the


loss ought to be a matter, rather of merriment, than of serious


sorrow. He has made no false stroke; he has done nothing which he


ought to be ashamed of; he has enjoyed completely the whole


pleasure of the game. If, on the contrary, the bad player,


notwithstanding all his blunders, should, in the same manner,


happen to win, his success can give him but little satisfaction.


He is mortified by the remembrance of all the faults which he


committed. Even during the play he can enjoy no part of the


pleasure which it is capable of affording. From ignorance of the


rules of the game, fear and doubt and hesitation are the


disagreeable sentiments that precede almost every stroke which he


plays; and when he has played it, the mortification of finding it


a gross blunder, commonly completes the unpleasing circle of his


sensations. Human life, with all the advantages which can


possibly attend it, ought, according to the Stoics, to be


regarded but as a mere two-penny stake; a matter by far too


insignificant to merit any anxious concern. Our only anxious


concern ought to be, not about the stake, but about the proper


method of playing. If we placed our happiness in winning the


stake, we placed it in what depended upon causes beyond our


power, and out of our direction. We necessarily exposed ourselves


to perpetual fear and uneasiness, and frequently to grievous and


mortifying disappointments. If we placed it in playing well, in


playing fairly, in playing wisely and skilfully; in the propriety


of our own conduct in short; we placed it in what, by proper


discipline, education, and attention, might be altogether in our


own power, and under our own direction. Our happiness was


perfectly secure, and beyond the reach of fortune. The event of


our actions, if it was out of our power, was equally out of our


concern, and we could never feel either fear or anxiety about it;


nor ever suffer any grievous, or even any serious disappointment.


    Human life itself, as well as every different advantage or


disadvantage which can attend it, might, they said, according to


Different circumstances, be the proper object either of our


choice or of our rejection. If, in our actual situation, there


were more circumstances agreeable to nature than contrary to it;


more circumstances which were the objects of choice than of


rejection; life, in this case, was, upon the whole, the proper


object of choice, and the propriety of conduct required that we


should remain in it. If, on the other hand, there were, in our


actual situation, without any probable hope of amendment, more


circumstances contrary to nature than agreeable to it; more


circumstances which were the objects of rejection than of choice;


life itself, in this case, became, to a wise man, the object of


rejection, and he was not only at liberty to remove out of it,


but the propriety of conduct, the rule which the Gods had given


him for the direction of his conduct, required him to do so. I am


ordered, says Epictetus, not to dwell at Nicopolis. I do not


dwell there. I am ordered not to dwell at Athens. I do not dwell


at Athens. I am ordered not to dwell in Rome. I do not dwell in


Rome. I am ordered to dwell in the little and rocky island of


Gyarae. I go and dwell there. But the house smokes in Gyarae. If


the smoke is moderate, I will bear it, and stay there. If it is


excessive, I will go to a house from whence no tyrant can remove


me. I keep in mind always that the door is open, that I can walk


out when I please, and retire to that hospitable house which is


at all times open to all the world; for beyond my undermost


garment, beyond my body, no man living has any power over me. If


your situation is upon the whole disagreeable; if your house


smokes too much for you, said the Stoics, walk forth by all


means. But walk forth without, repining, without murmuring or


complaining. Walk forth calm, contented, rejoicing, returning


thanks to the Gods, who, from their infinite bounty, have opened


the safe and quiet harbour of death, at all times ready to


receive us from the stormy ocean of human life; who have prepared


this sacred, this inviolable, this great asylum, always open,


always accessible; altogether beyond the reach of human rage and


injustice; and large enough to contain both all those who wish,


and all those who do not wish to retire to it: an asylum which


takes away from every man every pretence of complaining, or even


of fancying that there can be any evil in human life, except such


as he may suffer from his own folly and weakness.


    The Stoics, in the few fragments of their philosophy which


have come down to us, sometimes talk of leaving life with a


gaiety, and even with a levity, which, were we to consider those


passages by themselves, might induce us to believe that they


imagined we could with propriety leave it whenever we had a mind,


wantonly and capriciously, upon the slightest disgust or


uneasiness. 'When you sup with such a person,' says Epictetus,


'you complain of the long stories which he tells you about his


Mysian wars. "Now my friend, says he, having told you how I took


possession of an eminence at such a place, I will tell you how I


was besieged in such another place." But if you have a mind not


to be troubled with his long stories, do not accept of his


supper. If you accept of his supper, you have not the least


pretence to complain of his long stories. It is the same case


with what you call the evils of human life. Never complain of


that of which it is at all times in your power to rid yourself.'


Notwithstanding this gaiety and even levity of expression,


however, the alternative of leaving life, or of remaining in it,


was, according to the Stoics, a matter of the most serious and


important deliberation. We ought never to leave it till we were


distinctly called upon to do so by that superintending power


which had originally placed us in it. But we were to consider


ourselves as called upon to do so, not merely at the appointed


and unavoidable term of human life. Whenever the providence of


that superintending Power had rendered our condition in life upon


the whole the proper object rather of rejection than of choice;


the great rule which he had given us for the direction of our


conduct, then required us to leave it. We might then be said to


hear the awful and benevolent voice of that divine Being


distinctly calling upon us to do so.


    It was upon this account that, according to the Stoics, it


might be the duty of a wise man to remove out of life though he


was perfectly happy; while, on the contrary, it might be the duty


of a weak man to remain in it, though he was necessarily


miserable. If, in the situation of the wise man, there were more


circumstances which were the natural objects of rejection than of


choice, the whole situation became the object of rejection, and


the rule which the Gods had given him for the direction of his


conduct, required that he should remove out of it as speedily as


particular circumstances might render convenient. He was,


however, perfectly happy even during the time that he might think


proper to remain in it. He had placed his happiness, not in


obtaining the objects of his choice, or in avoiding those of his


rejection; but in always choosing and rejecting with exact


propriety; not in the success, but in the fitness of his


endeavours and exertions. If, in the situation of the weak man,


on the contrary, there were more circumstances which were the


natural objects of choice than of rejection; his whole situation


became the proper object of choice, and it was his duty to remain


in it. He was unhappy, however, from not knowing how to use those


circumstances. Let his cards be ever so good, he did not know how


to play them, and could enjoy no sort of real satisfaction,


either in the progress, or in the event of the game, in whatever


manner it might happen to turn out.(8*)


    The propriety, upon some occasions, of voluntary death,


though it was, perhaps, more insisted upon by the Stoics, than by


any other sect of ancient philosophers, was, however, a doctrine


common to them all, even to the peaceable and indolent


Epicureans. During the age in which flourished the founders of


all the principal sects of ancient philosophy; during the


Peloponnesian war and for many years after its conclusion, all


the different republics of Greece were, at home, almost always


distracted by the most furious factions; and abroad, involved in


the most sanguinary wars, in which each sought, not merely


superiority or dominion, but either completely to extirpate all


its enemies, or, what was not less cruel, to reduce them into the


vilest of all states, that of domestic slavery, and to sell them,


man, woman, and child, like so many herds of cattle, to the


highest bidder in the market. The smallness of the greater part


of those states, too, rendered it, to each of them, no very


improbable event, that it might itself fall into that very


calamity which it had so frequently, either, perhaps, actually


inflicted, or at least attempted to inflict upon some of its


neighbours. In this disorderly state of things, the most perfect


innocence, joined to both the highest rank and the greatest


public services, could give no security to any man that, even at


home and among his own relations and fellow-citizens, he was not,


at some time or another, from the prevalence of some hostile and


furious faction, to be condemned to the most cruel and


ignominious punishment. If he was taken prisoner in war, or if


the city of which he was a member was conquered, he was exposed,


if possible, to still greater injuries and insults. But every man


naturally, or rather necessarily, familiarizes his imagination


with the distresses to which he foresees that his situation may


frequently expose him. It is impossible that a sailor should not


frequently think of storms and shipwrecks, and foundering at sea,


and of how he himself is likely both to feel and to act upon such


occasions. It was impossible, in the same manner, that a Grecian


patriot or hero should not familiarize his imagination with all


the different calamities to which he was sensible his situation


must frequently, or rather constantly expose him. As an American


savage prepares his death-song, and considers how he should act


when he has fallen into the hands of his enemies, and is by them


put to death in the most lingering tortures, and amidst the


insults and derision of all the spectators; so a Grecian patriot


or hero could not avoid frequently employing his thoughts in


considering what he ought both to suffer and to do in banishment,


in captivity, when reduced to slavery, when put to the torture,


when brought to the scaffold. But the philosophers of all the


different sects very justly represented virtue; that is, wise,


just, firm, and temperate conduct; not only as the most probable,


but as the certain and infallible road to happiness even in this


life. This conduct, however, could not always exempt, and might


even sometimes expose the person who followed it to all the


calamities which were incident to that unsettled situation of


public affairs. They endeavoured, therefore, to show that


happiness was either altogether, or at least in a great measure,


independent of fortune; the Stoics, that it was so altogether;


the Academic and Peripatetic philosophers, that it was so in a


great measure. Wise, prudent, and good conduct was, in the first


place, the conduct most likely to ensure success in every species


of undertaking; and secondly, though it should fail of success,


yet the mind was not left without consolation. The virtuous man


might still enjoy the complete approbation of his own breast; and


might still feel that, how untoward soever things might be


without, all was calm and peace and concord within. He might


generally comfort himself, too, with the assurance that he


possessed the love and esteem of every intelligent and impartial


spectator, who could not fail both to admire his conduct, and to


regret his misfortune.


    Those philosophers endeavoured, at the same time, to show,


that the greatest misfortunes to which human life was liable,


might be supported more easily than was commonly imagined. They


endeavoured to point out the comforts which a man might still


enjoy when reduced to poverty, when driven into banishment, when


exposed to the injustice of popular clamour, when labouring under


blindness, under deafness, in the extremity of old age, upon the


approach of death. They pointed out, too, the considerations


which might contribute to support his constancy under the agonies


of pain and even of torture, in sickness, in sorrow for the loss


of children, for the death of friends and relations, etc. The few


fragments which have come down to us of what the ancient


philosophers had written upon these subjects, form, perhaps, one


of the most instructive, as well as one of the most interesting


remains of antiquity. The spirit and manhood of their doctrines


make a wonderful contrast with the desponding, plaintive, and


whining tone of some modern systems.


    But while those ancient philosophers endeavoured in this


manner to suggest every consideration which could, as Milton


says, arm the obdured breast with stubborn patience, as with


triple steel; they, at the same time, laboured above all to


convince their followers that there neither was nor could be any


evil in death; and that, if their situation became at any time


too hard for their constancy to support, the remedy was at hand,


the door was open, and they might, without fear, walk out when


they pleased. If there was no world beyond the present, death,


they said, could be no evil; and if there was another world, the


Gods must likewise be in that other, and a just man could fear no


evil while under their protection. Those philosophers, in short,


prepared a death-song, if I may say so, which the Grecian


patriots and heroes might make use of upon the proper occasions;


and, of all the different sects, the Stoics, I think it must be


acknowledged, had prepared by far the most animated and spirited


song.


    Suicide, however, never seems to have been very common among


the Greeks. Excepting Cleomenes, I cannot at present recollect


any very illustrious either patriot or hero of Greece, who died


by his own hand. The death of Aristomenes is as much beyond the


period of true history as that of Ajax. The common story of the


death of Themistocles, though within that period, bears upon its


face all the marks of a most romantic fable. Of all the Greek


heroes whose lives have been written by Plutarch, Cleomenes


appears to have been the only one who perished in this manner.


Theramines, Socrates, and Phocion, who certainly did not want


courage, suffered themselves to be sent to prison, and submitted


patiently to that death to which the injustice of their


fellow-citizens had condemned them. The brave Eumenes allowed


himself to be delivered up, by his own mutinous soldiers, to his


enemy Antigonus, and was starved to death, without attempting any


violence. The gallant Philopoemen suffered himself to be taken


prisoner by the Messenians, was thrown into a dungeon, and was


supposed to have been privately poisoned. Several of the


philosophers, indeed, are said to have died in this manner; but


their lives have been so very foolishly written, that very little


credit is due to the greater part of the tales which are told of


them. Three different accounts have been given of the death of


Zeno the Stoic. One is, that after enjoying, for ninety-eight


years, the most perfect state of health, he happened, in going


out of his school, to fall; and though he suffered no other


damage than that of breaking or dislocating one of his fingers,


he struck the ground with his hand, and, in the words of the


Niobe of Euripides, said, I come, why doest thou call me? and


immediately went home and hanged himself. At that great age, one


should think, he might have had a little more patience. Another


account is, that, at the same age, and in consequence of a like


accident, he starved himself to death. The third account is,


that, at seventy-two years of age, he died in the natural way; by


far the most probable account of the three, and supported too by


the authority of a co-temporary, who must have had every


opportunity of being well informed; of Persaeus, originally the


slave, and afterwards the friend and disciple of Zeno. The first


account is given by Apollonius of Tyre, who flourished about the


time of Augustus Caesar, between two and three hundred years


after the death of Zeno. I know not who is the author of the


second account. Apollonius, who was himself a Stoic, had probably


thought it would do honour to the founder of a sect which talked


so much about voluntary death, to die in this manner by his own


hand. Men of letters, though, after their death, they are


frequently more talked of than the greatest princes or statesmen


of their times, are generally, during their life, so obscure and


insignificant that their adventures are seldom recorded by


co-temporary historians. Those of after-ages, in order to satisfy


the public curiosity, and having no authentic documents either to


support or to contradict their narratives, seem frequently to


have fashioned them according to their own fancy; and almost


always with a great mixture of the marvellous. In this particular


case the marvellous, though supported by no authority, seems to


have prevailed over the probable, though supported by the best.


Diogenes Laertius plainly gives the preference to the story of


Apollonius. Lucian and Lactantius appear both to have given


credit to that of the great age and of the violent death.


    This fashion of voluntary death appears to have been much


more prevalent among the proud Romans, than it ever was among the


lively, ingenious, and accommodating Greeks. Even among the


Romans, the fashion seems not to have been established in the


early and, what are called, the virtuous ages of the republic.


The common story of the death of Regulus, though probably a


fable, could never have been invented, had it been supposed that


any dishonour could fall upon that hero, from patiently


submitting to the tortures which the Carthaginians are said to


have inflicted upon him. In the later ages of the republic some


dishonour I apprehend, would have attended this submission. In


the different civil wars which preceded the fall of the


commonwealth, many of the eminent men of all the contending


parties chose rather to perish by their own hands, than to fall


into those of their enemies. The death of Cato, celebrated by


Cicero, and censured by Caesar, and become the subject of a very


serious controversy between, perhaps, the two most illustrious


advocates that the world had ever beheld, stamped a character of


splendour upon this method of dying which it seems to have


retained for several ages after. The eloquence of Cicero was


superior to that of Caesar. The admiring prevailed greatly over


the censuring party, and the lovers of liberty, for many ages


afterwards, looked up to Cato as to the most venerable martyr of


the republican party. The head of a party, the Cardinal de Retz


observes, may do what he pleases; as long as he retains the


confidence of his own friends, he can never do wrong; a maxim of


which his Eminence had himself, upon several occasions, an


opportunity of experiencing the truth. Cato, it seems, joined to


his other virtues that of an excellent bottle companion. His


enemies accused him of drunkenness, but, says Seneca, whoever


objected this vice to Cato, will find it much easier to prove


that drunkenness is a virtue, than that Cato could be addicted to


any vice.


    Under the Emperors this method of dying seems to have been,


for a long time, perfectly fashionable. In the epistles of Pliny


we find an account of several persons who chose to die in this


manner, rather from vanity and ostentation, it would seem, than


from what would appear, even to a sober and judicious Stoic, any


proper or necessary reason. Even the ladies, who are seldom


behind in following the fashion, seem frequently to have chosen,


most unnecessarily, to die in this manner; and, like the ladies


in Bengal, to accompany, upon some occasions, their husbands to


the tomb. The prevalence of this fashion certainly occasioned


many deaths which would not otherwise have happened. All the


havock, however, which this, perhaps the highest exertion of


human vanity and impertinence, could occasion, would, probably,


at no time, be very great.


    The principle of suicide, the principle which would teach us,


upon some occasions, to consider that violent action as an object


of applause and approbation, seems to be altogether a refinement


of philosophy. Nature, in her sound and healthful state, seems


never to prompt us to suicide. There is, indeed, a species of


melancholy (a disease to which human nature, among its other


calamities, is unhappily subject) which seems to be accompanied


with, what one may call, an irresistible appetite for


self-destruction. In circumstances often of the highest external


prosperity, and sometimes too, in spite even of the most serious


and deeply impressed sentiments of religion, this disease has


frequently been known to drive its wretched victims to this fatal


extremity. The unfortunate persons who perish in this miserable


manner, are the proper objects, not of censure, but of


commiseration. To attempt to punish them, when they are beyond


the reach of all human punishment, is not more absurd than it is


unjust. That punishment can fall only on their surviving friends


and relations, who are always perfectly innocent, and to whom the


loss of their friend, in this disgraceful manner, must always be


alone a very heavy calamity. Nature, in her sound and healthful


state, prompts us to avoid distress upon all occasions; upon many


occasions to defend ourselves against it, though at the hazard,


or even with the certainty of perishing in that defence. But,


when we have neither been able to defend ourselves from it, nor


have perished in that defence, no natural principle, no regard to


the approbation of the supposed impartial spectator, to the


judgment of the man within the breast, seems to call upon us to


escape from it by destroying ourselves. It is only the


consciousness of our own weakness, of our own incapacity to


support the calamity with proper manhood and firmness, which can


drive us to this resolution. I do not remember to have either


read or heard of any American savage, who, upon being taken


prisoner by some hostile tribe, put himself to death, in order to


avoid being afterwards put to death in torture, and amidst the


insults and mockery of his enemies. He places his glory in


supporting those torments with manhood, and in retorting those


insults with tenfold contempt and derision.


    This contempt of life and death, however, and, at the same


time, the most entire submission to the order of Providence; the


most complete contentment with every event which the current of


human affairs could possibly cast up, may be considered as the


two fundamental doctrines upon which rested the whole fabric of


Stoical morality. The independent and spirited, but often harsh


Epictetus, may be considered as the great apostle of the first of


those doctrines: the mild, the humane, the benevolent Antoninus,


of the second.


    The emancipated slave of Epaphriditus, who, in his youth, had


been subjected to the insolence of a brutal master, who, in his


riper years, was, by the jealousy and caprice of Domitian,


banished from Rome and Athens, and obliged to dwell at Nicopolis,


and who, by the same tyrant, might expect every moment to be sent


to Gyarae, or, perhaps, to be put to death; could preserve his


tranquillity only by fostering in his mind the most sovereign


contempt of human life. He never exults so much, accordingly his


eloquence is never so animated as when he represents the futility


and nothingness of all its pleasures and all its pains.


    The good-natured Emperor, the absolute sovereign of the whole


civilized part of the world, who certainly had no peculiar reason


to complain of his own allotment, delights in expressing his


contentment with the ordinary course of things, and in pointing


out beauties even in those parts of it where vulgar observers are


not apt to see any. There is a propriety and even an engaging


grace, he observes, in old age as well as in youth; and the


weakness and decrepitude of the one state are as suitable to


nature as the bloom and vigour of the other. Death, too, is just


as proper a termination of old age, as youth is of childhood, or


manhood of youth. As we frequently say, he remarks upon another


occasion, that the physician has ordered to such a man to ride on


horseback, or to use the cold bath, or to walk barefooted; so


ought we to say, that Nature, the great conductor and physician


of the universe, has ordered to such a man a disease, or the


amputation of a limb, or the loss of a child. By the


prescriptions of ordinary physicians the patient swallows many a


bitter potion; undergoes many a painful operation. From the very


uncertain hope, however, that health may be the consequence, he


gladly submits to all. The harshest prescriptions of the great


Physician of nature, the patient may, in the same manner, hope


will contribute to his own health, to his own final prosperity


and happiness: and he may be perfectly assured that they not only


contribute, but are indispensably necessary to the health, to the


prosperity and happiness of the universe, to the furtherance and


advancement of the great plan of Jupiter. Had they not been so,


the universe would never have produced them; its all-wise


Architect and Conductor would never have suffered them to happen.


As all, even the smallest of the co-existent parts of the


universe, are exactly fitted to one another, and all contribute


to compose one immense and connected system; so all, even


apparently the most insignificant of the successive events which


follow one another, make parts, and necessary parts, of that


great chain of causes and effects which had no beginning, and


which will have no end; and which, as they all necessarily result


from the original arrangement and contrivance of the whole; so


they are all essentially necessary, not only to its prosperity,


but to its continuance and preservation. Whoever does not


cordially embrace whatever befals him, whoever is sorry that it


has befallen him, whoever wishes that it had not befallen him,


wishes, so far as in him lies, to stop the motion of the


universe, to break that great chain of succession, by the


progress of which that system can alone be continued and


preserved, and, for some little conveniency of his own, to


disorder and discompose the whole machine of the world. 'O


world,' says he, in another place, 'all things are suitable to me


which are suitable to thee. Nothing is too early or too late to


me which is seasonable for thee. All is fruit to me which thy


seasons bring forth. From thee are all things; in thee are all


things; for thee are all things. One man says, O beloved city of


Cecrops. Wilt not thou say, O beloved city of God?'


    From these very sublime doctrines the Stoics, or at least


some of the Stoics, attempted to deduce all their paradoxes.


    The Stoical wise man endeavoured to enter into the views of


the great Superintendant of the universe, and to see things in


the same light in which that divine Being beheld them. But, to


the great Superintendant of the universe, all the different


events which the course of his providence may bring forth, what


to us appear the smallest and the greatest, the bursting of a


bubble, as Mr Pope says, and that of a world, for example, were


perfectly equal, were equally parts of that great chain which he


had predestined from all eternity, were equally the effects of


the same unerring wisdom, of the same universal and boundless


benevolence. To the Stoical wise man, in the same manner, all


those different events were perfectly equal. In the course of


those events, indeed, a little department, in which he had


himself some little management and direction, had been assigned


to him. In this department he endeavoured to act as properly as


he could, and to conduct himself according to those orders which,


he understood, had been prescribed to him. But he took no anxious


or passionate concern either in the success, or in the


disappointment of his own most faithful endeavours. The highest


prosperity and the total destruction of that little department,


of that little system which had been in some measure committed to


his charge, were perfectly indifferent to him. If those events


had depended upon him, he would have chosen the one, and he would


have rejected the other. But as they did not depend upon him, he


trusted to a superior wisdom, and was perfectly satisfied that


the event which happened, whatever it might be, was the very


event which he himself, had he known all the connections and


dependencies of things, would most earnestly and devoutly have


wished for. Whatever he did under the influence and direction of


those principles was equally perfect; and when he stretched out


his finger, to give the example which they commonly made use of,


he performed an action in every respect as meritorious, as worthy


of praise and admiration, as when he laid down his life for the


service of his country. As, to the great Superintendant of the


universe, the greatest and the smallest exertions of his power,


the formation and dissolution of a world, the formation and


dissolution of a bubble, were equally easy, were equally


admirable, and equally the effects of the same divine wisdom and


benevolence; so, to the Stoical wise man, what we would call the


great action required no more exertion than the little one, was


equally easy, proceeded from exactly the same principles, was in


no respect more meritorious, nor worthy of any higher degree of


praise and admiration.


    As all those who had arrived at this state of perfection,


were equally happy. so all those who fell in the smallest degree


short of it, how nearly soever they might approach to it, were


equally miserable. As the man, they said, who was but an inch


below the surface of the water, could no more breathe than he who


was an hundred yards below it; so the man who had not completely


subdued all his private, partial, and selfish passions, who had


any other earnest desire but that for the universal happiness,


who had not completely emerged from that abyss of misery and


disorder into which his anxiety for the gratification of those


private, partial, and selfish passions had involved him, could no


more breathe the free air of liberty and independency, could no


more enjoy the security and happiness of the wise man, than he


who was most remote from that situation. As all the actions of


the wise man were perfect, and equally perfect; so all those of


the man who had not arrived at this supreme wisdom were faulty,


and, as some Stoics pretended, equally faulty. As one truth, they


said, could not be more true, nor one falsehood more false than


another; so an honourable action could not be more honourable,


nor a shameful one more shameful than another. As in shooting at


a mark, the man who missed it by an inch had equally missed it


with him who had done so by a hundred yards; so the man who, in


what to us appears the most insignificant action, had acted


improperly and without a sufficient reason, was equally faulty


with him who had done so in, what to us appears, the most


important; the man who has killed a cock, for example, improperly


and without a sufficient reason, with him who had murdered his


father.


    If the first of those two paradoxes should appear


sufficiently violent, the second is evidently too absurd to


deserve any serious consideration. It is, indeed, so very absurd


that one can scarce help suspecting that it must have been in


some measure misunderstood or misrepresented. At any rate, I


cannot allow myself to believe that such men as Zeno or


Cleanthes, men, it is said, of the most simple as well as of the


most sublime eloquence, could be the authors, either of these, or


of the greater part of the other Stoical paradoxes, which are in


general mere impertinent quibbles, and do so little honour to


their system that I shall give no further account of them. I am


disposed to impute them rather to Chrysippus, the disciple and


follower, indeed, of Zeno and Cleanthes, but who, from all that


has been delivered down to us concerning him, seems to have been


a mere dialectical pedant, without taste or elegance of any kind.


He may have been the first who reduced their doctrines into a


scholastic or technical system of artificial definitions,


divisions, and subdivisions; one of the most effectual


expedients, perhaps, for extinguishing whatever degree of good


sense there may be in any moral or metaphysical doctrine. Such a


man may very easily be supposed to have understood too literally


some animated expressions of his masters in describing the


happiness of the man of perfect virtue, and the unhappiness of


whoever fell short of that character.


    The Stoics in general seem to have admitted that there might


be a degree of proficiency in those who had not advanced to


perfect virtue and happiness. They distributed those proficients


into different classes, according to the degree of their


advancement; and they called the imperfect virtues which they


supposed them capable of exercising, not rectitudes, but


proprieties, fitnesses, decent and becoming actions, for which a


plausible or probable reason could be assigned, what Cicero


expresses by the Latin word officia, and Seneca, I think more


exactly, by that of convenientia. The doctrine of those


imperfect, but attainable virtues, seems to have constituted what


we may call the practical morality of the Stoics. It is the


subject of Cicero's Offices; and is said to have been that of


another book written by Marcus Brutus, but which is now lost.


    The plan and system which Nature has sketched out for our


conduct, seems to be altogether different from that of the


Stoical philosophy.


    By Nature the events which immediately affect that little


department in which we ourselves have some little management and


direction, which immediately affect ourselves, our friends, our


country, are the events which interest us the most, and which


chiefly excite our desires and aversions, our hopes and fears,


our joys and sorrows. Should those passions be, what they are


very apt to be, too vehement, Nature has provided a proper remedy


and correction. The real or even the imaginary presence of the


impartial spectator, the authority of the man within the breast,


is always at hand to overawe them into the proper tone and temper


of moderation.


    If, notwithstanding our most faithful exertions, all the


events which can affect this little department, should turn out


the most unfortunate and disastrous, Nature has by no means left


us without consolation. That consolation may be drawn, not only


from the complete approbation of the man within the breast, but,


if possible, from a still nobler and more generous principle,


from a firm reliance upon, and a reverential submission to, that


benevolent wisdom which directs all the events of human life, and


which, we may be assured, would never have suffered those


misfortunes to happen, had they not been indispensably necessary


for the good of the whole.


    Nature has not prescribed to us this sublime contemplation as


the great business and occupation of our lives. She only points


it out to us as the consolation of our misfortunes. The Stoical


philosophy prescribes it as the great business and occupation of


our lives. That philosophy teaches us to interest ourselves


earnestly and anxiously in no events, external to the good order


of our own minds, to the propriety of our own choosing and


rejecting, except in those which concern a department where we


neither have nor ought to have any sort of management or


direction, the department of the great Superintendant of the


universe. By the perfect apathy which it prescribes to us, by


endeavouring, not merely to moderate, but to eradicate all our


private, partial, and selfish affections, by suffering us to feel


for whatever can befall ourselves, our friends, our country, not


even the sympathetic and reduced passions of the impartial


spectator, it endeavours to render us altogether indifferent and


unconcerned in the success or miscarriage of every thing which


Nature has prescribed to us as the proper business and occupation


of our lives.


    The reasonings of philosophy, it may be said, though they may


confound and perplex the understanding, can never break down the


necessary connection which Nature has established between causes


and their effects. The causes which naturally excite our desires


and aversions, our hopes and fears, our joys and sorrows, would


no doubt, notwithstanding all the reasonings of Stoicism, produce


upon each individual, according to the degree of his actual


sensibility, their proper and necessary effects. The judgments of


the man within the breast, however, might be a good deal affected


by those reasonings, and that great inmate might be taught by


them to attempt to overawe all our private, partial, and selfish


affections into a more or less perfect tranquillity. To direct


the judgments of this inmate is the great purpose of all systems


of morality. That the Stoical philosophy had very great influence


upon the character and conduct of its followers, cannot be


doubted; and that though it might sometimes incite them to


unnecessary violence, its general tendency was to animate them to


actions of the most heroic magnanimity and most extensive


benevolence.





    IV. Besides these ancient, there are some modern systems,


according to which virtue consists in propriety; or in the


suitableness of the affection from which we act, to the cause or


object which excites it. The system of Dr Clark, which places


virtue in acting according to the relations of things, in


regulating our conduct according to the fitness or incongruity


which there may be in the application of certain actions to


certain things, or to certain relations: that of Mr Woollaston,


which places it in acting according to the truth of things,


according to their proper nature and essence, or in treating them


as what they really are, and not as what they are not: that of my


Lord Shaftesbury, which places it in maintaining a proper balance


of the affections, and in allowing no passion to go beyond its


proper sphere; are all of them more or less inaccurate


descriptions of the same fundamental idea.


    None of those systems either give, or even pretend to give,


any precise or distinct measure by which this fitness or


propriety of affection can be ascertained or judged of. That


precise and distinct measure can be found nowhere but in the


sympathetic feelings of the impartial and well-informed


spectator.


    The description of virtue, besides, which is either given, or


at least meant and intended to be given in each of those systems,


for some of the modern authors are not very fortunate in their


manner of expressing themselves, is no doubt quite just, so far


as it goes. There is no virtue without propriety, and wherever


there is propriety some degree of approbation is due. But still


this description is imperfect. For though propriety is an


essential ingredient in every virtuous action, it is not always


the sole ingredient. Beneficent actions have in them another


quality by which they appear not only to deserve approbation but


recompense. None of those systems account either easily or


sufficiently for that superior degree of esteem which seems due


to such actions, or for that diversity of sentiment which they


naturally excite. Neither is the description of vice more


complete. For, in the same manner, though impropriety is a


necessary ingredient in every vicious action, it is not always


the sole ingredient; and there is often the highest degree of


absurdity and impropriety in very harmless and insignificant


actions. Deliberate actions, of a pernicious tendency to those we


live with, have, besides their impropriety, a peculiar quality of


their own by which they appear to deserve, not only


disapprobation, but punishment; and to be the objects, not of


dislike merely, but of resentment and revenge: and none of those


systems easily and sufficiently account for that superior degree


of detestation which we feel for such actions.





Chap. II





Of those Systems which make Virtue consist in Prudence





    The most ancient of those systems which make virtue consist


in prudence, and of which any considerable remains have come down


to us, is that of Epicurus, who is said, however, to have


borrowed all the leading principles of his philosophy from some


of those who had gone before him, particularly from Aristippus;


though it is very probable, notwithstanding this allegation of


his enemies, that at least his manner of applying those


principles was altogether his own.


    According to Epicurus,(9*) bodily pleasure and pain were the


sole ultimate objects of natural desire and aversion. That they


were always the natural objects of those passions, he thought


required no proof. Pleasure might, indeed, appear sometimes to be


avoided; not, however, because it was pleasure, but because, by


the enjoyment of it, we should either forfeit some greater


pleasure, or expose ourselves to some pain that was more to be


avoided than this pleasure was to be desired. Pain, in the same


manner, might appear sometimes to be eligible; not, however,


because it was pain, but because by enduring it we might either


avoid a still greater pain, or acquire some pleasure of much more


importance. That bodily pain and pleasure, therefore, were always


the natural objects of desire and aversion, was, he thought,


abundantly evident. Nor was it less so, he imagined, that they


were the sole ultimate objects of those passions. Whatever else


was either desired or avoided, was so, according to him, upon


account of its tendency to produce one or other of those


sensations. The tendency to procure pleasure rendered power and


riches desirable, as the contrary tendency to produce pain made


poverty and insignificancy the objects of aversion. Honour and


reputation were valued, because the esteem and love of those we


live with were of the greatest consequence both to procure


pleasure and to defend us from pain. Ignominy and bad fame, on


the contrary, were to be avoided, because the hatred, contempt


and resentment of those we lived with, destroyed all security,


and necessarily exposed us to the greatest bodily evils.


    All the pleasures and pains of the mind were, according to


Epicurus, ultimately derived from those of the body. The mind was


happy when it thought of the past pleasures of the body, and


hoped for others to come: and it was miserable when it thought of


the pains which the body had formerly endured, and dreaded the


same or greater thereafter.


    But the pleasures and pains of the mind, though ultimately


derived from those of the body, were vastly greater than their


originals. The body felt only the sensation of the present


instant, whereas the mind felt also the past and the future, the


one by remembrance, the other by anticipation, and consequently


both suffered and enjoyed much more. When we are under the


greatest bodily pain, he observed, we shall always find, if we


attend to it, that it is not the suffering of the present instant


which chiefly torments us, but either the agonizing remembrance


of the past, or the yet more horrible dread of the future. The


pain of each instant, considered by itself, and cut off from all


that goes before and all that comes after it, is a trifle, not


worth the regarding. Yet this is all which the boDy can ever be


said to suffer. In the same manner, when we enjoy the greatest


pleasure, we shall always find that the bodily sensation, the


sensation of the present instant, makes but a small part of our


happiness, that our enjoyment chiefly arises either from the


cheerful recollection of the past, or the still more joyous


anticipation of the future, and that the mind always contributes


by much the largest share of the entertainment.


    Since our happiness and misery, therefore, depended chiefly


on the mind, if this part of our nature was well disposed, if our


thoughts and opinions were as they should be, it was of little


importance in what manner our body was affected. Though under


great bodily pain, we might still enjoy a considerable share of


happiness, if our reason and judgment maintained their


superiority. We might entertain ourselves with the remembrance of


past, and with the hopes of future pleasure; we might soften the


rigour of our pains, by recollecting what it was which, even in


this situation, we were under any necessity of suffering. That


this was merely the bodily sensation, the pain of the present


instant, which by itself could never be very great. That whatever


agony we suffered from the dread of its continuance, was the


effect of an opinion of the mind, which might be corrected by


juster sentiments; by considering that, if our pains were


violent, they would probably be of short duration; and that if


they were of long continuance, they would probably be moderate,


and admit of many intervals of ease; and that, at any rate, death


was always at hand and within call to deliver us, which as,


according to him, it put an end to all sensation, either of pain


or pleasure, could not be regarded as an evil. When we are, said


he, death is not; and when death is, we are not; death therefore


can be nothing to us.


    If the actual sensation of positive pain was in itself so


little to be feared, that of pleasure was still less to be


desired. Naturally the sensation of pleasure was much less


pungent than that of pain. If, therefore, this last could take so


very little from the happiness of a well-disposed mind, the other


could add scarce any thing to it. When the body was free from


pain and the mind from fear and anxiety, the superadded sensation


of bodily pleasure could be of very little importance; and though


it might diversify could not properly be said to increase the


happiness of the situation.


    In ease of body, therefore, and in security or tranquillity


of mind, consisted, according to Epicurus, the most perfect state


of human nature, the most complete happiness which man was


capable of enjoying. To obtain this great end of natural desire


was the sole object of all the virtues, which, according to him,


were not desirable upon their own account, but upon account of


their tendency to bring about this situation.


    Prudence, for example, though, according to this philosophy,


the source and principle of all the virtues, was not desirable


upon its own account. That careful and laborious and circumspect


state of mind, ever watchful and ever attentive to the most


distant consequences of every action. could not be a thing


pleasant or agreeable for its own sake, but upon account of its


tendency to procure the greatest goods and to keep off the


greatest evils.


    To abstain from pleasure too, to curb and restrain our


natural passions for enjoyment, which was the office of


temperance, could never be desirable for its own sake. The whole


value of this virtue arose from its utility, from its enabling us


to postpone the present enjoyment for the sake of a greater to


come, or to avoid a greater pain that might ensue from it.


Temperance, in short, was nothing but prudence with regard to


pleasure.


    To support labour, to endure pain, to be exposed to danger or


to death, the situations which fortitude would often lead us


into, were surely still less the objects of natural desire. They


were chosen only to avoid greater evils. We submitted to labour,


in order to avoid the greater shame and pain of poverty, and we


exposed ourselves to danger and to death in defence of our


liberty and property, the means and instruments of pleasure and


happiness; or in defence of our country, in the safety of which


our own was necessarily comprehended. Fortitude enabled us to do


all this cheerfully, as the best which, in our present situation,


could possibly be done, and was in reality no more than prudence,


good judgment, and presence of mind in properly appreciating


pain, labour, and danger, always choosing the less in order to


avoid the greater.


    It is the same case with justice. To abstain from what is


another's was not desirable on its own account, and it could not


surely be better for you, that I should possess what is my own,


than that you should possess it. You ought, however, to abstain


from whatever belongs to me, because by doing otherwise you will


provoke the resentment and indication of mankind. The security


and tranquillity of your mind will be entirely destroyed. You


will be filled with fear and consternation at the thought of that



punishment which you will imagine that men are at all times ready


to inflict upon you, and from which no power, no art, no


concealment, will ever, in your own fancy, be sufficient to


protect you. That other species of justice which. consists in


doing proper good offices to different persons, according to the


various relations of neighbours, kinsmen, friends, benefactors,


superiors, or equals, which they may stand in to us, is


recommended by the same reasons. To act properly in all these


different relations procures us the esteem and love of those we


live with; as to do otherwise excites their contempt and hatred.


By the one we naturally secure, by the other we necessarily


endanger our own ease and tranquillity, the great and ultimate


objects of all our desires. The whole virtue of justice,


therefore, the most important of all the virtues, is no more than


discreet and prudent conduct with regard to our neighbours.


    Such is the doctrine of Epicurus concerning the nature of


virtue. It may seem extraordinary that this philosopher, who is


described as a person of the most amiable manners, should never


have observed, that, whatever may be the tendency of those


virtues, or of the contrary vices, with regard to our bodily ease


and security, the sentiments which they naturally excite in


others are the objects of a much more passionate desire or


aversion than all their other consequences; that to be amiable,


to be respectable, to be the proper object of esteem, is by every


well-disposed mind more valued than all the ease and security


which love, respect, and esteem can procure us; that, on the


contrary, to be odious, to be contemptible, to be the proper


object of indignation, is more dreadful than all that we can


suffer in our body from hatred, contempt, or indignation; and


that consequently our desire of the one character, and our


aversion to the other, cannot arise from any regard to the


effects which either of them is likely to produce upon the body.


    This system is, no doubt, altogether inconsistent with that


which I have been endeavouring to establish. It is not difficult,


however, to discover from what phasis, if I may say so, from what


particular view or aspect of nature, this account of things


derives its probability. By the wise contrivance of the Author of


nature, virtue is upon all ordinary occasions, even with regard


to this life, real wisdom, and the surest and readiest means of


obtaining both safety and advantage. Our success or


disappointment in our undertakings must very much depend upon the


good or bad opinion which is commonly entertained of us, and upon


the general disposition of those we live with, either to assist


or to oppose us. But the best, the surest, the easiest, and the


readiest way of obtaining the advantageous and of avoiding the


unfavourable judgments of others, is undoubtedly to render


ourselves the proper objects of the former and not of the latter.


'Do you desire,' said Socrates, 'the reputation of a good


musician? The only sure way of obtaining it, is to become a good


musician. Would you desire in the same manner to be thought


capable of serving your country either as a general or as a


statesman? The best way in this case too is really to acquire the


art and experience of war and government, and to become really


fit to be a general or a statesman. And in the same manner if you


would be reckoned sober, temperate, just, and equitable, the best


way of acquiring this reputation is to become sober, temperate,


just, and equitable. If you can really render yourself amiable,


respectable, and the proper object of esteem, there is no fear of


your not soon acquiring the love, the respect, and esteem of


those you live with.' Since the practice of virtue, therefore, is


in general so advantageous, and that of vice so contrary to our


interest, the consideration of those opposite tendencies


undoubtedly stamps an additional beauty and propriety upon the


one, and a new deformity and impropriety upon the other.


Temperance, magnanimity, justice, and beneficence, come thus to


be approved of, not only under their proper characters, but under


the additional character of the highest wisDom and most real


prudence. And in the same manner, the contrary vices of


intemperance, pusillanimity, injustice, and either malevolence or


sordid selfishness, come to be disapproved of, not only under


their proper characters, but under the additional character of


the most short-sighted folly and weakness. Epicurus appears in


every virtue to have attended to this species of propriety only.


It is that which is most apt to occur to those who are


endeavouring to persuade others to regularity of conduct. When


men by their practice, and perhaps too by their maxims,


manifestly show that the natural beauty of virtue is not like to


have much effect upon them, how is it possible to move them but


by representing the folly of their conduct, and how much they


themselves are in the end likely to suffer by it?


    By running up all the different virtues too to this one


species of propriety, Epicurus indulged a propensity, which is


natural to all men, but which philosophers in particular are apt


to cultivate with a peculiar fondness, as the great means of


displaying their ingenuity, the propensity to account for all


appearances from as few principles as possible. And he, no doubt,


indulged this propensity still further, when he referred all the


primary objects of natural desire and aversion to the pleasures


and pains of the body. The great patron of the atomical


philosophy, who took so much pleasure in deducing all the powers


and qualities of bodies from the most obvious and familiar, the


figure, motion, and arrangement of the small parts of matter,


felt no doubt a similar satisfaction, when he accounted, in the


same manner, for all the sentiments and passions of the mind from


those which are most obvious and familiar.


    The system of Epicurus agreed with those of Plato, Aristotle,


and Zeno, in making virtue consist in acting in the most suitable


manner to obtain the (10*)primary objects of natural desire. It


differed from all of them in two other respects; first, in the


account which it gave of those primary objects of natural desire;


and secondly, in the account which it gave of the excellence of


virtue, or of the reason why that quality ought to be esteemed.


    The primary objects of natural desire consisted, according to


Epicurus, in bodily pleasure and pain, and in nothing else:


whereas, according to the other three philosophers, there were


many other objects, such as knowledge, such as the happiness of


our relations, of our friends, of our country, which were


ultimately desirable for their own sakes.


    Virtue too, according to Epicurus, did not deserve to be


pursued for its own sake, nor was itself one of the ultimate


objects of natural appetite, but was eligible only upon account


of its tendency to prevent pain and to procure ease and pleasure.


In the opinion of the other three, on the contrary, it was


desirable, not merely as the means of procuring the other primary


objects of natural desire, but as something which was in itself


more valuable than them all. Man, they thought, being born for


action, his happiness must consist, not merely in the


agreeableness of his passive sensations, but also in the


propriety of his active exertions.





Chap. III





Of those Systems which make Virtue consist in Benevolence





    The system which makes virtue consist in benevolence, though


I think not so ancient as all of those which I have already given


an account of, is, however, of very great antiquity. It seems to


have been the doctrine of the greater part of those philosophers


who, about and after the age of Augustus, called themselves


Eclectics, who pretended to follow chiefly the opinions of Plato


and Pythagoras, and who upon that account are commonly known by


the name of the later Platonists.


    In the divine nature, according to these authors, benevolence


or love was the sole principle of action, and directed the


exertion of all the other attributes. The wisdom of the Deity was


employed in finding out the means for bringing about those ends


which his goodness suggested, as his infinite power was exerted


to execute them. Benevolence, however, was still the supreme and


governing attribute, to which the others were subservient, and


from which the whole excellency, or the whole morality, if I may


be allowed such an expression, of the divine operations, was


ultimately derived. The whole perfection and virtue of the human


mind consisted in some resemblance or participation of the divine


perfections, and, consequently, in being filled with the same


principle of benevolence and love which influenced all the


actions of the Deity. The actions of men which flowed from this


motive were alone truly praise-worthy, or could claim any merit


in the sight of the Deity. It was by actions of charity and love


only that we could imitate, as became us, the conduct of God,


that we could express our humble and devout admiration of his


infinite perfections, that by fostering in our own minds the same


divine principle, we could bring our own affections to a greater


resemblance with his holy attributes, and thereby become more


proper objects of his love and esteem; till at last we arrived at


that immediate converse and communication with the Deity to which


it was the great object of this philosophy to raise us.


    This system, as it was much esteemed by many ancient fathers


of the Christian church, so after the Reformation it was adopted


by several divines of the most eminent piety and learning and of


the most amiable manners; particularly, by Dr Ralph Cudworth, by


Dr Henry More, and by Mr John Smith of Cambridge. But of all the


patrons of this system, ancient or modern, the late Dr Hutcheson


was undoubtedly, beyond all comparison, the most acute, the most


distinct, the most philosophical, and what is of the greatest


consequence of all, the soberest and most judicious.


    That virtue consists in benevolence is a notion supported by


many appearances in human nature. It has been observed already,


that proper benevolence is the most graceful and agreeable of all


the affections, that it is recommended to us by a double


sympathy, that as its tendency is necessarily beneficent, it is


the proper object of gratitude and reward, and that upon all


these accounts it appears to our natural sentiments to possess a


merit superior to any other. It has been observed too, that even


the weaknesses of benevolence are not very disagreeable to us,


whereas those of every other passion are always extremely


disgusting. Who does not abhor excessive malice, excessive


selfishness, or excessive resentment? But the most excessive


indulgence even of partial friendship is not so offensive. It is


the benevolent passions only which can exert themselves without


any regard or attention to propriety, and yet retain something


about them which is engaging. There is something pleasing even in


mere instinctive good-will which goes on to do good offices


without once reflecting whether by this conduct it is the proper


object either of blame or approbation. It is not so with the


other passions. The moment they are deserted, the moment they are


unaccompanied by the sense of propriety, they cease to be


agreeable.


    As benevolence bestows upon those actions which proceed from


it, a beauty superior to all others, so the want of it, and much


more the contrary inclination, communicates a peculiar deformity


to whatever evidences such a disposition. Pernicious actions are


often punishable for no other reason than because they shew a


want of sufficient attention to the happiness of our neighbour.


    Besides all this, Dr Hutcheson(11*) observed that whenever in


any action, supposed to proceed from benevolent affections, some


other motive had been discovered, our sense of the merit of this


action was just so far diminished as this motive was believed to


have influenced it. If an action, supposed to proceed from


gratitude, should be discovered to have arisen from an


expectation of some new favour, or if what was apprehended to


proceed from public spirit, should be found out to have taken its


origin from the hope of a pecuniary reward, such a discovery


would entirely destroy all notion of merit or praise-worthiness


in either of these actions. Since, therefore, the mixture of any


selfish motive, like that of a baser alloy, diminished or took


away altogether the merit which would otherwise have belonged to


any action, it was evident, he imagined, that virtue must consist


in pure and disinterested benevolence alone.


    When those actions, on the contrary, which are commonly


supposed to proceed from a selfish motive, are discovered to have


arisen from a benevolent one, it greatly enhances our sense of


their merit. If we believed of any person that he endeavoured to


advance his fortune from no other view but that of doing friendly


offices, and of making proper returns to his benefactors, we


should only love and esteem him the more. And this observation


seemed still more to confirm the conclusion, that it was


benevolence only which could stamp upon any action the character


of virtue.


    Last of all, what, he imagined, was an evident proof of the


justness of this account of virtue, in all the disputes of


casuists concerning the rectitude of conduct, the public good, he


observed, was the standard to which they constantly referred;


thereby universally acknowledging that whatever tended to promote


the happiness of mankind was right and laudable and virtuous, and


the contrary, wrong, blamable, and vicious. In the late debates


about passive obeDience and the right of resistance, the sole


point in controversy among men of sense was, whether universal


submission would probably be attended with greater evils than


temporary insurrections when privileges were invaded. Whether


what, upon the whole, tended most to the happiness of mankind,


was not also morally good, was never once, he said, made a


question.


    Since benevolence, therefore, was the only motive which could


bestow upon any action the character of virtue, the greater the


benevolence which was evidenced by any action, the greater the


praise which must belong to it.


    Those actions which aimed at the happiness of a great


community, as they demonstrated a more enlarged benevolence than


those which aimed only at that of a smaller system, so were they,


likewise, proportionally the more virtuous. The most virtuous of


all affections, therefore, was that which embraced as its object


the happiness of all intelligent beings. The least virtuous, on


the contrary, of those to which the character of virtue could in


any respect belong, was that which aimed no further than at the


happiness of an individual, such as a son, a brother, a friend.


    In directing all our actions to promote the greatest possible


good, in submitting all inferior affections to the desire of the


general happiness of mankind, in regarding one's self but as one


of the many, whose prosperity was to be pursued no further than


it was consistent with, or conducive to that of the whole,


consisted the perfection of virtue.


    Self-love was a principle which could never be virtuous in


any degree or in any direction. It was vicious whenever it


obstructed the general good. When it had no other effect than to


make the individual take care of his own happiness, it was merely


innocent, and though it deserved no praise, neither ought it to


incur any blame. Those benevolent actions which were performed,


notwithstanding some strong motive from self-interest, were the


more virtuous upon that account. They demonstrated the strength


and vigour of the benevolent principle.


    Dr Hutcheson(12*) was so far from allowing self-love to be in


any case a motive of virtuous actions, that even a regard to the


pleasure of self-approbation, to the comfortable applause of our


own consciences, according to him, diminished the merit of a


benevolent action. This was a selfish motive, he thought, which,


so far as it contributed to any action, demonstrated the weakness


of that pure and disinterested benevolence which could alone


stamp upon the conduct of man the character of virtue. In the


common judgments of mankind, however, this regard to the


approbation of our own minds is so far from being considered as


what can in any respect diminish the virtue of any action, that


it is rather looked upon as the sole motive which deserves the


appellation of virtuous.


    Such is the account given of the nature of virtue in this


amiable system, a system which has a peculiar tendency to nourish


and support in the human heart the noblest and the most agreeable


of all affections, and not only to check the injustice of


self-love, but in some measure to discourage that principle


altogether, by representing it as what could never reflect any


honour upon those who were influenced by it.


    As some of the other systems which I have already given an


account of, do not sufficiently explain from whence arises the


peculiar excellency of the supreme virtue of beneficence, so this


system seems to have the contrary defect, of not sufficiently


explaining from whence arises our approbation of the inferior


virtues of prudence, vigilance, circumspection, temperance,


constancy, firmness. The view and aim of our affections, the


beneficent and hurtful effects which they tend to produce, are


the only qualities at all attended to in this system. Their


propriety and impropriety, their suitableness and unsuitableness,


to the cause which excites them, are disregarded altogether.


    Regard to our own private happiness and interest, too, appear


upon many occasions very laudable principles of action. The


habits of oeconomy, industry, discretion, attention, and


application of thought, are generally supposed to be cultivated


from self-interested motives, and at the same time are


apprehended to be very praise-worthy qualities, which deserve the


esteem and approbation of every body. The mixture of a selfish


motive, it is true, seems often to sully the beauty of those


actions which ought to arise from a benevolent affection. The


cause of this, however, is not that self-love can never be the


motive of a virtuous action, but that the benevolent principle


appears in this particular case to want its due degree of


strength, and to be altogether unsuitable to its object. The


character, therefore, seems evidently imperfect, and upon the


whole to deserve blame rather than praise. The mixture of a


benevolent motive in an action to which self-love alone ought to


be sufficient to prompt us, is not so apt indeed to diminish our


sense of its propriety, or of the virtue of the person who


performs it. We are not ready to suspect any person of being


defective in selfishness. This is by no means the weak side of


human nature, or the failing of which we are apt to be


suspicious. If we could really believe, however, of any man,


that, was it not from a regard to his family and friends, he


would not take that proper care of his health, his life, or his


fortune, to which self-preservation alone ought to be sufficient


to prompt him, it would undoubtedly be a failing, though one of


those amiable failings, which render a person rather the object


of pity than of contempt or hatred. It would still, however,


somewhat diminish the dignity and respectableness of his


character. Carelessness and want of oeconomy are universally


disapproved of, not, however, as proceeding from a want of


benevolence, but from a want of the proper attention to the


objects of self-interest.


    Though the standard by which casuists frequently determine


what is right or wrong in human conduct, be its tendency to the


welfare or disorder of society, it does not follow that a regard


to the welfare of society should be the sole virtuous motive of


action, but only that, in any competition, it ought to cast the


balance against all other motives.


    Benevolence may, perhaps, be the sole principle of action in


the Deity, and there are several, not improbable, arguments which


tend to persuade us that it is so. It is not easy to conceive


what other motive an independent and all-perfect Being, who


stands in need of nothing external, and whose happiness is


complete in himself, can act from. But whatever may be the case


with the Deity, so imperfect a creature as man, the support of


whose existence requires so many things external to him, must


often act from many other motives. The condition of human nature


were peculiarly hard, if those affections, which, by the very


nature of our being, ought frequently to influence our conduct,


could upon no occasion appear virtuous, or deserve esteem and


commendation from any body.


    Those three systems, that which places virtue in propriety,


that which places it in prudence, and that which makes it consist


in benevolence, are the principal accounts which have been given


of the nature of virtue. To one or other of them, all the other


descriptions of virtue, how different soever they may appear, are


easily reducible.


    That system which places virtue in obedience to the will of


the Deity, may be counted either among those which make it


consist in prudence, or among those which make it consist in


propriety. When it is asked, why we ought to obey the will of the


Deity, this question, which would be impious and absurd in the


highest degree, if asked from any doubt that we ought to obey


him, can admit but of two different answers. It must either be


said that we ought to obey the will of the Deity because he is a


Being of infinite power, who will reward us eternally if we do


so, and punish us eternally if we do otherwise: or it must be


said, that independent of any regard to our own happiness, or to


rewards and punishments of any kind, there is a congruity and


fitness that a creature should obey its creator, that a limited


and imperfect being should submit to one of infinite and


incomprehensible perfections. Besides one or other of these two,


it is impossible to conceive that any other answer can be given


to this question. If the first answer be the proper one, virtue


consists in prudence, or in the proper pursuit of our own final


interest and happiness; since it is upon this account that we are


obliged to obey the will of the Deity. If the second answer be


the proper one, virtue must consist in propriety, since the


ground of our obligation to obedience is the suitableness or


congruity of the sentiments of humility and submission to the


superiority of the object which excites them.


    That system which places virtue in utility, coincides too


with that which makes it consist in propriety. According to this


system, all those qualities of the mind which are agreeable or


advantageous, either to the person himself or to others, are


approved of as virtuous, and the contrary disapproved of as


vicious. But the agreeableness or utility of any affection


depends upon the degree which it is allowed to subsist in. Every


affection is useful when it is confined to a certain degree of


moderation; and every affection is disadvantageous when it


exceeds the proper bounds. According to this system therefore,


virtue consists not in any one affection, but in the proper


degree of all the affections. The only difference between it and


that which I have been endeavouring to establish, is, that it


makes utility, and not sympathy, or the correspondent affection


of the spectator, the natural and original measure of this proper


degree.





Chap. IV





Of licentious Systems





    All those systems, which I have hitherto given an account of,


suppose that there is a real and essential distinction between


vice and virtue, whatever these qualities may consist in. There


is a real and essential difference between the propriety and


impropriety of any affection, between benevolence and any other


principle of action, between real prudence and shortsighted folly


or precipitate rashness. In the main too all of them contribute


to encourage the praise-worthy, and to discourage the blamable


disposition.


    It may be true, perhaps, of some of them, that they tend, in


some measure, to break the balance of the affections, and to give


the mind a particular bias to some principles of action, beyond


the proportion that is due to them. The ancient systems, which


place virtue in propriety, seem chiefly to recommend the great,


the awful, and the respectable virtues, the virtues of


self-government and self-command; fortitude, magnanimity,


independency upon fortune, the contempt of all outward accidents,


of pain, poverty, exile, and death. It is in these great


exertions that the noblest propriety of conduct is displayed. The


soft, the amiable, the gentle virtues, all the virtues of


indulgent humanity are, in comparison, but little insisted upon,


and seem, on the contrary, by the Stoics in particular, to have


been often regarded as mere weaknesses which it behoved a wise


man not to harbour in his breast.


    The benevolent system, on the other hand, while it fosters


and encourages all those milder virtues in the highest degree,


seems entirely to neglect the more awful and respectable


qualities of the mind. It even denies them the appellation of


virtues. It calls them moral abilities, and treats them as


qualities which do not deserve the same sort of esteem and


approbation, that is due to what is properly denominated virtue.


All those principles of action which aim only at our own


interest, it treats, if that be possible, still worse. So far


from having any merit of their own, they diminish, it pretends,


the merit of benevolence, when they co-operate with it: and


prudence, it is asserted, when employed only in promoting private


interest, can never even be imagined a virtue.


    That system, again, which makes virtue consist in prudence


only, while it gives the highest encouragement to the habits of


caution, vigilance, sobriety, and judicious moderation, seems to


degrade equally both the amiable and respectable virtues, and to


strip the former of all their beauty, and the latter of all their


grandeur.


    But notwithstanding these defects, the general tendency of


each of those three systems is to encourage the best and most


laudable habits of the human mind: and it were well for society,


if, either mankind in general, or even those few who pretend to


live according to any philosophical rule, were to regulate their


conduct by the precepts of any one of them. We may learn from


each of them something that is both valuable and peculiar. If it


was possible, by precept and exhortation, to inspire the mind


with fortitude and magnanimity, the ancient systems of propriety


would seem sufficient to do this. Or if it was possible, by the


same means, to soften it into humanity, and to awaken the


affections of kindness and general love towards those we live


with, some of the pictures with which the benevolent system


presents us, might seem capable of producing this effect. We may


learn from the system of Epicurus, though undoubtedly the most


imperfect of all the three, how much the practice of both the


amiable and respectable virtues is conducive to our own interest,


to our own ease and safety and quiet even in this life. As


Epicurus placed happiness in the attainment of ease and security,


he exerted himself in a particular manner to show that virtue


was, not merely the best and the surest, but the only means of


acquiring those invaluable possessions. The good effects of


virtue, upon our inward tranquillity and peace of mind, are what


other philosophers have chiefly celebrated. Epicurus, without


neglecting this topic, has chiefly insisted upon the influence of


that amiable quality on our outward prosperity and safety. It was


upon this account that his writings were so much studied in the


ancient world by men of all different philosophical parties. It


is from him that Cicero, the great enemy of the Epicurean system,


borrows his most agreeable proofs that virtue alone is sufficient


to secure happiness. Seneca, though a Stoic, the sect most


opposite to that of Epicurus, yet quotes this philosopher more


frequently than any other.


    There is, however, another system which seems to take away


altogether the distinction between vice and virtue, and of which


the tendency is, upon that account, wholly pernicious: I mean the


system of Dr Mandeville. Though the notions of this author are in


almost every respect erroneous, there are, however, some


appearances in human nature, which, when viewed in a certain


manner, seem at first sight to favour them. These, described and


exaggerated by the lively and humorous, though coarse and rustic


eloquence of Dr Mandeville, have thrown upon his doctrines an air


of truth and probability which is very apt to impose upon the


unskilful.


    Dr Mandeville considers whatever is done from a sense of


propriety, from a regard to what is commendable and


praise-worthy, as being done from a love of praise and


commendation, or as he calls it from vanity. Man, he observes, is


naturally much more interested in his own happiness than in that


of others, and it is impossible that in his heart he can ever


really prefer their prosperity to his own. Whenever he appears to


do so, we may be assured that he imposes upon us, and that he is


then acting from the same selfish motives as at all other times.


Among his other selfish passions, vanity is one of the strongest,


and he is always easily flattered and greatly delighted with the


applauses of those about him. When he appears to sacrifice his


own interest to that of his companions, he knows that his conduct


will be highly agreeable to their self-love, and that they will


not fail to express their satisfaction by bestowing upon him the


most extravagant praises. The pleasure which he expects from


this, over-balances, in his opinion, the interest which he


abandons in order to procure it. His conduct, therefore, upon


this occasion, is in reality just as selfish, and arises from


just as mean a motive, as upon any other. He is flattered,


however, and he flatters himself, with the belief that it is


entirely disinterested; since, unless this was supposed, it would


not seem to merit any commendation either in his own eyes or in


those of others. All public spirit, therefore, all preference of


public to private interest, is, according to him, a mere cheat


and imposition upon mankind; and that human virtue which is so


much boasted of, and which is the occasion of so much emulation


among men, is the mere offspring of flattery begot upon pride.


    Whether the most generous and public-spirited actions may


not, in some sense, be regarded as proceeding from self-love, I


shall not at present examine. The decision of this question is


not, I apprehend, of any importance towards establishing the


reality of virtue, since self-love may frequently be a virtuous


motive of action. I shall only endeavour to show that the desire


of doing what is honourable and noble, of rendering ourselves the


proper objects of esteem and approbation, cannot with any


propriety be called vanity. Even the love of well-grounded fame


and reputation, the desire of acquiring esteem by what is really


estimable, does not deserve that name. The first is the love of


virtue, the noblest and the best passion in human nature. The


second is the love of true glory, a passion inferior no doubt to


the former, but which in dignity appears to come immediately


after it. He is guilty of vanity who desires praise for qualities


which are either not praise-worthy in any degree, or not in that


degree in which he expects to be praised for them who sets his


character upon the frivolous ornaments of dress and equipage, or


upon the equally frivolous accomplishments of ordinary behaviour.


He is guilty of vanity who desires praise for what indeed very


well deserves it, but what he perfectly knows does not belong to


him. The empty coxcomb who gives himself airs of importance which


he has no title to, the silly liar who assumes the merit of


adventures which never happened, the foolish plagiary who gives


himself out for the author of what he has no pretensions to, are


properly accused of this passion. He too is said to be guilty of


vanity who is not contented with the silent sentiments of esteem


and approbation, who seems to be fonder of their noisy


expressions and acclamations than of the sentiments themselves,


who is never satisfied but when his own praises are ringing in


his ears, and who solicits with the most anxious importunity all


external marks of respect, is fond of titles, of compliments, of


being visited, of being attended, of being taken notice of in


public places with the appearance of deference and attention.


This frivolous passion is altogether different from either of the


two former, and is the passion of the lowest and the least of


mankind, as they are of the noblest and the greatest.


    But though these three passions, the desire of rendering


ourselves the proper objects of honour and esteem; or of becoming


what is honourable and estimable; the desire of acquiring honour


and esteem by really deserving those sentiments; and the


frivolous desire of praise at any rate, are widely different;


though the two former are always approved of, while the latter


never fails to be despised; there is, however, a certain remote


affinity among them, which, exaggerated by the humorous and


diverting eloquence of this lively author, has enabled him to


impose upon his readers. There is an affinity between vanity and


the love of true glory, as both these passions aim at acquiring


esteem and approbation. But they are different in this, that the


one is a just, reasonable, and equitable passion, while the other


is unjust, absurd, and ridiculous. The man who desires esteem for


what is really estimable, desires nothing but what he is justly


entitled to, and what cannot be refused him without some sort of


injury. He, on the contrary, who desires it upon any other terms,


demands what he has no just claim to. The first is easily


satisfied, is not apt to be jealous or suspicious that we do not


esteem him enough, and is seldom solicitous about receiving many


external marks of our regard. The other, on the contrary, is


never to be satisfied, is full of jealousy and suspicion that we


do not esteem him so much as he desires, because he has some


secret consciousness that he desires more than he deserves. The


least neglect of ceremony, he considers as a mortal affront, and


as an expression of the most determined contempt. He is restless


and impatient, and perpetually afraid that we have lost all


respect for him, and is upon this account always anxious to


obtain new expressions of esteem, and cannot be kept in temper


but by continual attention and adulation.


    There is an affinity too between the desire of becoming what


is honourable and estimable, and the desire of honour and esteem,


between the love of virtue and the love of true glory. They


resemble one another not only in this respect, that both aim at


really being what is honourable and noble, but even in that


respect in which the love of true glory resembles what is


properly called vanity, some reference to the sentiments of


others. The man of the greatest magnanimity, who desires virtue


for its own sake, and is most indifferent about what actually are


the opinions of mankind with regard to him, is still, however,


delighted with the thoughts of what they should be, with the


consciousness that though he may neither be honoured nor


applauded, he is still the proper object of honour and applause,


and that if mankind were cool and candid and consistent with


themselves, and properly informed of the motives and


circumstances of his conduct, they would not fail to honour and


applaud him. Though he despises the opinions which are actually


entertained of him, he has the highest value for those which


ought to be entertained of him. That he might think himself


worthy of those honourable sentiments, and, whatever was the idea


which other men might conceive of his character, that when he


should put himself in their situation, and consider, not what


was, but what ought to be their opinion, he should always have


the highest idea of it himself, was the great and exalted motive


of his conduct. As even in the love of virtue, therefore, there


is still some reference, though not to what is, yet to what in


reason and propriety ought to be, the opinion of others, there is


even in this respect some affinity between it, and the love of


true glory. There is, however, at the same time, a very great


difference between them. The man who acts solely from a regard to


what is right and fit to be done, from a regard to what is the


proper object of esteem and approbation, though these sentiments


should never be bestowed upon him, acts from the most sublime and


godlike motive which human nature is even capable of conceiving.


The man, on the other hand, who while he desires to merit


approbation is at the same time anxious to obtain it, though he


too is laudable in the main, yet his motives have a greater


mixture of human infirmity. He is in danger of being mortified by


the ignorance and injustice of mankind, and his happiness is


exposed to the envy of his rivals and the folly of the public.


The happiness of the other, on the contrary, is altogether secure


and independent of fortune, and of the caprice of those he lives


with. The contempt and hatred which may be thrown upon him by the


ignorance of mankind, he considers as not belonging to him, and


is not at all mortified by it. Mankind despise and hate him from


a false notion of his character and conduct. If they knew him


better, they would esteem and love him. It is not him whom,


properly speaking, they hate and despise, but another person whom


they mistake him to be. Our friend, whom we should meet at a


masquerade in the garb of our enemy, would be more diverted than


mortified, if under that disguise we should vent our indignation


against him. Such are the sentiments of a man of real


magnanimity, when exposed to unjust censure. It seldom happens,


however, that human nature arrives at this degree of firmness.


Though none but the weakest and most worthless of mankind are


much delighted with false glory, yet, by a strange inconsistency,


false ignominy is often capable of mortifying those who appear


the most resolute and determined.


    Dr Mandeville is not satisfied with representing the


frivolous motive of vanity, as the source of all those actions


which are commonly accounted virtuous. He endeavours to point out


the imperfection of human virtue in many other respects. In every


case, he pretends, it falls short of that complete self-denial


which it pretends to, and, instead of a conquest, is commonly no


more than a concealed indulgence of our passions. Wherever our


reserve with regard to pleasure falls short of the most ascetic


abstinence, he treats it as gross luxury and sensuality. Every


thing, according to him, is luxury which exceeds what is


absolutely necessary for the support of human nature, so that


there is vice even in the use of a clean shirt, or of a


convenient habitation. The indulgence of the inclination to sex,


in the most lawful union, he considers as the same sensuality


with the most hurtful gratification of that passion, and derides


that temperance and that chastity which can be practised at so


cheap a rate. The ingenious sophistry of his reasoning, is here,


as upon many other occasions, covered by the ambiguity of


language. There are some of our passions which have no other


names except those which mark the disagreeable and offensive


degree. The spectator is more apt to take notice of them in this


degree than in any other. When they shock his own sentiments,


when they give him some sort of antipathy and uneasiness, he is


necessarily obliged to attend to them, and is from thence


naturally led to give them a name. When they fall in with the


natural state of his own mind, he is very apt to overlook them


altogether, and either gives them no name at all, or, if he give


them any, it is one which marks rather the subjection and


restraint of the passion, than the degree which it still is


allowed to subsist in, after it is so subjected and restrained.


Thus the common names(13*) of the love of pleasure, and of the


love of sex, denote a vicious and offensive degree of those


passions. The words temperance and chastity, on the other hand,


seem to mark rather the restraint and subjection which they are


kept under, than the degree which they are still allowed to


subsist in. When he can show, therefore, that they still subsist


in some degree, he imagines, he has entirely demolished the


reality of the virtues of temperance and chastity, and shown them


to be mere impositions upon the inattention and simplicity of


mankind. Those virtues, however, do not require an entire


insensibility to the objects of the passions which they mean to


govern. They only aim at restraining the violence of those


passions so far as not to hurt the individual, and neither


disturb nor offend the society.


    It is the great fallacy of Dr. Mandeville's book(14*) to


represent every passion as wholly vicious, which is so in any


degree and in any direction. It is thus that he treats every


thing as vanity which has any reference, either to what are, or


to what ought to be the sentiments of others: and it is by means


of this sophistry, that he establishes his favourite conclusion,


that private vices are public benefits. If the love of


magnificence, a taste for the elegant arts and improvements of


human life, for whatever is agreeable in dress, furniture, or


equipage, for architecture, statuary, painting, and music, is to


be regarded as luxury, sensuality, and ostentation, even in those


whose situation allows, without any inconveniency, the indulgence


of those passions, it is certain that luxury, sensuality, and


ostentation are public benefits: since without the qualities upon


which he thinks proper to bestow such opprobrious names, the arts


of refinement could never find encouragement, and must languish


for want of employment. Some popular ascetic doctrines which had


been current before his time, and which placed virtue in the


entire extirpation and annihilation of all our passions, were the


real foundation of this licentious system. It was easy for Dr


Mandeville to prove, first, that this entire conquest never


actually took place among men; and secondly, that, if it was to


take place universally, it would be pernicious to society, by


putting an end to all industry and commerce, and in a manner to


the whole business of human life. By the first of these


propositions he seemed to prove that there was no real virtue,


and that what pretended to be such, was a mere cheat and


imposition upon mankind; and by the second, that private vices


were public benefits, since without them no society could prosper


or flourish.


    Such is the system of Dr Mandeville, which once made so much


noise in the world, and which, though, perhaps, it never gave


occasion to more vice than what would have been without it, at


least taught that vice, which arose from other causes, to appear


with more effrontery, and to avow the corruption of its motives


with a profligate audaciousness which had never been heard of


before.


    But how destructive soever this system may appear, it could


never have imposed upon so great a number of persons, nor have


occasioned so general an alarm among those who are the friends of


better principles, had it not in some respects bordered upon the


truth. A system of natural philosophy may appear very plausible,


and be for a long time very generally received in the world, and


yet have no foundation in nature, nor any sort of resemblance to


the truth. The vortices of Des Cartes were regarded by a very


ingenious nation, for near a century together, as a most


satisfactory account of the revolutions of the heavenly bodies.


Yet it has been demonstrated, to the conviction of all mankind,


that these pretended causes of those wonderful effects, not only


do not actually exist, but are utterly impossible, and if they


did exist, could produce no such effects as are ascribed to them.


But it is otherwise with systems of moral philosophy, and an


author who pretends to account for the origin of our moral


sentiments, cannot deceive us so grossly, nor depart so very far


from all resemblance to the truth. When a traveller gives an


account of some distant country, he may impose upon our credulity


the most groundless and absurd fictions as the most certain


matters of fact. But when a person pretends to inform us of what


passes in our neighbourhood, and of the affairs of the very


parish which we live in, though here too, if we are so careless


as not to examine things with our own eves, he may deceive us in


many respects, yet the greatest falsehoods which he imposes upon


us must bear some resemblance to the truth, and must even have a


considerable mixture of truth in them. An author who treats of


natural philosophy, and pretends to assign the causes of the


great phaenomena of the universe, pretends to give an account of


the affairs of a very distant country, concerning which he may


tell us what he pleases, and as long as his narration keeps


within the bounds of seeming possibility, he need not despair of


gaining our belief. But when he proposes to explain the origin of


our desires and affections, of our sentiments of approbation and


disapprobation, he pretends to give an account, not only of the


affairs of the very parish that we live in, but of our own


domestic concerns. Though here too, like indolent masters who put


their trust in a steward who deceives them, we are very liable to


be imposed upon, yet we are incapable of passing any account


which does not preserve some little regard to the truth. Some of


the articles, at least, must be just, and even those which are


most overcharged must have had some foundation, otherwise the


fraud would be detected even by that careless inspection which we


are disposed to give. The author who should assign, as the cause


of any natural sentiment, some principle which neither had any


connexion with it, nor resembled any other principle which had


some such connexion, would appear absurd and ridiculous to the


most injudicious and unexperienced reader.





Section III





Of the different Systems which have been formed concerning the


Principle of Approbation





Introduction





    After the inquiry concerning the nature of virtue, the next


question of importance in Moral Philosophy, is concerning the


principle of approbation, concerning the power or faculty of the


mind which renders certain characters agreeable or disagreeable


to us, makes us prefer one tenour of conduct to another,


denominate the one right and the other wrong, and consider the


one as the object of approbation, honour, and reward; the other


as that of blame, censure, and punishment.


    Three different accounts have been given of this principle of


approbation. According to some, we approve and disapprove both of


our own actions and of those of others, from self-love only, or


from some view of their tendency to our own happiness or


disadvantage: according to others, reason, the same faculty by


which we distinguish between truth and falsehood, enables us to


distinguish between what is fit and unfit both in actions and


affections: accorDing to others this distinction is altogether


the effect of immediate sentiment and feeling, and arises from


the satisfaction or disgust with which the view of certain


actions or affections inspires us. Self-love, reason, and


sentiment, therefore, are the three different sources which have


been assigned for the principle of approbation.


    Before I proceed to give an account of those different


systems, I must observe, that the determination of this second


question, though of the greatest importance in speculation, is of


none in practice. The question concerning the nature of virtue


necessarily has some influence upon our notions of right and


wrong in many particular cases. That concerning the principle of


approbation can possibly have no such effect. To examine from


what contrivance or mechanism within, those different notions or


sentiments arise, is a mere matter of philosophical curiosity.





Chap. I





Of those Systems which deduce the Principle of Approbation from


Self-love





    Those who account for the principle of approbation from


self-love, do not all account for it in the same manner, and


there is a good deal of confusion and inaccuracy in all their


different systems. According to Mr Hobbes, and many of his


followers,(15*) man is driven to take refuge in society, not by


any natural love which he bears to his own kind, but because


without the assistance of others he is incapable of subsisting


with ease or safety. Society, upon this account, becomes


necessary to him, and whatever tends to its support and welfare,


he considers as having a remote tendency to his own interest;


and, on the contrary, whatever is likely to disturb or destroy


it, he regards as in some measure hurtful or pernicious to


himself. Virtue is the great support, and vice the great


disturber of human society. The former, therefore, is agreeable,


and the latter offensive to every man; as from the one he


foresees the prosperity, and from the other the ruin and disorder


of what is so necessary for the comfort and security of his


existence.


    That the tendency of virtue to promote, and of vice to


disturb the order of society, when we consider it coolly and


philosophically, reflects a very great beauty upon the one, and a


very great deformity upon the other, cannot, as I have observed


upon a former occasion, be called in question. Human society,


when we contemplate it in a certain abstract and philosophical


light, appears like a great, an immense machine, whose regular


and harmonious movements produce a thousand agreeable effects. As


in any other beautiful and noble machine that was the production


of human art, whatever tended to render its movements more smooth


and easy, would derive a beauty from this effect, and, on the


contrary, whatever tended to obstruct them would displease upon


that account: so virtue, which is, as it were, the fine polish to


the wheels of society, necessarily pleases; while vice, like the


vile rust, which makes them jar and grate upon one another, is as


necessarily offensive. This account, therefore, of the origin of


approbation and disapprobation, so far as it derives them from a


regard to the order of society, runs into that principle which


gives beauty to utility, and which I have explained upon a former


occasion; and it is from thence that this system derives all that


appearance of probability which it possesses. When those authors


describe the innumerable advantages of a cultivated and social,


above a savage and solitary life; when they expatiate upon the


necessity of virtue and good order for the maintenance of the


one, and demonstrate how infallibly the prevalence of vice and


disobedience to the laws tend to bring back the other, the reader


is charmed with the novelty and grandeur of those views which


they open to him: he sees plainly a new beauty in virtue, and a


new deformity in vice, which he had never taken notice of before,


and is commonly so delighted with the discovery, that he seldom


takes time to reflect, that this political view, having never


occurred to him in his life before, cannot possibly be the ground


of that approbation and disapprobation with which he has always


been accustomed to consider those different qualities.


    When those authors, on the other hand, deduce from self-love


the interest which we take in the welfare of society, and the


esteem which upon that account we bestow upon virtue, they do not


mean, that when we in this age applaud the virtue of Cato, and


detest the villany of Catiline, our sentiments are influenced by


the notion of any benefit we receive from the one, or of any


detriment we suffer from the other. It was not because the


prosperity or subversion of society, in those remote ages and


nations, was apprehended to have any influence upon our happiness


or misery in the present times; that according to those


philosophers, we esteemed the virtuous, and blamed the disorderly


characters. They never imagined that our sentiments were


influenced by any benefit or damage which we supposed actually to


redound to us, from either; but by that which might have


redounded to us, had we lived in those distant ages and


countries; or by that which might still redound to us, if in our


own times we should meet with characters of the same kind. The


idea, in short, which those authors were groping about, but which


they were never able to unfold distinctly, was that indirect


sympathy which we feel with the gratitude or resentment of those


who received the benefit or suffered the damage resulting from


such opposite characters: and it was this which they were


indistinctly pointing at, when they said, that it was not the


thought of what we had gained or suffered which prompted our


applause or indignation, but the conception or imagination of


what we might gain or suffer if we were to act in society with


such associates.


    Sympathy, however, cannot, in any sense, be regarded as a


selfish principle. When I sympathize with your sorrow or your


indignation, it may be pretended, indeed, that my emotion is


founded in self-love, because it arises from bringing your case


home to myself, from putting myself in your situation, and thence


conceiving what I should feel in the like circumstances. But


though sympathy is very properly said to arise from an imaginary


change of situations with the person principally concerned, yet


this imaginary change is not supposed to happen to me in my own


person and character, but in that of the person with whom I


sympathize. When I condole with you for the loss of your only


son, in order to enter into your grief I do not consider what I,


a person of such a character and profession, should suffer, if I


had a son, and if that son was unfortunately to die: but I


consider what I should suffer if I was really you, and I not only


change circumstances with you, but I change persons and


characters. My grief, therefore, is entirely upon your account,


and not in the least upon my own. It is not, therefore, in the


least selfish. How can that be regarded as a selfish passion,


which does not arise even from the imagination of any thing that


has befallen, or that relates to myself, in my own proper person


and character, but which is entirely occupied about what relates


to you? A man may sympathize with a woman in child-bed; though it


is impossible that he should conceive himself as suffering her


pains in his own proper person and character. That whole account


of human nature, however, which deduces all sentiments and


affections from self-love, which has made so much noise in the


world, but which, so far as I know, has never yet been fully and


distinctly explained, seems to me to have arisen from some


confused misapprehension of the system of sympathy.





Chap. II





Of those Systems which make Reason the Principle of Approbation





    It is well known to have been the doctrine of Mr Hobbes, that


a state of nature is a state of war; and that antecedent to the


institution of civil government there could be no safe or


peaceable society among men. To preserve society, therefore,


according to him, was to support civil government, and to destroy


civil government was the same thing as to put an end to society.


But the existence of civil government depends upon the obedience


that is paid to the supreme magistrate. The moment he loses his


authority, all government is at an end. As self-preservation,


therefore, teaches men to applaud whatever tends to promote the


welfare of society, and to blame whatever is likely to hurt it;


so the same principle, if they would think and speak


consistently, ought to teach them to applaud upon all occasions


obedience to the civil magistrate, and to blame all disobedience


and rebellion. The very ideas of laudable and blamable, ought to


be the same with those of obedience and disobedience. The laws of


the civil magistrate, therefore, ought to be regarded as the sole


ultimate standards of what was just and unjust, of what was right


and wrong.


    It was the avowed intention of Mr Hobbes, by propagating


these notions, to subject the consciences of men immediately to


the civil, and not to the ecclesiastical powers, whose turbulence


and ambition, he had been taught, by the example of his own


times, to regard as the principal source of the disorders of


society. His doctrine, upon this account, was peculiarly


offensive to theologians, who accorDingly did not fail to vent


their indignation against him with great asperity and bitterness.


It was likewise offensive to all sound moralists, as it supposed


that there was no natural distinction between right and wrong,


that these were mutable and changeable, and depended upon the


mere arbitrary will of the civil magistrate. This account of


things, therefore, was attacked from all quarters, and by all


sorts of weapons, by sober reason as well as by furious


declamation.


    In order to confute so odious a doctrine, it was necessary to


prove, that antecedent to all law or positive institution, the


mind was naturally endowed with a faculty, by which it


distinguished in certain actions and affections, the qualities of


right, laudable, and virtuous, and in others those of wrong,


blamable, and vicious.


    Law, it was justly observed by Dr Cudworth,(16*) could not be


the original source of those distinctions; since upon the


supposition of such a law, it must either be right to obey it,


and wrong to disobey it, or indifferent whether we obeyed it, or


disobeyed it. That law which it was indifferent whether we obeyed


or disobeyed, could not, it was evident, be the source of those


distinctions; neither could that which it was right to obey and


wrong to disobey, since even this still supposed the antecedent


notions or ideas of right and wrong, and that obedience to the


law was conformable to the idea of right, and disobedience to


that of wrong.


    Since the mind, therefore, had a notion of those distinctions


antecedent to all law, it seemed necessarily to follow, that it


derived this notion from reason, which pointed out the difference


between right and wrong, in the same manner in which it did that


between truth and falsehood: and this conclusion, which, though


true in some respects, is rather hasty in others, was more easily


received at a time when the abstract science of human nature was


but in its infancy, and before the distinct offices and powers of


the different faculties of the human mind had been carefully


examined and distinguished from one another. When this


controversy with Mr Hobbes was carried on with the greatest


warmth and keenness, no other faculty had been thought of from


which any such ideas could possibly be supposed to arise. It


became at this time, therefore, the popular doctrine, that the


essence of virtue and vice did not consist in the conformity or


disagreement of human actions with the law of a superior, but in


their conformity or disagreement with reason, which was thus


considered as the original source and principle of approbation


and disapprobation.


    That virtue consists in conformity to reason, is true in some


respects, and this faculty may very justly be considered as, in


some sense, the source and principle of approbation and


disapprobation, and of all solid judgments concerning right and


wrong. It is by reason that we discover those general rules of


justice by which we ought to regulate our actions: and it is by


the same faculty that we form those more vague and indeterminate


ideas of what is prudent, of what is decent, of what is generous


or noble, which we carry constantly about with us, and according


to which we endeavour, as well as we can, to model the tenor of


our conduct. The general maxims of morality are formed, like all


other general maxims, from experience and induction. We observe


in a great variety of particular cases what pleases or displeases


our moral faculties, what these approve or disapprove of, and, by


induction from this experience, we establish those general rules.


But induction is always regarded as one of the operations of


reason. From reason, therefore, we are very properly said to


derive all those general maxims and ideas. It is by these,


however, that we regulate the greater part of our moral


judgments, which would be extremely uncertain and precarious if


they depended altogether upon what is liable to so many


variations as immediate sentiment and feeling, which the


different states of health and humour are capable of altering so


essentially. As our most solid judgments, therefore, with regard


to right and wrong, are regulated by maxims and ideas derived


from an induction of reason, virtue may very properly be said to


consist in a conformity to reason, and so far this faculty may be


considered as the source and principle of approbation and


disapprobation.


    But though reason is undoubtedly the source of the general


rules of morality, and of all the moral judgments which we form


by means of them; it is altogether absurd and unintelligible to


suppose that the first perceptions of right and wrong can be


derived from reason, even in those particular cases upon the


experience of which the general rules are formed. These first


perceptions, as well as all other experiments upon which any


general rules are founded, cannot be the object of reason, but of


immediate sense and feeling. It is by finding in a vast variety


of instances that one tenor of conduct constantly pleases in a


certain manner, and that another as constantly displeases the


mind, that we form the general rules of morality. But reason


cannot render any particular object either agreeable or


disagreeable to the mind for its own sake. Reason may show that


this object is the means of obtaining some other which is


naturally either pleasing or displeasing, and in this manner may


render it either agreeable or disagreeable for the sake of


something else. But nothing can be agreeable or disagreeable for


its own sake, which is not rendered such by immediate sense and


feeling. If virtue, therefore, in every particular instance,


necessarily pleases for its own sake, and if vice as certainly


displeases the mind, it cannot be reason, but immediate sense and


feeling, which, in this manner, reconciles us to the one, and


alienates us from the other.


    Pleasure and pain are the great objects of desire and


aversion: but these are distinguished not by reason, but by


immediate sense and feeling. If virtue, therefore, be desirable


for its own sake, and if vice be, in the same manner, the object


of aversion, it cannot be reason which originally distinguishes


those different qualities, but immediate sense and feeling.


    As reason, however, in a certain sense, may justly be


considered as the principle of approbation and disapprobation,


these sentiments were, through inattention, long regarded as


originally flowing from the operations of this faculty. Dr


Hutcheson had the merit of being the first who distinguished with


any degree of precision in what respect all moral distinctions


may be said to arise from reason, and in what respect they are


founded upon immediate sense and feeling. In his illustrations


upon the moral sense he has explained this so fully, and, in my


opinion, so unanswerably, that, if any controversy is still kept


up about this subject, I can impute it to nothing, but either to


inattention to what that gentleman has written, or to a


superstitious attachment to certain forms of expression, a


weakness not very uncommon among the learned, especially in


subjects so deeply interesting as the present, in which a man of


virtue is often loath to abandon, even the propriety of a single


phrase which he has been accustomed to.





Chap. III





Of those Systems which make Sentiment the Principle of


Approbation





    Those systems which make sentiment the principle of


approbation may be divided into two different classes.





    I. According to some the principle of approbation is founded


upon a sentiment of a peculiar nature, upon a particular power of


perception exerted by the mind at the view of certain actions or


affections; some of which affecting this faculty in an agreeable


and others in a disagreeable manner, the former are stamped with


the characters of right, laudable, and virtuous; the latter with


those of wrong, blamable, and vicious. This sentiment being of a


peculiar nature distinct from every other, and the effect of a


particular power of perception, they give it a particular name,


and call it a moral sense.





    II. According to others, in order to account for the


principle of approbation, there is no occasion for supposing any


new power of perception which had never been heard of before:


Nature, they imagine, acts here, as in all other cases, with the


strictest oeconomy, and produces a multitude of effects from one


and the same cause; and sympathy, a power which has always been


taken notice of, and with which the mind is manifestly endowed,


is, they think, sufficient to account for all the effects


ascribed to this peculiar faculty.





    I. Dr Hutcheson(17*) had been at great pains to prove that


the principle of approbation was not founded on self-love. He had


demonstrated too that it could not arise from any operation of


reason. Nothing remained, he thought, but to suppose it a faculty


of a peculiar kind, with which Nature had endowed the human mind,


in order to produce this one particular and important effect.


When self-love and reason were both excluded, it did not occur to


him that there was any other known faculty of the mind which


could in any respect answer this purpose.


    This new power of perception he called a moral sense, and


supposed it to be somewhat analogous to the external senses. As


the bodies around us, by affecting these in a certain manner,


appear to possess the different qualities of sound, taste, odour,


colour; so the various affections of the human mind, by touching


this particular faculty in a certain manner, appear to possess


the different qualities of amiable and odious, of virtuous and


vicious, of right and wrong.


    The various senses or powers of perception,(18*) from which


the human mind derives all its simple ideas, were, according to


this system, of two different kinds, of which the one were called


the direct or antecedent, the other, the reflex or consequent


senses. The direct senses were those faculties from which the


mind derived the perception of such species of things as did not


presuppose the antecedent perception of any other. Thus sounds


and colours were objects of the direct senses. To hear a sound or


to see a colour does not presuppose the antecedent perception of


any other quality or object. The reflex or consequent senses, on


the other hand, were those faculties from which the mind derived


the perception of such species of things as presupposed the


antecedent perception of some other. Thus harmony and beauty were


objects of the reflex senses. In order to perceive the harmony of


a sound, or the beauty of a colour, we must first perceive the


sound or the colour. The moral sense was considered as a faculty


of this kind. That faculty, which Mr Locke calls reflection, and


from which he derived the simple ideas of the different passions


and emotions of the human mind, was, according to Dr Hutcheson, a


direct internal sense. That faculty again by which we perceived


the beauty or deformity, the virtue or vice of those different


passions and emotions, was a reflex, internal sense.


    Dr Hutcheson endeavoured still further to support this


doctrine, by shewing that it was agreeable to the analogy of


nature, and that the mind was endowed with a variety of other


reflex senses exactly similar to the moral sense; such as a sense


of beauty and deformity in external objects; a public sense, by


which we sympathize with the happiness or misery of our


fellow-creatures; a sense of shame and honour, and a sense of


ridicule.


    But notwithstanding all the pains which this ingenious


philosopher has taken to prove that the principle of approbation


is founded in a peculiar power of perception, somewhat analogous


to the external senses, there are some consequences, which he


acknowledges to follow from this doctrine, that will, perhaps, be


regarded by many as a sufficient confutation of it. The qualities


he allows,(19*) which belong to the objects of any sense, cannot,


without the greatest absurdity, be ascribed to the sense itself.


Who ever thought of calling the sense of seeing black or white,


the sense of hearing loud or low, or the sense of tasting sweet


or bitter? And, according to him, it is equally absurd to call


our moral faculties virtuous or vicious, morally good or evil.


These qualities belong to the objects of those faculties, not to


the faculties themselves. If any man, therefore, was so absurdly


constituted as to approve of cruelty and injustice as the highest


virtues, and to disapprove of equity and humanity as the most


pitiful vices, such a constitution of mind might indeed be


regarded as inconvenient both to the individual and to the


society, and likewise as strange, surprising, and unnatural in


itself; but it could not, without the greatest absurdity, be


denominated vicious or morally evil.


    Yet surely if we saw any man shouting with admiration and


applause at a barbarous and unmerited execution, which some


insolent tyrant had ordered, we should not think we were guilty


of any great absurdity in denominating this behaviour vicious and


morally evil in the highest degree, though it expressed nothing


but depraved moral faculties, or an absurd approbation of this


horrid action, as of what was noble, magnanimous, and great. Our


heart, I imagine, at the sight of such a spectator, would forget


for a while its sympathy with the sufferer, and feel nothing but


horror and detestation, at the thought of so execrable a wretch.


We should abominate him even more than the tyrant who might be


goaded on by the strong passions of jealousy, fear, and


resentment, and upon that account be more excusable. But the


sentiments of the spectator would appear altogether without cause


or motive, and therefore most perfectly and completely


detestable. There is no perversion of sentiment or affection


which our heart would be more averse to enter into, or which it


would reject with greater hatred and indignation than one of this


kind; and so far from regarding such a constitution of mind as


being merely something strange or inconvenient, and not in any


respect vicious or morally evil, we should rather consider it as


the very last and most dreadful stage of moral depravity.


    Correct moral sentiments, on the contrary, naturally appear


in some degree laudable and morally good. The man, whose censure


and applause are upon all occasions suited with the greatest


accuracy to the value or unworthiness of the object, seems to


deserve a degree even of moral approbation. We admire the


delicate precision of his moral sentiments: they lead our own


judgments, and, upon account of their uncommon and surprising


justness, they even excite our wonder and applause. We cannot


indeed be always sure that the conduct of such a person would be


in any respect correspondent to the precision and accuracy of his


judgments concerning the conduct of others. Virtue requires habit


and resolution of mind, as well as delicacy of sentiment; and


unfortunately the former qualities are sometimes wanting, where


the latter is in the greatest perfection. This disposition of


mind, however, though it may sometimes be attended with


imperfections, is incompatible with any thing that is grossly


criminal, and is the happiest foundation upon which the


superstructure of perfect virtue can be built. There are many men


who mean very well, and seriously purpose to do what they think


their duty, who notwithstanding are disagreeable on account of


the coarseness of their moral sentiments.


    It may be said, perhaps, that though the principle of


approbation is not founded upon any power of perception that is


in any respect analogous to the external senses, it may still be


founded upon a peculiar sentiment which answers this one


particular purpose and no other. Approbation and disapprobation,


it may be pretended, are certain feelings or emotions which arise


in the mind upon the view of different characters and actions;


and as resentment might be called a sense of injuries, or


gratitude a sense of benefits, so these may very properly receive


the name of a sense of right and wrong, or of a moral sense.


    But this account of things, though it may not be liable to


the same objections with the foregoing, is exposed to others


which are equally unanswerable.


    First of all, whatever variations any particular emotion may


undergo, it still preserves the general features which


distinguish it to be an emotion of such a kind, and these general


features are always more striking and remarkable than any


variation which it may undergo in particular cases. Thus anger is


an emotion of a particular kind: and accordingly its general


features are always more distinguishable than all the variations


it undergoes in particular cases. Anger against a man is, no


doubt, somewhat different from anger against a woman, and that


again from anger against a child. In each of those three cases,


the general passion of anger receives a different modification


from the particular character of its object, as may easily be


observed by the attentive. But still the general features of the


passion predominate in all these cases. To distinguish these,


requires no nice observation: a very delicate attention, on the


contrary, is necessary to discover their variations: every body


takes notice of the former; scarce any body observes the latter.


If approbation and disapprobation, therefore, were, like


gratitude and resentment, emotions of a particular kind, distinct


from every other, we should expect that in all the variations


which either of them might undergo, it would still retain the


general features which mark it to be an emotion of such a


particular kind, clear, plain, and easily distinguishable. But in


fact it happens quite otherwise. If we attend to what we really


feel when upon different occasions we either approve or


disapprove, we shall find that our emotion in one case is often


totally different from that in another, and that no common


features can possibly be discovered between them. Thus the


approbation with which we view a tender, delicate, and humane


sentiment, is quite different from that with which we are struck


by one that appears great, daring, and magnanimous. Our


approbation of both may, upon different occasions, be perfect and


entire; but we are softened by the one, and we are elevated by


the other, and there is no sort of resemblance between the


emotions which they excite in us. But according to that system


which I have been endeavouring to establish, this must


necessarily be the case. As the emotions of the person whom we


approve of, are, in those two cases, quite opposite to one


another, and as our approbation arises from sympathy with those


opposite emotions, what we feel upon the one occasion, can have


no sort of resemblance to what we feel upon the other. But this


could not happen if approbation consisted in a peculiar emotion


which had nothing in common with the sentiments we approved of,


but which arose at the view of those sentiments, like any other


passion at the view of its proper object. The same thing holds


true with regard to disapprobation. Our horror for cruelty has no


sort of resemblance to our contempt for mean-spiritedness. It is


quite a different species of discord which we feel at the view of


those two different vices, between our own minds and those of the


person whose sentiments and behaviour we consider.


    Secondly, I have already observed, that not only the


different passions or affections of the human mind which are


approved or disapproved of, appear morally good or evil, but that


proper and improper approbation appear, to our natural


sentiments, to be stamped with the same characters. I would ask,


therefore, how it is, that, according to this system, we approve


or disapprove of proper or improper approbation? To this question


there is, I imagine, but one reasonable answer, which can


possibly be given. It must be said, that when the approbation


with which our neighbour regards the conduct of a third person


coincides with our own, we approve of his approbation, and


consider it as, in some measure, morally good; and that, on the


contrary, when it does not coincide with our own sentiments, we


disapprove of it, and consider it as, in some measure, morally


evil. It must be allowed, therefore, that, at least in this one


case, the coincidence or opposition of sentiments, between the


observer and the person observed, constitutes moral approbation


or disapprobation. And if it does so in this one case, I would


ask, why not in every other? Or to what purpose imagine a new


power of perception in order to account for those sentiments?


    Against every account of the principle of approbation, which


makes it depend upon a peculiar sentiment, distinct from every


other, I would object; that it is strange that this sentiment,


which Providence undoubtedly intended to be the governing


principle of human nature, should hitherto have been so little


taken notice of, as not to have got a name in any language. The


word moral sense is of very late formation, and cannot yet be


considered as making part of the English tongue. The word


approbation has but within these few years been appropriated to


denote peculiarly any thing of this kind. In propriety of


language we approve of whatever is entirely to our satisfaction,


of the form of a building, of the contrivance of a machine, of


the flavour of a dish of meat. The word conscience does not


immediately denote any moral faculty by which we approve or


disapprove. Conscience supposes, indeed, the existence of some


such faculty, and properly signifies our consciousness of having


acted agreeably or contrary to its directions. When love, hatred,


joy, sorrow, gratitude, resentment, with so many other passions


which are all supposed to be the subjects of this principle, have


made themselves considerable enough to get titles to know them


by, is it not surprising that the sovereign of them all should


hitherto have been so little heeded, that, a few philosophers


excepted, nobody has yet thought it worth while to bestow a name


upon it?


    When we approve of any character or action, the sentiments


which we feel, are, according to the foregoing system, derived


from four sources, which are in some respects different from one


another. First, we sympathize with the motives of the agent;


secondly, we enter into the gratitude of those who receive the


benefit of his actions; thirdly, we observe that his conduct has


been agreeable to the general rules by which those two sympathies


generally act; and, last of all, when we consider such actions as


making a part of a system of behaviour which tends to promote the


happiness either of the individual or of the society, they appear


to derive a beauty from this utility, not unlike that which we


ascribe to any well-contrived machine. After deducting, in any


one particular case, all that must be acknowledged to proceed


from some one or other of these four principles, I should be glad


to know what remains, and I shall freely allow this overplus to


be ascribed to a moral sense, or to any other peculiar faculty,


provided any body will ascertain precisely what this overplus is.


It might be expected, perhaps, that if there was any such


peculiar principle, such as this moral sense is supposed to be,


we should feel it, in some particular cases, separated and


detached from every other, as we often feel joy, sorrow, hope,


and fear, pure and unmixed with any other emotion. This however,


I imagine, cannot even be pretended. I have never heard any


instance alleged in which this principle could be said to exert


itself alone and unmixed with sympathy or antipathy, with


gratitude or resentment, with the perception of the agreement or


disagreement of any action to an established rule, or last of all


with that general taste for beauty and or der which is excited by


inanimated as well as by animated objects.





    II. There is another system which attempts to account for the


origin of our moral sentiments from sympathy, distinct from that


which I have been endeavouring to establish. It is that which


places virtue in utility, and accounts for the pleasure with


which the spectator surveys the utility of any quality from


sympathy with the happiness of those who are affected by it. This


sympathy is different both from that by which we enter into the


motives of the agent, and from that by which we go along with the


gratitude of the persons who are benefited by his actions. It is


the same principle with that by which we approve of a


well-contrived machine. But no machine can be the object of


either of those two last mentioned sympathies. I have already, in


the fourth part of this discourse, given some account of this


system.





Section IV





Of the Manner in which different Authors have treated of the


practical Rules of Morality








    It was observed in the third part of this discourse, that the


rules of justice are the only rules of morality which are precise


and accurate; that those of all the other virtues are loose,


vague, and indeterminate; that the first may be compared to the


rules of grammar; the others to those which critics lay down for


the attainment of what is sublime and elegant in composition, and


which present us rather with a general idea of the perfection we


ought to aim at, than afford us any certain and infallible


directions for acquiring it.


    As the different rules of morality admit such different


degrees of accuracy, those authors who have endeavoured to


collect and digest them into systems have done it in two


Different manners; and one set has followed through the whole


that loose method to which they were naturally directed by the


consideration of one species of virtues; while another has as


universally endeavoured to introduce into their precepts that


sort of accuracy of which only some of them are susceptible. The


first have wrote like critics, the second like grammarians.





    I. The first, among whom we may count all the ancient


moralists, have contented themselves with describing in a general


manner the different vices and virtues, and with pointing out the


deformity and misery of the one disposition as well as the


propriety and happiness of the other, but have not affected to


lay down many precise rules that are to hold good unexceptionably


in all particular cases. They have only endeavoured to ascertain,


as far as language is capable of ascertaining, first, wherein


consists the sentiment of the heart, upon which each particular


virtue is founded, what sort of internal feeling or emotion it is


which constitutes the essence of friendship, of humanity, of


generosity, of justice, of magnanimity, and of all the other


virtues, as well as of the vices which are opposed to them: and,


secondly, what is the general way of acting, the ordinary tone


and tenor of conduct to which each of those sentiments would


direct us, or how it is that a friendly, a generous, a brave, a


just, and a humane man, would, upon ordinary occasions, chuse to


act.


    To characterize the sentiment of the heart, upon which each


particular virtue is founded, though it requires both a delicate


and an accurate pencil, is a task, however, which may be executed


with some degree of exactness. It is impossible, indeed, to


express all the variations which each sentiment either does or


ought to undergo, according to every possible variation of


circumstances. They are endless, and language wants names to mark


them by. The sentiment of friendship, for example, which we feel


for an old man is different from that which we feel for a young:


that which we entertain for an austere man different from that


which we feel for one of softer and gentler manners: and that


again from what we feel for one of gay vivacity and spirit. The


friendship which we conceive for a man is different from that


with which a woman affects us, even where there is no mixture of


any grosser passion. What author could enumerate and ascertain


these and all the other infinite varieties which this sentiment


is capable of undergoing? But still the general sentiment of


friendship and familiar attachment which is common to them all,


may be ascertained with a sufficient degree of accuracy. The


picture which is drawn of it, though it will always be in many


respects incomplete, may, however, have such a resemblance as to


make us know the original when we meet with it, and even


distinguish it from other sentiments to which it has a


considerable resemblance, such as good-will, respect, esteem,


admiration.


    To describe, in a general manner, what is the ordinary way of


acting to which each virtue would prompt us, is still more easy.


It is, indeed, scarce possible to describe the internal sentiment


or emotion upon which it is founded, without doing something of


this kind. It is impossible by language to express, if I may say


so, the invisible features of all the different modifications of


passion as they show themselves within. There is no other way of


marking and distinguishing them from one another, but by


describing the effects which they produce without, the


alterations which they occasion in the countenance, in the air


and eternal behaviour, the resolutions they suggest, the actions


they prompt to. It is thus that Cicero, in the first book of his


Offices, endeavours to direct us to the practice of the four


cardinal virtues, and that Aristotle in the practical parts of


his Ethics, points out to us the different habits by which he


would have us regulate our behaviour, such as liberality,


magnificence, magnanimity, and even jocularity and good-humour,


qualities which that indulgent philosopher has thought worthy of


a place in the catalogue of the virtues, though the lightness of


that approbation which we naturally bestow upon them, should not


seem to entitle them to so venerable a name.


    Such works present us with agreeable and lively pictures of


manners. By the vivacity of their descriptions they inflame our


natural love of virtue, and increase our abhorrence of vice: by


the justness as well as delicacy of their observations they may


often help both to correct and to ascertain our natural


sentiments with regard to the propriety of conduct, and


suggesting many nice and delicate attentions, form us to a more


exact justness of behaviour, than what, without such instruction,


we should have been apt to think of. In treating of the rules of


morality, in this manner, consists the science which is properly


called Ethics, a science which, though like criticism it does not


admit of the most accurate precision, is, however, both highly


useful and agreeable. It is of all others the most susceptible of


the embellishments of eloquence, and by means of them of


bestowing, if that be possible, a new importance upon the


smallest rules of duty. Its precepts, when thus dressed and


adorned, are capable of producing upon the flexibility of youth,


the noblest and most lasting impressions, and as they fall in


with the natural magnanimity of that generous age, they are able


to inspire, for a time at least, the most heroic resolutions, and


thus tend both to establish and confirm the best and most useful


habits of which the mind of man is susceptible. Whatever precept


and exhortation can do to animate us to the practice of virtue,


is done by this science delivered in this manner.





 II. The second set of moralists, among whom we may count all the


casuists of the middle and latter ages of the christian church,


as well as all those who in this and in the preceding century


have treated of what is called natural jurisprudence, do not


content themselves with characterizing in this general manner


that tenor of conduct which they would recommend to us, but


endeavour to lay down exact and precise rules for the direction


of every circumstance of our behaviour. As justice is the only


virtue with regard to which such exact rules can properly be


given; it is this virtue, that has chiefly fallen under the


consideration of those two different sets of writers. They treat


of it, however, in a very different manner.


    Those who write upon the principles of jurisprudence,


consider only what the person to whom the obligation is due,


ought to think himself entitled to exact by force; what every


impartial spectator would approve of him for exacting, or what a


judge or arbiter, to whom he had submitted his case, and who had


undertaken to do him justice, ought to oblige the other person to


suffer or to perform. The casuists, on the other hand, do not so


much examine what it is, that might properly be exacted by force,


as what it is, that the person who owes the obligation ought to


think himself bound to perform from the most sacred and


scrupulous regard to the general rules of justice, and from the


most conscientious dread, either of wronging his neighbour, or of


violating the integrity of his own character. It is the end of


jurisprudence to prescribe rules for the decisions of judges and


arbiters. It is the end of casuistry to prescribe rules for the


conduct of a good man. By observing all the rules of


jurisprudence, supposing them ever so perfect, we should deserve


nothing but to be free from external punishment. By observing


those of casuistry, supposing them such as they ought to be, we


should be entitled to considerable praise by the exact and


scrupulous delicacy of our behaviour.


    It may frequently happen that a good man ought to think


himself bound, from a sacred and conscientious regard to the


general rules of justice, to perform many things which it would


be the highest injustice to extort from him, or for any judge or


arbiter to impose upon him by force. To give a trite example; a


highwayman, by the fear of death, obliges a traveller to promise


him a certain sum of money. Whether such a promise, extorted in


this manner by unjust force, ought to be regarded as obligatory,


is a question that has been very much debated.


    If we consider it merely as a question of jurisprudence, the


decision can admit of no doubt. It would be absurd to suppose


that the highwayman can be entitled to use force to constrain the


other to perform. To extort the promise was a crime which


deserved the highest punishment, and to extort the performance


would only be adding a new crime to the former. He can complain


of no injury who has been only deceived by the person by whom he


might justly have been killed. To suppose that a judge ought to


enforce the obligation of such promises, or that the magistrate


ought to allow them to sustain action at law, would be the most


ridiculous of all absurdities. If we consider this question,


therefore, as a question of jurisprudence, we can be at no loss


about the decision.


    But if we consider it as a question of casuistry, it will not


be so easily determined. Whether a good man, from a conscientious


regard to that most sacred rule of justice, which commands the


observance of all serious promises, would not think himself bound


to perform, is at least much more doubtful. That no regard is due


to the disappointment of the wretch who brings him into this


situation, that no injury is done to the robber, and consequently


that nothing can be extorted by force, will admit of no sort of


dispute. But whether some regard is not, in this case, due to his


own dignity and honour, to the inviolable sacredness of that part


of his character which makes him reverence the law of truth and


abhor every thing that approaches to treachery and falsehood,


may, perhaps, more reasonably be made a question. The casuists


accordingly are greatly divided about it. One party, with whom we


may count Cicero among the ancients, among the moderns,


Puffendorf, Barbeyrac his commentator, and above all the late Dr


Hutcheson, one who in most cases was by no means a loose casuist,


determine, without any hesitation, that no sort of regard is due


to any such promise, and that to think otherwise is mere weakness


and superstition. Another party, among whom we may reckon


(20*)some of the ancient fathers of the church, as well as some


very eminent modern casuists, have been of another opinion, and


have judged all such promises obligatory.


    If we consider the matter according to the common sentiments


of mankind, we shall find that some regard would be thought due


even to a promise of this kind; but that it is impossible to


determine how much, by any general rule that will apply to all


cases without exception. The man who was quite frank and easy in


making promises of this kind, and who violated them with as


little ceremony, we should not chuse for our friend and


companion. A gentleman who should promise a highwayman five


pounds and not perform, would incur some blame. If the sum


promised, however, was very great, it might be more doubtful,


what was proper to be done. If it was such, for example, that the


payment of it would entirely ruin the family of the promiser, if


it was so great as to be sufficient for promoting the most useful


purposes, it would appear in some measure criminal, at least


extremely improper, to throw it, for the sake of a punctilio,


into such worthless hands. The man who should beggar himself, or


who should throw away an hundred thousand pounds, though he could


afford that vast sum, for the sake of observing such a parole


with a thief, would appear to the common sense of mankind, absurd


and extravagant in the highest degree. Such profusion would seem


inconsistent with his duty, with what he owed both to himself and


others, and what, therefore, regard to a promise extorted in this


manner, could by no means authorise. To fix, however, by any


precise rule, what degree of regard ought to be paid to it, or


what might be the greatest sum which could be due from it, is


evidently impossible. This would vary according to the characters


of the persons, according to their circumstances, according to


the solemnity of the promise, and even according to the incidents


of the rencounter. and if the promiser had been treated with a


great deal of that sort of gallantry, which is sometimes to be


met with in persons of the most abandoned characters, more would


seem due than upon other occasions. It may be said in general,


that exact propriety requires the observance of all such


promises, wherever it is not inconsistent with some other duties


that are more sacred; such as regard to the public interest, to


those whom gratitude, whom natural affection, or whom the laws of


proper beneficence should prompt us to provide for. But, as was


formerly taken notice of, we have no precise rules to determine


what external actions are due from a regard to such motives, nor,


consequently, when it is that those virtues are inconsistent with


the observance of such promises.


    It is to be observed, however, that whenever such promises


are violated, though for the most necessary reasons, it is always


with some degree of dishonour to the person who made them. After


they are made, we may be convinced of the impropriety of


observing them. But still there is some fault in having made


them. It is at least a departure from the highest and noblest


maxims of magnanimity and honour. A brave man ought to die,


rather than make a promise which he can neither keep without


folly, nor violate without ignominy. For some degree of ignominy


always attends a situation of this kind. Treachery and falsehood


are vices so dangerous, so dreadful, and, at the same time, such


as may so easily, and, upon many occasions, so safely be


indulged, that we are more jealous of them than of almost any


other. Our imagination therefore attaches the idea of shame to


all violations of faith, in every circumstance and in every


situation. They resemble, in this respect, the violations of


chastity in the fair sex, a virtue of which, for the like


reasons, we are excessively jealous; and our sentiments are not


more delicate with regard to the one, than with regard to the


other. Breach of chastity dishonours irretrievably. No


circumstances, no solicitation can excuse it; no sorrow, no


repentance atone for it. We are so nice in this respect that even


a rape dishonours, and the innocence of the mind cannot, in our


imagination, wash out the pollution of the body. It is the same


case with the violation of faith, when it has been solemnly


pledged, even to the most worthless of mankind. Fidelity is so


necessary a virtue, that we apprehend it in general to be due


even to those to whom nothing else is due, and whom we think it


lawful to kill and destroy. It is to no purpose that the person


who has been guilty of the breach of it, urges that he promised


in order to save his life, and that he broke his promise because


it was inconsistent with some other respectable duty to keep it.


These circumstances may alleviate, but cannot entirely wipe out


his dishonour. He appears to have been guilty of an action with


which, in the imaginations of men, some degree of shame is


inseparably connected. He has broke a promise which he had


solemnly averred he would maintain; and his character, if not


irretrievably stained and polluted, has at least a ridicule


affixed to it, which it will be very difficult entirely to


efface; and no man, I imagine, who had gone through an adventure


of this kind would be fond of telling the story.


    This instance may serve to show wherein consists the


difference between casuistry and jurisprudence, even when both of


them consider the obligations of the general rules of justice.


    But though this difference be real and essential, though


those two sciences propose quite different ends, the sameness of


the subject has made such a similarity between them, that the


greater part of authors whose professed design was to treat of


jurisprudence, have determined the different questions they


examine, sometimes according to the principles of that science,


and sometimes according to those of casuistry, without


distinguishing, and, perhaps, without being themselves aware when


they did the one, and when the other.


    The doctrine of the casuists, however, is by no means


confined to the consideration of what a conscientious regard to


the general rules of justice would demand of us. It embraces many


other parts of Christian and moral duty. What seems principally


to have given occasion to the cultivation of this species of


science was the custom of auricular confession, introduced by the


Roman Catholic superstition, in times of barbarism and ignorance.


By that institution, the most secret actions, and even the


thoughts of every person, which could be suspected of receding in


the smallest degree from the rules of Christian purity, were to


be revealed to the confessor. The confessor informed his


penitents whether, and in what respect they had violated their


duty, and what penance it behoved them to undergo, before he


could absolve them in the name of the offended Deity.


    The consciousness, or even the suspicion of having done


wrong, is a load upon every mind, and is accompanied with anxiety


and terror in all those who are not hardened by long habits of


iniquity. Men, in this, as in all other distresses, are naturally


eager to disburthen themselves of the oppression which they feel


upon their thoughts, by unbosoming the agony of their mind to


some person whose secrecy and discretion they can confide in. The


shame, which they suffer from this acknowledgment, is fully


compensated by that deviation of their uneasiness which the


sympathy of their confident seldom fails to occasion. It relieves


them to find that they are not altogether unworthy of regard, and


that however their past conduct may be censured, their present


disposition is at least approved of, and is perhaps sufficient to


compensate the other, at least to maintain them in some degree of


esteem with their friend. A numerous and artful clergy had, in


those times of superstition, insinuated themselves into the


confidence of almost every private family. They possessed all the


little learning which the times could afford, and their manners,


though in many respects rude and disorderly, were polished and


regular compared with those of the age they lived in. They were


regarded, therefore, not only as the great directors of all


religious, but of all moral duties. Their familiarity gave


reputation to whoever was so happy as to possess it, and every


mark of their disapprobation stamped the deepest ignominy upon


all who had the misfortune to fall under it. Being considered as


the great judges of right and wrong, they were naturally


consulted about all scruples that occurred, and it was reputable


for any person to have it known that he made those holy men the


confidents of all such secrets, and took no important or delicate


step in his conduct without their advice and approbation. It was


not difficult for the clergy, therefore, to get it established as


a general rule, that they should be entrusted with what it had


already become fashionable to entrust them, and with what they


generally would have been entrusted, though no such rule had been


established. To qualify themselves for confessors became thus a


necessary part of the study of churchmen and divines, and they


were thence led to collect what are called cases of conscience,


nice and delicate situations in which it is hard to determine


whereabouts the propriety of conduct may lie. Such works, they


imagined, might be of use both to the directors of consciences


and to those who were to be directed; and hence the origin of


books of casuistry.


    The moral duties which fell under the consideration of the


casuists were chiefly those which can, in some measure at least,


be circumscribed within general rules, and of which the violation


is naturally attended with some degree of remorse and some dread


of suffering punishment. The design of that institution which


gave occasion to their works, was to appease those terrors of


conscience which attend upon the infringement of such duties. But


it is not every virtue of which the defect is accompanied with


any very severe compunctions of this kind, and no man applies to


his confessor for absolution, because he did not perform the most


generous, the most friendly, or the most magnanimous action


which, in his circumstances, it was possible to perform. In


failures of this kind, the rule that is violated is commonly not


very determinate, and is generally of such a nature too, that


though the observance of it might entitle to honour and reward,


the violation seems to expose to no positive blame, censure, or


punishment. The exercise of such virtues the casuists seem to


have regarded as a sort of works of supererogation, which could


not be very strictly exacted, and which it was therefore


unnecessary for them to treat of.


    The breaches of moral duty, therefore, which came before the


tribunal of the confessor, and upon that account fell under the


cognizance of the casuists, were chiefly of three different


kinds.


    First and principally, breaches of the rules of justice. The


rules here are all express and positive, and the violation of


them is naturally attended with the consciousness of deserving,


and the dread of suffering punishment both from God and man.


    Secondly, breaches of the rules of chastity. These in all


grosser instances are real breaches of the rules of justice, and


no person can be guilty of them without doing the most


unpardonable injury to some other. In smaller instances, when


they amount only to a violation of those exact decorums which


ought to be observed in the conversation of the two sexes, they


cannot indeed justly be considered as violations of the rules of


justice. They are generally, however, violations of a pretty


plain rule, and, at least in one of the sexes, tend to bring


ignominy upon the person who has been guilty of them, and


consequently to be attended in the scrupulous with some degree of


shame and contrition of mind.


    Thirdly, breaches of the rules of veracity. The violation of


truth, it is to be observed, is not always a breach of justice,


though it is so upon many occasions, and consequently cannot


always expose to any external punishment. The vice of common


lying, though a most miserable meanness, may frequently do hurt


to nobody, and in this case no claim of vengeance or satisfaction


can be due either to the persons imposed upon, or to others. But


though the violation of truth is not always a breach of justice,


it is always a breach of a very plain rule, and what naturally


tends to cover with shame the person who has been guilty of it.


    There seems to be in young children an instinctive


disposition to believe whatever they are told. Nature seems to


have judged it necessary for their preservation that they should,


for some time at least, put implicit confidence in those to whom


the care of their childhood, and of the earliest and most


necessary parts of their education, is intrusted. Their


credulity, accordingly, is excessive, and it requires long and


much experience of the falsehood of mankind to reduce them to a


reasonable degree of diffidence and distrust. In grown-up people


the degrees of credulity are, no doubt, very different. The


wisest and most experienced are generally the least credulous.


But the man scarce lives who is not more credulous than he ought


to be, and who does not, upon many occasions, give credit to


tales, which not only turn out to be perfectly false, but which a


very moderate degree of reflection and attention might have


taught him could not well be true. The natural disposition is


always to believe. It is acquired wisdom and experience only that


teach incredulity, and they very seldom teach it enough. The


wisest and most cautious of us all frequently gives credit to


stories which he himself is afterwards both ashamed and


astonished that he could possibly think of believing.


    The man whom we believe is necessarily, in the things


concerning which we believe him, our leader and director, and we


look up to him with a certain degree of esteem and respect. But


as from admiring other people we come to wish to be admired


ourselves; so from being led and directed by other people we


learn to wish to become ourselves leaders and directors. And as


we cannot always be satisfied merely with being admired, unless


we can at the same time persuade ourselves that we are in some


degree really worthy of admiration; so we cannot always be


satisfied merely with being believed, unless we are at the same


time conscious that we are really worthy of belief. As the desire


of praise and that of praise-worthiness, though very much a-kin,


are yet distinct and separate desires; so the desire of being


believed and that of being worthy of belief, though very much


a-kin too, are equally distinct and separate desires.


    The desire of being believed, the desire of persuading, of


leading and directing other people, seems to be one of the


strongest of all our natural desires. It is, perhaps, the


instinct upon which is founded the faculty of speech, the


characteristical faculty of human nature. No other animal


possesses this faculty, and we cannot discover in any other


animal any desire to lead and direct the judgment and conduct of


its fellows. Great ambition, the desire of real superiority, of


leading and directing, seems to be altogether peculiar to man,


and speech is the great instrument of ambition, of real


superiority, of leading and directing the judgments and conduct


of other people.


    It is always mortifying not to be believed, and it is doubly


so when we suspect that it is because we are supposed to be


unworthy of belief and capable of seriously and wilfully


deceiving. To tell a man that he lies, is of all affronts the


most mortal. But whoever seriously and wilfully deceives is


necessarily conscious to himself that he merits this affront,


that he does not deserve to be believed, and that he forfeits all


title to that sort of credit from which alone he can derive any


sort of ease, comfort, or satisfaction in the society of his


equals. The man who had the misfortune to imagine that nobody


believed a single word he said, would feel himself the outcast of


human society, would dread the very thought of going into it, or


of presenting himself before it, and could scarce fail, I think,


to die of despair. It is probable, however, that no man ever had


just reason to entertain this humiliating opinion of himself. The


most notorious liar, I am disposed to believe, tells the fair


truth at least twenty times for once that he seriously and


deliberately lies; and, as in the most cautious the disposition


to believe is apt to prevail over that to doubt and distrust; so


in those who are the most regardless of truth, the natural


disposition to tell it prevails upon most occasions over that to


deceive, or in any respect to alter or disguise it.


    We are mortified when we happen to deceive other people,


though unintentionally, and from having been ourselves deceived.


Though this involuntary falsehood may frequently be no mark of


any want of veracity, of any want of the most perfect love of


truth, it is always in some degree a mark of want of judgment, of


want of memory, of improper credulity, of some degree of


precipitancy and rashness. It always diminishes our authority to


persuade, and always brings some degree of suspicion upon our


fitness to lead and direct. The man who sometimes misleads from


mistake, however, is widely different from him who is capable of


wilfully deceiving. The former may safely be trusted upon many


occasions; the latter very seldom upon any.


    Frankness and openness conciliate confidence. We trust the


man who seems willing to trust us. We see clearly, we think, the


road by which he means to conduct us, and we abandon ourselves


with pleasure to his guidance and direction. Reserve and


concealment, on the contrary, call forth diffidence. We are


afraid to follow the man who is going we do not know where. The


great pleasure of conversation and society, besides, arises from


a certain correspondence of sentiments and opinions, from a


certain harmony of minds, which like so many musical instruments


coincide and keep time with one another. But this most delightful


harmony cannot be obtained unless there is a free communication


of sentiments and opinions. We all desire, upon this account, to


feel how each other is affected, to penetrate into each other's


bosoms, and to observe the sentiments and affections which really


subsist there. The man who indulges us in this natural passion,


who invites us into his heart, who, as it were, sets open the


gates of his breast to us, seems to exercise a species of


hospitality more delightful than any other. No man, who is in


ordinary good temper, can fail of pleasing, if he has the courage


to utter his real sentiments as he feels them, and because he


feels them. It is this unreserved sincerity which renders even


the prattle of a child agreeable. How weak and imperfect soever


the views of the open-hearted, we take pleasure to enter into


them, and endeavour, as much as we can, to bring down our own


understanding to the level of their capacities, and to regard


every subject in the particular light in which they appear to


have considered it. This passion to discover the real sentiments


of others is naturally so strong, that it often degenerates into


a troublesome and impertinent curiosity to pry into those secrets


of our neighbours which they have very justifiable reasons for


concealing; and, upon many occasions, it requires prudence and a


strong sense of propriety to govern this, as well as all the


other passions of human nature, and to reduce it to that pitch


which any impartial spectator can approve of. To disappoint this


curiosity, however, when it is kept within proper bounds, and


aims at nothing which there can be any just reason for


concealing, is equally disagreeable in its turn. The man who


eludes our most innocent questions, who gives no satisfaction to


our most inoffensive inquiries, who plainly wraps himself up in


impenetrable obscurity, seems, as it were, to build a wall about


his breast. We run forward to get within it, with all the


eagerness of harmless curiosity; and feel ourselves all at once


pushed back with the rudest and most offensive violence.


    The man of reserve and concealment, though seldom a very


amiable character, is not disrespected or despised. He seems to


feel coldly towards us, and we feel as coldly towards him. He is


not much praised or beloved, but he is as little hated or blamed.


He very seldom, however, has occasion to repent of his caution,


and is generally disposed rather to value himself upon the


prudence of his reserve. Though his conduct, therefore, may have


been very faulty, and sometimes even hurtful, he can very seldom


be disposed to lay his case before the casuists, or to fancy that


he has any occasion for their acquittal or approbation.


    It is not always so with the man, who, from false


information, from inadvertency, from precipitancy and rashness,


has involuntarily deceived. Though it should be in a matter of


little consequence, in telling a piece of common news, for


example, if he is a real lover of truth, he is ashamed of his own


carelessness, and never fails to embrace the first opportunity of


making the fullest acknowledgments. If it is in a matter of some


consequence, his contrition is still greater; and if any unlucky


or fatal consequence has followed from his misinformation, he can


scarce ever forgive himself. Though not guilty, he feels himself


to be in the highest degree, what the ancients called, piacular,


and is anxious and eager to make every sort of atonement in his


power. Such a person might frequently be disposed to lay his case


before the casuists, who have in general been very favourable to


him, and though they have sometimes justly condemned him for


rashness, they have universally acquitted him of the ignominy of


falsehood.


    But the man who had the most frequent occasion to consult


them, was the man of equivocation and mental reservation, the man


who seriously and deliberately meant to deceive, but who, at the


same time, wished to flatter himself that he had really told the


truth. With him they have dealt variously. When they approved


very much of the motives of his deceit, they have sometimes


acquitted him, though, to do them justice, they have in general


and much more frequently condemned him.


    The chief subjects of the works of the casuists, therefore,


were the conscientious regard that is due to the rules of


justice; how far we ought to respect the life and property of our


neighbour; the duty of restitution; the laws of chastity and


modesty, and wherein consisted what, in their language, are


called the sins of concupiscence; the rules of veracity, and the


obligation of oaths, promises, and contracts of all kinds.


    It may be said in general of the works of the casuists that


they attempted, to no purpose, to direct by precise rules what it


belongs to feeling and sentiment only to judge of. How is it


possible to ascertain by rules the exact point at which, in every


case, a delicate sense of justice begins to run into a frivolous


and weak scrupulosity of conscience? When it is that secrecy and


reserve begin to grow into dissimulation? How far an agreeable


irony may be carried, and at what precise point it begins to


degenerate into a detest. able lie? What is the highest pitch of


freedom and ease of behaviour which can be regarded as graceful


and becoming, and when it is that it first begins to run into a


negligent and thoughtless licentiousness? With regard to all such


matters, what would hold good in any one case would scarce do so


exactly in any other, and what constitutes the propriety and


happiness of behaviour varies in every case with the smallest


variety of situation. Books of casuistry, therefore, are


generally as useless as they are commonly tiresome. They could be


of little use to one who should consult them upon occasion, even


supposing their decisions to be just; because, notwithstanding


the multitude of cases collected in them, yet upon account of the


still greater variety of possible circumstances, it is a chance,


if among all those cases there be found one exactly parallel to


that under consideration. One, who is really anxious to do his


duty, must be very weak, if he can imagine that he has much


occasion for them; and with regard to one who is negligent of it,


the style of those writings is not such as is likely to awaken


him to more attention. None of them tend to animate us to what is


generous and noble. None of them tend to soften us to what is


gentle and humane. Many of them, on the contrary, tend rather to


teach us to chicane with our own consciences, and by their vain


subtilties serve to authorise innumerable evasive refinements


with regard to the most essential articles of our duty. That


frivolous accuracy which they attempted to introduce into


subjects which do not admit of it, almost necessarily betrayed


them into those dangerous errors, and at the same time rendered


their works dry and disagreeable, abounding in abtruse and


metaphysical distinctions, but incapable of exciting in the heart


any of those emotions which it is the principal use of books of


morality to excite.


    The two useful parts of moral philosophy, therefore, are


Ethics and Jurisprudence: casuistry ought to be rejected


altogether; and the ancient moralists appear to have judged much


better, who, in treating of the same subjects, did not affect any


such nice exactness, but contented themselves with describing, in


a general manner, what is the sentiment upon which justice,


modesty, and veracity are founded, and what is the ordinary way


of acting to which those virtues would commonly prompt us.


    Something, indeed, not unlike the doctrine of the casuists,


seems to have been attempted by several philosophers. There is


something of this kind in the third book of Cicero's Offices,


where he endeavours like a casuist to give rules for our conduct


in many nice cases, in which it is difficult to determine


whereabouts the point of propriety may lie. It appears too, from


many passages in the same book, that several other philosophers


had attempted something of the same kind before him. Neither he


nor they, however, appear to have aimed at giving a complete


system of this sort, but only meant to show how situations may


occur, in which it is doubtful, whether the highest propriety of


conduct consists in observing or in receding from what, in


ordinary cases, are the rules of duty.


    Every system of positive law may be regarded as a more or


less imperfect attempt towards a system of natural jurisprudence,


or towards an enumeration of the particular rules of justice. As


the violation of justice is what men will never submit to from


one another, the public magistrate is under a necessity of


employing the power of the commonwealth to enforce the practice


of this virtue. Without this precaution, civil society would


become a scene of bloodshed and disorder, every man revenging


himself at his own hand whenever he fancied he was injured. To


prevent the confusion which would attend upon every man's doing


justice to himself, the magistrate, in all governments that have


acquired any considerable authority, undertakes to do justice to


all, and promises to hear and to redress every complaint of


injury. In all well-governed states too, not only judges are


appointed for determining the controversies of individuals, but


rules are prescribed for regulating the decisions of those


judges; and these rules are, in general, intended to coincide


with those of natural justice. It does not, indeed, always happen


that they do so in every instance. Sometimes what is called the


constitution of the state, that is, the interest of the


government; sometimes the interest of particular orders of men


who tyrannize the government, warp the positive laws of the


country from what natural justice would prescribe. In some


countries, the rudeness and barbarism of the people hinder the


natural sentiments of justice from arriving at that accuracy and


precision which, in more civilized nations, they naturally attain


to. Their laws are, like their manners, gross and rude and


undistinguishing. In other countries the unfortunate constitution


of their courts of judicature hinders any regular system of


jurisprudence from ever establishing itself among them, though


the improved manners of the people may be such as would admit of


the most accurate. In no country do the decisions of positive law


coincide exactly, in every case, with the rules which the natural


sense of justice would dictate. Systems of positive law,


therefore, though they deserve the greatest authority, as the


records of the sentiments of mankind in different ages and


nations, yet can never be regarded as accurate systems of the


rules of natural justice.


    It might have been expected that the reasonings of lawyers,


upon the different imperfections and improvements of the laws of


different countries, should have given occasion to an inquiry


into what were the natural rules of justice independent of all


positive institution. It might have been expected that these


reasonings should have led them to aim at establishing a system


of what might properly be called natural jurisprudence, or a


theory of the general principles which ought to run through and


be the foundation of the laws of all nations. But though the


reasonings of lawyers did produce something of this kind, and


though no man has treated systematically of the laws of any


particular country, without intermixing in his work many


observations of this sort; it was very late in the world before


any such general system was thought of, or before the philosophy


of law was treated of by itself, and without regard to the


particular institutions of any one nation. In none of the ancient


moralists, do we find any attempt towards a particular


enumeration of the rules of justice. Cicero in his Offices, and


Aristotle in his Ethics, treat of justice in the same general


manner in which they treat of all the other virtues. In the laws


of Cicero and Plato, where we might naturally have expected some


attempts towards an enumeration of those rules of natural equity,


which ought to be enforced by the positive laws of every country,


there is, however, nothing of this kind. Their laws are laws of


police, not of justice. Grotius seems to have been the first who


attempted to give the world any thing like a system of those


principles which ought to ruin through, and be the foundation of


the laws of all nations: and his treatise of the laws of war and


peace, with all its imperfections, is perhaps at this day the


most complete work that has yet been given upon this subject. I


shall in another discourse endeavour to give an account of the


general principles of law and government, and of the different


revolutions they have undergone in the different ages and periods


of society, not only in what concerns justice, but in what


concerns police, revenue, and arms, and whatever else is the


object of law. I shall not, therefore, at present enter into any


further detail concerning the history of jurisprudence.





NOTES:





1. See Plato de Rep. lib. iv.





2. The distributive justice of Aristotle is somewhat different.


It consists in the proper distribution of rewards from the public


stock of a community. See Aristotle Ethic. Nic. l.5.c.2.





3. See Artistotle Ethic. Nic. l.a.c.5. et seq. et l.3.c.3 et seq.





4. See Aristotle Ethic. Nic. lib. ii. ch 1, 2, 3, and 4.





5. See Aristotle Mag. Mor. lib. i. ch. 1.





6. See Cicero de finibus. lib. iii.; also Dogenes Laertius in


Zenone, lib. vii. segment 84.





7. Arrian. lib. ii.c.5.





8. See Cicero de finibus, lib. 3. c.28. Olivet's edition.





9. See Cicero de finibus. lib. i. Diogenes Laert. i, x.





10. Prima naturae.





11. See Inquiry concerning Virtue, sect. 1 and 2.





12. Inquiry concerning virtue, sect. 2. art. 4. also


Illustrations on the moral sense, sect. 5. last paragraph.





13. Luxury and lust.





14. Fable of the Bees.





15. Puffendorff, Mandeville.





16. Immutable Morality, l. 1.





17. Inquiry concerning Virtue.





18. Treatise of the Passions.





19. Illustrations upon the Moral Sense, sect. 1, p. 237, et seq.; third edition.





20. St Augustine, La Placette.







The End
