



Natural Value

	by Friedrich Wieser



Book 5

The Natural Cost Value of Products

Chapter 1

The Law of Costs

    Production goods which are capable of being employed in
several ways receive their value, as we are aware, from the value
of the least of their products, the production of which is
economically permissible; that is, from the marginal product or
from their contribution to the product. This value attaches
equally to all similar articles or similar items of a productive
stock, even to those which are actually employed in more
remunerative ways. In a stock of iron each part has an equal
value with every similar part in the stock, based on the marginal
contribution. It is the same with a stock of coal; the same with
any available supply of labour of equal quality; the same with
any other production good. Assume that, in a productive stock of
the class a, the item put to the most insignificant use gives a
product of 1, every item in the stock will have the value of 1;
every item of the class b has the value of 2, if the marginal
productive contribution of the class be 2, and every item of the
class c has the value of 3, if the marginal productive
contribution amounts to 3. 
    Now, as a rule (the exceptions will be discussed later on)
production goods retain that value which is ascribed to them
before the beginning of the production -- in anticipation of the
best possible result, -- after the completion of the process of
production; that is to say, they retain it still in the products
which they have been transformed into. To take the former
figures, the product of the elements 10a + 10b + 10c, will, as a
rule have the value 10 + 20 + 30 + 60, and the product of the
elements 10a + 20b + 10c, will have the value 10 + 40 + 30 = 80. 
    This law may be expressed differently according as we state
it from the side of production goods or from that of products. 
    In the former case it runs thus: -- similar production goods
maintain, as a rule, in every product, first, a similar value,
and second, that value as it attaches to them through their
marginal productive contribution. This is the correct formula. As
the law of costs is usually understood, however, the second
clause would be left out; thus giving a formula for relative
values, but not for absolute amounts of value. 
    In the latter case the law runs thus: -- the value of a
product is, as a rule, a complex obtained by multiplying the
quantity of production goods employed by the value of the
productive unit, or -- taking into consideration the fact that
every product is always produced from several productive factors
-- it is a sum of such complexes (10a + 10b + 10c, or 10a + 20b +
10c, and so on). From this formula, which indicates the absolute
amounts of value, there follows another for the relations of
value. It is that the values of products which have one
productive factor in common are, to each other, in respect of
this common factor, as the quantities of it requisite for their
production. This is the correct formula. As usually understood
the law runs more briefly thus; -- the values of products are to
each other as the costs requisite for their production. This,
again, is merely a relative, not an absolute expression. Closer
consideration shows that it is not possible to apply this
relative formula so long as it stands alone. The amount 10a + 20b
+ 10c is not twice as great as the amount 10a + 10b + 10c, but
twice as great only as regards the factor b; the general relation
can only be established when the absolute values of a, b, and c,
are known. If a = 10, b = 20, and c = 30, the ratio is as 80 to
60; if b = 100, it is as 240 to 140. 
    In the Ursprung des Werthes I called products which have one
productive factor in common Productionsverwandt, which may be
rendered in English as "cognate." They represent, as it were, the
descending line of this factor, and stand to one another in
collateral relationship. All products made from the same quality
of iron are cognate. Many products are cognate to each other in
more than one respect, e.g. products of iron in the making of
which have been expended similar kinds of labour or similar fuel.
Understood in this sense, it is always cognate products to which
the law just stated refers. 
    This is the well-known law of costs. The task now lies before
us to explain and prove it.(1*)

NOTES:

1. I have formulated the law of costs only with relation to the
so-called costs of production. Besides this we speak sometimes of
costs, when we refer to expenses of purchase. By this is meant
the sums of money a buyer has to expend to obtain possession of
goods. An exactly analogous law obtains as regards these costs.
All sums of money of equal amount destined for the purchase of
goods ave equal value to the one owner, and all goods purchased
for money -- under certain assumptions entirely analogous to
those conditions which hold as regards the law of costs in
production -- have to the one owner a value in proportion to
their costs of purchase (see Book II, chap. ii). The law of costs
of production has, however, a more far-reaching importance than
the law of costs of purchase, inasmuch as it is not, like the
latter, limited subjectively, but also holds as regards objective
exchange value. In consideration of these more far-reaching
effects it is entitled to a special statement. 
    Sax has stated the conception of costs still more
comprehensively (see chap. 56 in his Grundlegung der
Staatswirthschaft). Nevertheless, important though the results
thus obtained may be, it appears to me that, for the reason just
stated, it is right to hold by the narrower conception of the
costs of production, as against this wider one. 
    In connection with the present book, see Ursprung des
Werthes, pp. 97, 103, and 146; further, in Böhm-Bawerk's Werth,
pp. 61 and 534; as also Sax, p. 327; and, finally, the parts
referring to this subject in Jevons and Walras. Menger does not
treat of costs. 

Chapter 2

The Conception of Costs

    Whatever economic production goods a man has within his
disposal, whether lands, capital, or labour power, he counts part
of his wealth -- although they do not directly increase his
satisfactions; and he does so with just as much right as he
counts those consumption goods wealth which permit of direct
enjoyment. The possession of production goods gives the promise
of acquiring consumption goods later. Production, therefore, not
only creates value, it also destroys value. Only so long as one
is taken by surprise at the emergence of productive value, in
that it is unexpected, is it reckoned as pure gain. When the
Phoenicians -- as the fable goes -- accidentally came upon glass
among the ashes, only the gain of production would be present to
their minds; but whoever, thereafter, began to produce glass, and
in doing so was obliged to pay attention to the materials of its
production, would learn perforce the destructive part of
production. If production, on the one side, brings forth
products, it limits, on the other, the producing powers. On this
account it is every one's duty to see that his production is
always directed towards the greatest possible result, in case he
should consume more value than he will eventually gain. 
    This circumstance receives more distinct form and emphasis in
the case of production goods capable of many and various
employments. Here care must be taken to choose those employments
which will prove the most economically efficient, both as regards
kind and amount. Circulating capital or labour power devoted to
any one production, is thereby absolutely withdrawn from all
others; the same is true of fixed capital, and even of
unconsumable land, during the period of the production to which
they are devoted. In consideration of this fact the devotion of
means of production to individual undertaking must always be well
considered. It is necessary, for this end, that the man who
resolves on the making of one special product, should form an
exact idea of the value of all the other products whose
manufacture is thereby rendered impossible. But how can this be
done? It is done by taking account of the value of their common
economic factors of production. In these factors the value of all
"cognate" products, without exception, is incorporated.
Productive value, consequently, occupies a position of mention
among the whole circle of cognate products. Whenever the value of
any class of products falls or rises, and thereby either the
extension or the limitation of other branches of production is
demanded,(1*) the effect is first communicated to productive
value, and is then passed on from productive value. The products
and the value of the products adjust themselves, in each
individual case, to the productive value, and the productive
value indicates the limit of production common to all. 
    In this way we reach the point of view from which production
goods are conceived of as costs. The first element in it is that
the productive employment figures as outlay, as sacrifice, as
loss; the second is that, in virtue of this, attention is called
to the equalisation of several connected productions. To say that
any kind of production involves cost, simply implies that the
economic means of production, which could doubtless have been
usefully employed in other directions, are either used up in it,
or are suspended during it. Costs are production goods when these
are devoted to one individual employment, and, on account of
their capacity of being otherwise employed, take the shape of
outlay, expenditure.(2*) The measure for estimating costs is
always the productive marginal utility, as it is found on
consideration of all the employments economically permissible. 
    Thus only those production goods which we have already (in
Book III. chap. xii) called "cost goods," as opposed to "monopoly
goods," can be regarded as costs. Productive elements which admit
of only one kind of employment, do not share the multiplicity of
conditions necessary for the emergence of what we recognise as
costs. A mineral spring, which can be used only by drawing off
its contents and putting them into bottles, must, obviously,
stand in a quite different relation to the value of the product
from the unskilled labour which fills the bottles, but is capable
of a hundred other uses besides. "Monopoly goods" simply take to
themselves the value of the products imputed to them, and do not
conduct it back again to these products, as do "cost goods," --
while cost goods are the parent goods of the great productive
relationships, within which they act as combining forces and
equalisers of value. The more various the employments of any
productive element are, and the shorter the processes are, -- as
this continually necessitates new deliberations as to how the
goods are to be employed next -- the more does their employment
in production obtain the character of a sacrifice whose amount
must be well weighed if the proper balance of production is to be
maintained. Unskilled labour and the commonest kinds of floating
capital, are, consequently, the goods to which the conception of
costs most frequently applies. 

NOTES:

1. If, for instance, the price of cotton thread is reduced,
thread manufacturers will not pay the former price for cotton
yarns. But if cotton spinners are compelled to quote a lower
price to thread manufacturers they cannot ask a higher price from
cloth weavers. Thus the weavers get their raw material cheaper
because of the fall in the price of the cognate product, thread,
and this tends to an extension of the cloth manufacture. -- W.S. 

2. This definition requires a slight readjustment only in so far
as interest and land rent (see below, Book V. chaps. xi and xii)
are reckoned among costs. Interest and rent -- or the goods which
constitute them -- are not production goods; they are simply
elements of the production calculus as production goods are. 

Chapter 3

Foundation of the Law of Costs

    The value of costs determines the value of products in two
ways. In general it determines it indirectly, by regulating the
supply produced; but, in individual cases, it determines it
directly by communicating the amount of its own value without any
intermediary. 
    First: as regards the indirect action of costs. In the value
of the costs is expressed the expectation of the greatest
possible return from production. In order to fulfil this
expectation, the relation between the amounts of all cognate
products turned out must be well weighed and proportioned. If too
much be produced in any one direction a loss will have to be
borne elsewhere, which will be more sensible than the gain
resulting from the over-production. If too little be produced in
any one direction a similar loss will be felt, which it will be
impossible to make good by over-production elsewhere. 
    Whether too much or too little has been produced is seen
exactly in the value. If the value of products -- as it results
from the equation between supply and demand -- is less than that
of the costs, too much has been produced; the costs which should
have brought forth products having higher value have brought
forth only goods having less value. Where the value of the
product exceeds that of the costs, too little has been produced
-- with one exception which will be mentioned shortly; -- the
costs have not been employed entirely in bringing forth products
of the highest value the very anticipation of which gave the
costs their value. If products, then, are to be produced neither
over nor under cost they must be produced exactly at cost value,
if they are to find the most economically advantageous
distribution of production.
    If we ask why products thus produced -- neither under nor
over costs -- have value, and why they have definite amounts of
value, we shall doubtless find that they have themselves alone to
thank for it. They create it out of their utility, taking into
consideration the amounts produced. The circumstance that costs
of a certain value have been expended in making them, is of no
consequence as regards their value. The cost value does not
determine the use value; the use value exists of itself, and
sanctions the cost value. 
    Second: as regards the direct action of costs. Under certain
circumstances it is economically permissible to produce things
whose use value exceeds their cost value, while they must, none
the less, be estimated at their cost value. This direct action is
the most striking of the two. Assume that the amount of costs
necessary for an article has the value of 6, and that the first
article produced has a use value of 10, while the use value of a
second article would amount to only 1 (compare Book I. chap. iv
and Book III. chap. viii): the production must be confined to one
article. How is it to be valued? This will depend upon
circumstances. In a moment of extreme danger a weapon will be
estimated according to its use value. But suppose a man to be
leisurely preparing and equipping himself for an adventuresome
journey, he will not think of valuing the best of weapons more
highly than the materials and labour available for the purpose of
producing and reproducing them. The loss of the weapon can always
be made good -- supposing one has the necessary leisure and means
for its reproduction -- by a sacrifice in costs, the amount of
which is certainly less than the importance possessed by the
weapon itself in a moment of urgent need. A good having a use
value equal to 10, and a cost value equal to 6, must be estimated
at 6, so long as its reproduction is possible and the
satisfaction of want is not prejudiced by the delay. 
    The same argument as leads to our valuing at marginal utility
any single item of a stock which happens to be actually devoted
to satisfying a want of higher grade, leads to our valuing at
cost value and no more, a product whose specific use value
exceeds its cost value, supposing we have also in our possession
the means of producing and reproducing it at the proper moment.
For, as, in the one case, the marginal use is really the only use
threatened, so, in the other, the cost value is the only value
threatened. Here is a new application of the marginal law. 
    Cases of the kind just described attract particular notice on
account of the fact that the influence of costs upon the value of
products is independent of amounts produced. If the cost value,
in the example just given, rise from 6 to 9, or fall to 2, one
product only will be produced, and its value likewise will follow
the changes of the cost value, and rise to 9 or fall to 2,
without the amounts produced being changed. Ricardo, with the
keenness of observation peculiar to him, pointed to the
consideration of those instances, in which the value of the
product adjusts itself to the cost value without any change of
amounts, as a very important one from the point of theory. As a
matter of fact it is so, although Ricardo was wrong in the place
he gave it. He wished to prove from it that costs are
fundamentally an independent source of value, whereas, as a
matter of fact, it proves simply that costs may, in certain
isolated cases, directly determine the amount of the value of
products. It is, however, chiefly decisive in that it gives us an
insight into the connections of the process of valuation such as
could scarcely be obtained otherwise. It gives us, indeed, the
most unequivocal and umdeniable application of the marginal law
that it is possible to find anywhere. 
    Moreover, even in this case, the fact that costs have been
expended is of no importance as regards the value of products.
The decisive circumstance is, that costs could again be expended,
and secure a higher utility at a less sacrifice of utility.(1*)

NOTES:

1. The foundation of the law of costs given in the text appears
to be applicable only to natural value, and not to exchange value
or price. But it is also applicable to them. The proximate
explanation of the validity of the law of costs, in the case of
price, is that producers are not willing to sell under cost, and
-- where there is free competition -- are not able to sell over
cost. But why is it that they will not sell in the former case,
and why does competition make it impossible to sell in the
latter? In the last resort it is because every one applies for
himself, as well as he is able, the natural laws of valuation,
and those laws bring him to that amount of product, or that
valuation of what is produced, from which the law of costs
results. Competition -- i.e. the efforts of others who apply the
same natural laws -- then forces him to give expression, in the
price which he asks from the consumers, to the valuation which he
has made for himself. The actual position of price depends,
therefore, essentially upon the actual position of competition,
particularly on how far the efforts of competition are limited by
the "hindrances to equalisation." These "hindrances" are
peculiarly strong in international trade, in which, accordingly,
the law of costs holds only very slightly. 

Chapter 4

Conditions Under Which the Law of Cost Obtains

    It is unnecessary to say that products only come under the
law of costs. The products which principally come under this law
are those which are produced frequently, regularly, and in large
amounts, and, in particular, those in the production of which
cost-goods are exclusively employed. Products whose manufacture
is strictly and narrowly limited by confessedly monopoly goods do
not experience the influence of costs at all. All alterations in
costs in such cases go, not to products, but to the monopoly
factors of production; every dilution of costs raises, and every
increase lowers, the value of these factors.(1*)
    Such products too as are to be re-employed in production --
i.e. all produced concrete forms of capital, or "capital goods,"
as we may call them for convenience sake -- come under the law of
costs. Thus the valuation of capital becomes an exceedingly
complicated matter. One has always to combine two things; -- the
return to the capital and its costs. Both amounts stand in mutual
relation, and tend, so far as possible, towards equality. The
greater the value of the return, the greater the costs that may
be expended in producing it; and the greater will be the
expenditure of costs, so far as is practicable and necessary: the
smaller the requisite expenditure of costs, the smaller will
finally be the value of the return, whether this result from the
fact that production finally is correspondingly extended, or from
the fact that the valuation of the utility is directly pressed
down to the level of the costs. If a machine does very good work,
that is a cause for valuing it highly; but if it can be cheaply
produced, the machine itself, and, finally, its products also,
will find a low value. The costs of producing capital transmit
their effects right down to the fruits of the capital, however
remote these may be, so long as they fall within the producer's
field of vision, and can be taken into consideration in the
estimates of value. 
    Products which come under the law of costs do not, however,
come under it in all circumstances. To do so they must come under
consideration as products, i.e. as dependent upon the elements
from which they are formed. If they are estimated independently,
if they are valued in isolation and for themselves, their own
utility alone -- or their marginal utility -- will determine
their value, without their productive marginal utility being
taken into consideration at all. 
    This is most clearly seen in the case of the immediate
determination of value by costs. Why in this case is the
valuation made according to costs? Because the products can
always be obtained again at the sacrifice of the costs, and, just
on that account, only when they can be obtained at this
sacrifice. If the possibility of their reproduction be excluded
through any circumstance whatever -- say e.g. that the import of
some article is stopped by a blockade, or that demand has
increased so rapidly that production cannot keep pace with it, --
the value will be estimated at the full amount of the utility (or
marginal utility) which the products are expected to give. As a
rule, there are such abundant supplies of all products -- partly
in the possession of private householders, partly in the larger
stores of producers and merchants  -- that people are provided
against the smaller increases in demand. Valuation by costs is
suspended only in the case of large and permanent disturbance of
production. If reproduction remains possible, although at a
higher outlay than before, -- not, however, coming up to the
height of utility, -- the law of costs will still obtain, only
that the determining amount of costs will have risen. If demand
decrease, or unforeseen supplies increase the stock, to such an
extent that the marginal utility falls below the amount of costs,
the law of costs will be suspended until marginal utility shall
have so far risen as to render production again practicable. 
    The same applies where costs do not directly determine value,
but determine, in the first instance, only the extent of
production. The influence of costs ceases so soon as, and so far
as, the possibility of production ceases. Here again may be
observed the same influence of accumulated stocks -- that,
through the medium of them, all smaller disturbances in the
provision for want are equalised.(2*)
    When the disturbances which caused the suspension or
imitation of the law of costs are over, it again becomes active.
So far as is at all possible, men try to conduct production
according to a universal plan which embraces all the productions
"cognate" at the time. Isolated production prevents complete
utilisation of the means of production; it limits provisions for
human want too greatly at certain points, while going too far in
other directions, or, what is still worse, leaving production at
certain points entirely alone. On this account there is always a
tendency to return to the most comprehensive conditions of
production, and thus, so far as is possible, to the valuation
according to costs. 
    If society were ever to arrive, in its economic life, at such
perfection and control that no plan of production ever
miscarried, that there was no interruption in exchange, that no
unforeseen loss of goods happened, that all acquisitions of goods
could be anticipated to the fullest extent and in the most exact
degree, that, finally, the demands should never vary or, at
least, that the variations should always be adequately
anticipated: -- in such circumstances the law of costs would be
the only form in which the general law of value would appear as
regards those goods in respect to which it holds. It is not to be
expected that any disposition of affairs could bring social
economy to such perfection. Even in the most perfect condition of
society there will be changes, such as must for the moment limit
or extend the sphere over which the law of costs holds sway. 
    If the socialists expect that, in their future state,
valuation by costs will be all-sufficient, they are in error,
unless man is able to exert such mastery over the natural
conditions of the life of goods, that no harvest shall ever fail,
or, indeed, be overabundant; and, moreover, unless the national
life can be assured of a perfectly peaceful course, such as can
be conceived of only when war has ceased, when invention is no
more, and when no new need ever emerges. 

NOTES:

1. Thus in the cotton thread trade neither changes in wages nor
in the price of raw material seem to affect prices; they only
increase or decrease profits. -- W.S.

2. Up to a certain point costs do -- even in such cases as these
-- directly determine value. All goods that can be supplemented
from stocks in warehouses and the like, which stocks again can be
renewed through production, thereby appear to us directly as mere
combinations of their productive elements. And to this extent it
may be said that, on the whole, the cases where costs directly
determine value predominate. 

Chapter 5

The Determining Amount of Costs

    The circumstance, as such, that a good has involved costs,
and that it has involved a certain amount of costs, does not
determine its value. Not only must the conditions under which the
law of costs obtains be fulfilled, but the justifiable amount of
costs must be observed. 
    It is only the "socially necessary" costs, the smallest
amount of costs required, that determines value, whether the
determination is "indirect" or "direct." In cases of "indirect"
determination, cost value requires the sanction of use value.
Whatever is expended uselessly receives no value, and whatever is
superfluously expended, -- expended in excess of what is
necessary to obtain the utility -- receives no value. In cases of
"direct" determination of value, the important thing from the
first is the outlay requisite for reproduction. 
    The value of products which are economically produced with
the smallest cost, must consequently alter should there be, later
on, any change in the determining amount of costs. And, in
particular, if the amount of costs should become less, the value
of commodities produced at the old dearer rate must fall, from
the moment when the new and cheap goods are capable of meeting
the demand, or even sooner than this, so far as the old stocks
are large and dare not be held back in view of the increasing
production. 
    It may be that all the products in demand cannot be produced
at the one cheapest rate of cost. Then, of necessity, the amount
of costs must rise. The value of goods produced at different
costs is determined throughout by the highest cost necessary; the
portion which has been produced at the greatest expense must be
valued correspondingly high, if it is permissible to produce it
at all at so great an expense; and the other portion, which has
been produced more cheaply, must be valued equally high, because
all products of equal quality must have equal value. 
    All these propositions are well known both theoretically and
practically, so far as regards exchange value. It is of interest
for us to know that they also obtain as regards natural value. 

Chapter 6

The Law of Costs and the General Law of Value

    If the statement of the law of costs just laid down be
correct, there can be no doubt regarding its relation to the
general law of value. 
    Between costs and utility there is no fundamental opposition.
Costs are goods valued, in the individual case, according to
their general utility. The opposition between costs and utility
is only that between the utility of the individual case, and
utility on the whole. Whoever thinks of "utility" without
thinking of "costs," simply neglects, in the utility of one
production, the utility of the others. And whoever produces, in
the individual case, at the least cost, produces, on the whole,
with the highest utility, inasmuch as he thus saves all the
opportunities of utility possible, and consequently in the long
run utilises all these opportunities to the utmost extent. 
    Thus where the law of costs obtains, utility remains the
source of value. More than this, marginal utility remains the
measure of value. The only thing is that utility and marginal
utility are no longer determined in a one-sided way within the
limits of each particular group of products, but over the entire
field of cognate production. Over this field it is always the
common productive marginal utility that decides. The result of
the productive combination 10a + 10b + 10c possesses the common
marginal utility of all productive goods of the class A ten
times, and so with the classes B and C. It consequently stands in
a definite ratio of value to the product resulting from 10a + 20b
+ 10c, and this ratio corresponds to the general law of value,
according to which separate parts of a stock are to be valued by
multiplying the number of items by the marginal utility. Even
products which, in outward appearance and destination, are
entirely different from one another, if traced back to the
productive elements of their manufacture come ultimately into the
same value relations as do the separate parts of a stock. A
cupboard and a table are in themselves different goods; reduced
to their productive factors they are of the same nature, belong
to the same class of supply, and receive a corresponding
expression of value. The law of costs is a peculiar and
complicated conception of the general law of value, used in a
peculiar and complicated case, vis. where the connection of goods
with one and the same stock is not apparent from their outward
appearance, but can only be recognised after reduction to the
productive elements of their manufacture.
     This statement would be imperfect if we did not add that the
law of costs as regards products is by far the most usual form
assumed by the general law of value. Products of almost every
kind are continually being reproduced, and consequently their
value must continually be decided by comparing the amount of the
productive supplies with the amount of the productive demand. The
vast majority of changes in value are occasioned by the changes
which occur in the coming forward of production goods (or in
their production, where they are themselves objects of
production), as also by technical changes, or changes in the
conditions of production which make the quantity of costs
necessary to produce the goods greater or less. Thus it happens
that variations in the value of products are traceable, in the
majority of cases, to some cause which is to be found in
production goods. Even in cases where the change of value first
arises in the demand and in the products, the effect of this
circumstance communicates itself, through the medium of the cost
goods, to the cognate products, and causes their value to rise or
fall. A product which is "cognate" with a hundred others, will,
in all probability, be affected a hundred times by changes in
their supply and demand relations, for once that it is affected
by a change in its own relations; and all these influences are
communicated to it from outside through the cost value. And thus
it is that changes in any single supply and demand must pass
without leaving any trace, unless they chance to be exceedingly
comprehensive, and are, therefore, capable, as against the supply
and demand over the whole circle of cognate production, of
disturbing the determining marginal utility. 
    The phenomena of costs are, therefore, a new proof of how
greatly the objective conditions of the existence of goods
influence the value of goods. How far the value of goods, in its
final form of "cost value," is from being the mirror of that
subjective fact from which it is derived -- the value of wants!
The circumstance that cognate products are produced by different
quantities of the same productive elements, brings their
subjective valuations into a ratio, the terms of which are
derived entirely from the objective conditions of production;
while the impulses which call for their emergence, as well as the
absolute value amounts of the elements whose multiples enter into
the ratio, remain subjective, and thus prove the subjectivity of
the source and nature of value.
    It was impossible that the influence of costs upon the value
of products could escape the observation of economists. None the
less has recognition by economic theory of the law of costs
remained for long very imperfect. It was conceived of only as a
relative law -- that the value of products was as the quantity of
costs; but as to what was the nature of costs, whence they
themselves receive their measure, what absolute amounts might
accrue to the value of products, -- on these points economists
were no more capable of saying anything than they were capable of
explaining the numerous contradictions which were inevitable so
long as costs were conceived as the final cause of the value of
products. Possibly it is the greatest triumph of the theory of
marginal utility that it fully explains the obscure conception of
costs, with which every other theory had to reckon, and with
which no theory could come to any reckoning. The labour theory
alone has attempted it, but it has thereby -- as we shall go on
to show -- introduced into theoretic political economy the
greatest errors that have ever been perpetrated within its
sphere. 

Chapter 7

The So-Called Costs of Production of Labour

    Through a very strange error in judgment the classical school
of political economy has put forward the proposition that the
exchange value of human labour also is determined by costs of
production. 
    The costs of production of human labour -- if we substitute
the prosaic personal meaning of this expression for the
impersonal and figurative one would be the costs of producing the
labourer. What a monstrous idea! Can it be that there is a
"production" of labourers in the same sense as there is a
production of material things? Has such a thing ever been said
even in the darkest ages of barbarism? Surely another name at
least might have been chosen. But leaving the name, let us get to
the substance. 
    The substance is, that, by the cost of production of labour
is meant the necessary cost of maintaining the labourer and his
family; the means of subsistence which the labourers themselves
regard as the minimum necessary to keep themselves in life, in
strength, and in ability to work, to bring children into the
world, and to bring them up to labour. And as the price of goods
can never stand permanently either above or below the costs of
production, so it is asserted that the wages of labour can never
stand permanently either above or below the existence-minimum. Of
course, this proposition can never be understood to apply to any
but the commonest and worst paid form of labour, seeing that the
better paid labour does raise itself above the lowest wage level
that can be considered permissible. 
    On the one side, so far as regards the impossibility of
sinking below the minimum, there is, as a fact, a close, indeed a
frightful analogy between the law of wage and the law of costs.
Where the labourer has no other income to spend than his wage,
wages cannot indeed fall permanently below the amount marked by
the prices of the necessary means of subsistence. If the means of
subsistence are scarce and dear, a higher wage must ultimately be
conceded. Misery and death are the imperious forces which bring
about this result, inasmuch as they reduce the number of
labourers until the reduced supply has raised wages sufficiently
to cover the necessaries of life. 
    But how is it as regards the other side? Is it true that
wages can never rise permanently above the costs of subsistence?
Is there the smallest analogy, or even an apparent analogy,
between the pressure exercised by the cognisance of cheaper
conditions of production upon the valuation of products, and the
pressure which might be exercised upon the valuation of labour by
cognisance of cheaper conditions of life? Economists of the
classical school assert that there is, and thereby they bring
again into the question motives which have as little in common
with the considerations that govern the production of goods, as
the law of nature, which says that he who can find no means of
sustenance must die, has with the considerations that govern the
manufacturer who discontinues a business when it fails to return
him its costs. The motive which is called upon to prove that wage
cannot maintain itself above the minimum of subsistence is the
power of the sexual instinct. If means of subsistence become
cheaper and more abundant, there is the more room for increase of
population, for marrying, producing children, and supporting
them. The supply of labourers can go on increasing, and wages go
on diminishing, until the maximum of population possible to
maintain, and the existence minimum of wage, are again reached.
This result is possible. But must it ever happen? Does it always
happen? What has experience to say? It speaks plainly enough --
so plainly that even those who assert that the law of costs
obtains for labour find themselves forced to add to that law
certain clauses which amount to nullifying it. Thus a clause is
added which says that what determines wage is that amount of
subsistence which the labourers themselves regard as the
permissible minimum, since experience shows that the minimum wage
differs from time to time, from place to place, and from nation
to nation. But this clause cancels the law. If the opinion of the
labourer is to be decisive, there can be no more talk of a
compulsory, objective, fixed standard of wage. In yet another
direction experience speaks still more conclusively. We notice
everywhere that the wage for different kinds of labour is of
varying amount. Only some of the labourers, and that not by any
means the majority, are always held down to the lowest possible
wage. But how could this be the case if the whole position of
labour were entirely governed by the power of sexual impulse as
is asserted? Would not the supply of labour under such a
supposition be overwhelmingly large, -- as a rule, and in the
long run at all events, -- and wages be reduced to the minimum in
all branches of production? Would not all wages be equally low?
The fact that higher wages are continuously maintained in the
higher branches of labour, is a clear proof that the height of
wage continues to be determined by considerations which are too
powerful to admit of their favourable results being suspended by
the sexual instinct; or -- what amounts to the same thing -- that
the sexual impulse does not possess that destructive power which
is ascribed to it. And if it does not possess this as regards one
class of labour, it is impossible to see why it should be held
necessary as regards the other class. 
    If the law of costs were true as regards wages of labour, it
would also be true as regards the natural value of labour. The
forces which are relied on to prove the law of costs in regard to
labour, would, of necessity -- if they do act as is asserted of
them -- have an equal effect under any social organisation. If
the sexual impulse were possessed of such surpassing strength, it
would, even in a communistic state, increase the number of
labourers to the highest point which could be maintained at the
existence minimum; only that here, where the labouring class
would include the whole nation, the consequences would be so much
the more comprehensive and destructive. To-day's "iron law of
wage" would be extended in the future to an iron law of universal
misery. 
    Modern economists are almost unanimous in repudiating the
application of the law of costs to labour in its older and cruder
form, but, on the other hand, they concede to the consideration
of the costs of maintaining the labourer another effect. It is
the effort of every class of labourers, they say, to retain the
level of life to which they have once attained, making their
claim of wages in correspondence therewith and striving to
realise their claim, besides regulating their marriages and the
size of their families in conformity. The wage, once become
customary, is said to have a tendency to maintain itself as a
permanency, and to resist the tendencies which would press it
down. This law also, if it were a true law of wage, would have to
be recognised as a natural economic law, as it also is founded
upon a universal force. Experience, however, does not seem to
justify it. Do not wages continually rise and fall? It is to be
feared that the quite intelligible wish of the worker to retain a
standard of income once reached has not the efficacy ascribed to
it, of resisting the chances of an unfavourable issue to labour.
If the return to labour falls, the natural value of labour falls,
without being in the least prevented by the previous customary
level of comfort, and it is in the highest degree likely that its
exchange value will fall along with it. For although these do not
by any means invariably coincide, -- do we not often see wages
falling short of natural value? -- as things are, it may be
considered an exceedingly rare occurrence that wages are in
excess of natural value. The result which might be expected from
the postponing of marriage and production of children would, in
any case, come much too late; it could only be felt after years,
in a succeeding generation, when circumstances would probably
have been long before completely changed. Of course, the desire
to obtain the highest possible income is a motive which cannot be
considered as quite insignificant among the many motives
determining the return from production. It is as fraught with
consequences as are intelligence, skill, favourable natural
circumstances. But why should this motive be brought prominently
forward only as regards the return to labour? Is it not equally
powerful as regards the products obtained from land and capital?
And why should its influence be limited to the amount of income
once obtained? Does it not go beyond this to the procuring of
fresh income? The truth is that men endeavour to make all
productive returns as large as ever their personal capacities
will allow, and that the returns so obtained determine the value
of the productive factors, -- of labour, as of all the others. It
is impossible to consider it even plausible, that a cause shall
be effective as regards labour alone, by which the level of wage
once reached obtains a peculiar power to maintain itself
permanently unimpaired.
    Here too the modern economists, who advance such theories,
probably do so merely in order to bring the law of wage into
correspondence with the general law of the price of commodities.
In one as in the other, they start with the false assumption of a
fundamental opposition between costs and utility, and wish to
find value between the "upper margin of utility" and the "under
margin of costs." But even supposing such an opposition did
exist, it would not at all events be in the least applicable to
labour. It is not possible to force labour into all the economic
categories in which material goods by their nature are placed. A
producible article is a good, that is, a useful thing -- in two
respects; firstly, in virtue of its effects -- the effects in
which it is "of use"; and, secondly, in virtue of its origin and
upkeep, in which respects it is materially a matter of property.
Labour can only be regarded as a thing in the former respect: in
respect of its useful effects the economic use of labour may and
ought to be considered. In the latter respect, labour is an
affair of persons, and its origin and upkeep cannot be decided by
purely economic considerations. It is overstepping the
permissible sphere of economic control when the attempt is made
to interfere with the personality of the labourer without regard
to other considerations; and economic theory goes beyond its
sphere when it claims to explain the facts of personal life
exclusively by economic considerations.(1*)

NOTES:

1. As labour is not the product of the labourer's means of
subsistence, so, conversely, the means of subsistence cannot be
regarded as the productive factors of labour. In other words, the
labourer's means of subsistence are not capital. If labour be a
good of the second rank, producing any kind of good of the first
rank -- a consumption good -- the labourer's fund of subsistence
is in no way a good of the third rank, producing the labourer; it
is again merely a good of the first rank, a consumption good for
the labourer. This has a result of great importance as regards
value. Value is communicated, as we have seen, first from the
want for goods of the first rank, and then from these to the
goods of second rank, and so on through all the ranks. If means
of subsistence were capital, they would receive their value from
the value of the service rendered by the labourer. But as they
are simply means of subsistence, they receive their value from
the wants which they provide for. 

Chapter 8

The Cost Theories

    I have hitherto almost entirely refrained from criticising
outside theories of value. Up to this point, the subject of
costs, none of these contains any foreign element whatever. What
renders them inadequate is chiefly their inadequate explanation
of the true elements of value. Should I have succeeded -- as I
scarcely dare hope -- in proving beyond dispute the theory to
which I have given my adhesion, all other theories in themselves
are thereby confuted inasmuch as it completes what they began.
Where they have said only half, the whole has been said; where
they have only approximated to truth, the truth itself has been
found. But it is otherwise -- though of course only in the case
of some of them, -- with those theories which derive the value of
goods from costs. They appeal to a foreign element which does not
lie in the path I have chosen to follow, and must therefore be
dealt with, as it were, on a bye-path of criticism. At the same
time, it must be said that this foreign element contains so much
that is plausible, that there would be a presumption against any
one who passed it by without remark, and a suspicion that his
statement did not embrace the entire truth.
    As I said, it is only some of the theories of costs with
which we are here concerned. 
    All such theories have this one point in common, that they
place costs and utility in opposition to each other, and explain
them as dissimilar principles of value. They differ, however, in
their manner of treating the principle of costs. Some limit
themselves to collating the individual elements of costs, and
showing their influence upon value, without answering, or even
bringing up, the essential and fundamental question as to what
costs really are, and whence they obtain their influence and
economic importance. Criticism of these theories is superfluous.
They contain no error to criticise. Their fault lies in their
silence; in their stopping short at the very heart of the
subject. 
    The rest of the cost theories must be judged differently.
They give to the idea of costs an entirely distinct meaning; a
meaning which is certainly -- taking it all in all -- incorrect;
but one which, in view of the largeness of its theoretic
intention, may be pardoned, and even regarded with some
recognition and respect. This division of the cost theories may
be marked by the title of Labour Theories, as the element of
labour forms their theoretic starting-point. Ricardo's system
indicates the high-water mark of the labour theory; the socialist
system is its final consequence. Many writers who reject both of
these systems, nevertheless take the fundamental motive of the
labour theory into their own systems. In fact, there are very few
writers who have kept entirely free from it. The critic has
consequently a large task before him. I make no secret of it that
to do battle with those views, as developed by economic writers,
seems to me a matter of considerably more importance that they
arise, in the last instance, from popular opinions widely held.
The fundamental idea of the labour theory is foreign to no one;
everybody has frequently enough had practical occasion to apply
it. But for this, Ricardo's system would never have obtained its
great hold, and this circumstance may prepare us to expect in the
future ever new formulations of the labour theory, should it not
be possible meantime to purify theoretically the popular view,
and lead it back from its exaggerations, which are easily
traceable to the imperfection of popular reasoning, into its true
and incontestable form.(1*) 

NOTES:

1. In his Werththeorien und Werthgesetz, in Conrad's Jahrbucher
for 1888, W. Scharling, one of the latest writers upon the theory
of value, has again traced it to the fundamental motive of the
labour theory, although with considerable amplification and
modification. He derives value from the difficulty of attainment,
or, more exactly, from the amount of effort which he who wishes
to acquire an object is spared by attaining his end through
exchange. I shall not at this point dwell on Scharling's positive
work, but rather refer the reader, in regard to his fundamental
motif, to the succeeding chapter. Only, in passing, I may note
that, among the efforts which are to give the standard to price,
Scharling includes that (p. 558) "which it costs (at an auction)
to distance other bidders," or what it costs "to overcome an
owner's disinclination to part from his goods." Both of these
efforts have their origin in nothing else than the payment of
that very price whose standard they are supposed to explain. In
this sense there might be included among the difficulties of
attainment the fact that thing must be paid for with money, while
people are bound to be economical with money. His views on the
theory of marginal utility are given, in an illustration cited by
Böhm-Bawerk, of a boy to whom "the pleasure of eating an apple is
more than seven times but less than eight times that of eating a
plum." "Let us Suppose" continues Scharling "that the father
comes and says to his boy: 'Our neighbour has given you
permission to pull as many apples from his garden as you wish';
the boy will at once alter his opinion as to the relation between
apples and plums, although his taste for and his enjoyment in
consuming the fruit remains unchanged. But the effort which the
possession of one apple saves him from putting forth, is no
longer the same." To my mind this illustration, which Scharling
advances in opposition to the theory of marginal utility, is
really a proof of that theory. In what way has the situation
changed after the father's speech? Clearly that the boy may now
have as many apples as he will, while formerly he had only one,
i.e. the available supply has been increased to superfluity. And
thus the result is attained which the theory of marginal utility
demands; the valuation of the apples is entirely altered.
Scharling's opposition would be justified if it were directed
against a theory which made value depend simply upon utility and
not on marginal utility. In our theory, along with utility, all
the influences are weighed which determine the degree of
utilisation, and of estimation of utility, by the supply; indeed,
even those influences which determine the amount of supply by the
conditions of production. 

Chapter 9

The Cost Theories (continued). Labour as an Element in Cost

    It cannot well be questioned that, among the costs of any
product, the labour necessary for its making comes first. Every
product withdraws the labour-power that is devoted to it from
other products to which it might have been devoted. There would
be nothing further to say on the subject, were it not that labour
calls for economic deliberation as to its employment on a second
ground besides that of its utility. Labour carried too far
becomes a burden, and brings a succession of serious personal
evils in its train. Where labour brings pain, strain, or danger,
there is good reason to think seriously over these consequences;
and, on their account alone, to regard every act of labour as a
sacrifice which should be made only if it is certain to be
adequately recompensed by its result. It is in this sense that it
is commonly said that production "costs" labour, and it is in
this sense that most economists conceive of labour as a cost
good. Not the utility but the personal sacrifice of the labourer
is to determine the economic valuation of labour, and its
influence upon the value of commodities. 
    To decide how much is right in this conception is one of the
most difficult tasks of political economy, and, as the theory has
developed, one of the most important. Beginning with the idea
that labour is valued according to the personal sacrifice it
involves, and going on to the wider idea that labour is the only
production good, that all products are directly products of
labour, and that all costs are labour costs, the conclusion has
been reached that the sacrifice of labour necessary for the
production of a good is the exclusive source of its cost value,
indeed, of its value pure and simple. From its relation to the
labour sacrifice the conception of value receives its content,
the amount of value its standard. In Adam Smith we find, as was
said in the preface, this "philosophical" conception of value
coming into collision with a second "empirical" conception.
Ricardo's system aims at proving that this "philosophical"
conception is almost realised in the empirical formation of
value. Finally the socialists roundly demand its complete
realisation, and condemn the empirical deviations as
disturbances. In connection with this conception of value, a
second conclusion, which relates to the origin and aim of human
economy, is drawn from the same premises. Human economy derives
its origin, in the last resort, from the fact that goods must be
obtained at the price of the sacrifice of labour, and the aim of
all economy is ultimately to make the sacrifice of labour
necessary for the production of goods as small as possible. And
thus, when we endeavour to examine the position of labour as a
cost good, we find ourselves plunged into the quarrel of theory
as to the fundamental questions of political economy. 
    The opponents of the Labour Theory do not in my opinion give
it full justice. They try to overturn it completely, whereas it
is by no means entirely false. It is conceivable, only it does
not fit in with facts; it is, if the expression may be allowed,
philosophically right, but it is not empirically realised.
    It is possible to conceive of a condition of economic life
under which the single consideration of the sacrifice involved in
labour would determine the value, both of labour itself and of
all products. The widespread recognition which Ricardo's theory
has obtained can only be explained by the fact that it is founded
upon a conceivable and attractive fundamental idea. Men learned
the meaning of "value" as a whole -- not as a philosophical
conception, but as applied to the circumstances of everyday life
-- for the first time, and then overlooked the fact that the
"value" of actual life was not completely explained. I shall
endeavour to formulate with all possible distinctness those
conditions under which the labour theory would apply. This is the
best means of enabling us to recognise how far these fall short
of realisation in existing economic circumstances. 
    Suppose that a community -- already abundantly provided with
all the material auxiliaries for labour -- had at their disposal
so great a supply of labour power, and so few wants, that they
were able to satisfy completely and without delay any desire that
they might happen to feel, simply by putting forth the exertion
necessary to produce the means of satisfaction. In this case the
means of satisfaction so produced would have no value from the
consideration of their utility, because as assumed -- they were
to be had immediately at all times and in superfluity. On the
other hand, the consideration of the exertion of labour required
to produce them must give them value. Every product made and
possessed would save an effort; the effort, namely, involved in
its reproduction. And, so far, one would have a lively interest
in holding on to any possession once obtained. The amount of this
interest would depend upon the exertion saved by the possession.
A product with a utility expressed by the intensity of 100, and
necessitating labour equal to 10, would have a value of 10, and
would have no value at all if its reproduction cost no effort. 
    The conceptions of value and wealth evolved from the assumed
circumstances would, formally considered, be such as should arise
if value and wealth were derived from consideration of the
utility which the goods assure, while, all the time, materially,
they would be completely different. Value would be the importance
which goods would then have in virtue of the interest every one
would feel in securing exemption from the undesirable pain of
labour. Wealth would be equivalent to great possessions of goods
securing immunity from the pain of labour. The advantage of
wealth would be rest. Poverty would not mean want, but only
unrest, pain. By a little increase of exertion any advantage of
prior possession could soon be overtaken. 
    That this is not the poverty which the poor man knows: that
this is not wealth as men really estimate it: that this is not
the value or the economy of which we have any experience: --
requires no proving. If merely by pain men could be rich, the
very people who are to-day the poorest would long ere this have
become the richest. Nothing in reality is as assumed by the
labour theory. Our desires are too great, the material resources
at our disposal too limited: our labour power too small. No
economical possession can be lost without some enjoyment being
lost. The idea of utility cannot possibly be separated from the
purposes of economy and the conception of value. 
    There is only one question that may still be asked. It is
whether consideration of the sacrifice of labour does not always
enter into the valuation of labour as a cost-good, and thus into
the Cost value of all products, alongside of and bound up with
the consideration of the utility of labour. But neither is this
the case. It could not be so. Such a possibility is excluded, not
empirically but logically. Productive labour can never have value
on account of the utility which is dependent upon its success or
non-success, and also on account of the personal effort which it
involves. In what circumstances does an act of labour have use
value? When, in event of its failure, the utility has to be given
up, because the labour cannot be put forth a second time; or
when, in the same case, the repetition of the service demands
that another use of the labour be abandoned, and its expected
utility with it; in other words, when there is not sufficient
labour available to meet the demand, when labour power is not
available in superfluity. And in what circumstances would a
service be estimated according to the sacrifice involved? When,
in event of failure, one would not need to give up the utility,
because it could always be obtained again at no greater expense
than the repeated effort; in other words, when all the available
labour power had not a predetermined and distinct destination,
but when there was always free labour power available in
superfluity. Labour could only be estimated at once by its
utility and by personal effort, if it were at once capable and
incapable of repetition; if there were at once a deficiency and
superfluity of labour powers. Where the available labour power is
less than the demand, labour value will be estimated exclusively
according to utility. Where the available labour power is in
excess of the demand, it will be valued exclusively with
reference to the labour sacrifice.(1*)
    Even where labour value is estimated by utility, naturally
one does not cease to consider the toils and dangers of labour.
And although the consideration of these does not directly enter
into the value of labour, it will continue to be a consideration
so long as toil is felt to be toil, and danger danger. It may
even obtain an indirect influence upon valuation, as it must
continue to receive economic consideration in several
connections. 
    These connections may be exactly enumerated.
    First, before undertaking any labour a man has to consider
whether the utility outweighs the effort. Only those acts of
labour whose result outweighs the hardship entailed can be
reasonably performed. Herein, moreover, is contained the reason
why labour, estimated by amount of hardship alone, is less highly
valued than when it receives its value from its return. This also
gives rise to another important issue. The circumstance that
expenditure of labour is felt to be a burden, must somewhat
affect the selection of employments to which it is devoted. It
may occur, as Sax (see note) has forcibly shown, that a less
useful employment of labour is chosen before a more useful one,
because the latter requires comparatively a greater amount of
exertion. 
    Second, when labour is once decided on its performance must
always be ordered in such a way that the toil and danger are made
as light as possible. 
    Third, the fact that labour is felt to be a burden has the
effect of curtailing somewhat the supply of labour as a whole. If
labour were not burdensome and exhausting; more labour would be
expended than is. And thus the use value of labour is, as we have
already suggested, indirectly affected, by being placed at a
slightly higher level on account of the diminished supply.
Services of equal utility, but of different degrees of hardship,
are so regulated in regard to value that the more troublesome
labour is more highly appraised. But this result can only ensue
when the supply is really diminished. Wherever the fear of toil
and danger does not have an actively deterrent effect, or where
it is overcome by the presence of other motives to such an extent
that the supply remains undiminished, the value of labour does
not increase. Experience shows that the most wearisome, wearing,
and least healthy of employments are valued least highly, because
they are the most easily accessible to the great majority, and
are consequently the most amply supplied. In the communistic
state it would not, in all probability, be in any wise different.
The great majority of the citizens will always be suited for the
coarsest kind of work only, and those kinds of work are at once
the most burdensome and the simplest. And while the communistic
state would be plentifully supplied with this sort of labour, so
that it could be employed down to the smallest possible return in
utility, the better labour powers, in virtue of their more
limited number, would require to be economised and have careful
consideration given to their employment, just as happens to-day.
Utility and not toil would, in general, afford the standard for
the valuation of personal services. 
    But we are not finished with our consideration of the labour
theory. Its greatest errors relate to the valuation which it
gives to capital as an element in cost.(2*)

NOTES:

1. It is not at all impossible that, at one and the same place,
there may be a lack of labour in certain departments -- e.g.
skilled labour -- while there is superfluity in the available
supply in others -- e.g. common hand labour. In such a case the
services of the former are estimated by utility, and the latter
by amount of hardship. Under primitive economic conditions the
"supply of labour power" is frequency too large; not until there
has been a considerable advance in civilisation does it become
the rule that labour is insufficient. Further, even the labour
power of one and the same individual may be too small as regards
certain requirements of labour, and at the same time too great as
regards others. It happens almost invariably that labourers whose
capacity for performing some particular form of service is not
sufficient to meet the economic demand for such services, have
always sufficient capacity remaining to meet the trifling
necessity for labour in their own private lives. With this is
connected the fact that labour power is never entirely worn out;
after performing the labour of his particular vocation, man
refreshes and restores his energy best by light and distracting
employments. Even in a country where the economic demand for
labour is entirely insufficient, there are not lacking occasions
in which labour may be estimated according to the amount of
hardship involved. Every individual is continually finding such
occasions; and every one thus learns from his own experience the
fundamental motif of the labour theory. 

2. See Ursprung des Werthes, p. 103, and also Böhm-Bawerk's
Werth, p. 42, and, on the opposite side, Sax, chapter 45. Sax,
starting from the correct proposition that only those goods
should be produced whose utility outweighs the burden of labour
they involve, appears to me to go rather far in the conclusions
he draws, when he says: "If the Unlust connected with the want in
question (i.e. the Unlust which originates from the want not
being satisfied) is less than that of the burden of labour, then
the desire for the good will be a passive one. The want itself
ceases to be felt." Only in so far as the desire is "active" does
the expected product receive a value in thought. That, as I have
said, seems to me to go too far. In considering whether a thing
should be made or not, the value, as derived from the expected
utility, will be estimated undiminished; and, at the same time,
the expected toil will be weighed as a thing by itself. If I
hunger but am too lazy to work, I still continue to feel the
hunger, and thus estimate the value of food according to the
measure of my hunger; only it may happen that the presentation of
this value is not sufficient to overcome my laziness. 

Chapter 10

The Cost Theories (continued). Capital as an Element in Cost

    In any compete estimate of costs there can be no doubt that
the figures representing the necessary consumption of capital
must be added to the costs of labour. Of two products costing
equal amounts of labour, that one must be dearer for which the
greater consumption of capital is required. Thus it has been
calculated ever since capital was possessed by man, and thus it
will continue to be calculated, even in the communistic state.
The necessity for it is so obvious that even the adherents of the
labour theory bow before it. Even they admit that the costs of
capital co-operate in determining the value of products. There is
nothing for it but to try and reconcile their theory with this
incontestable fact. To do this there is only one resource, but
one so singular that only a kind of theoretical infatuation could
avail itself of it. If all costs go back in the last resort to
labour, and if the existence of capital-costs cannot be denied,
capital-costs must ultimately go back to labour-costs -- capital
must be labour. 
    The attempt to reduce capital to labour has been made in two
ways, both of them following out the same fundamental idea.
Labour must be shown to be the primary economic element, and
capital represented as a secondary or derivative form of it.
Labour value appears as the primitive economic value from which
capital value is derived. 
    The first of the two efforts made to prove this proposition
is deduced from the manner in which capital works. The effect of
all capital is either to save labour or to increase the result of
labour. Does not a machine save human labour? Does it not bring
it to greater productiveness? As a matter of fact, there are
forms of capital which are able to render services as human
labour renders them, and which can, to that extent, be
substituted for labour. But can this be maintained of all
capital? What labour power, for example, does a raw material
replace? And, on the other hand, it may undoubtedly be said of
many kinds of labour, with equal right, that their effects are
either to save capital or to increase capital. Capital frequently
supplants labour, but frequently also labour supplants capital.
Where wages are low every undertaker will save his capital and
employ more labourers. 
    The second attempt is much more important. It points to the
origin of capital. Here we go back to the first beginnings of the
acquisition of capital. All capital has, in the last resort --
says this theory -- been obtained by labour, and on this ground
all capital ultimately represents labour. In the most varied
forms, and illustrated by a perfect wealth of examples, this
thought finds itself in many writers. It is found in Adam Smith
and Ricardo, and it is triumphantly adopted by the socialists in
order to make good their contention that all costs are
labour-costs, and that capital is simply "materialised labour."
    It is not easy to imagine greater contradictions than the
labour theory presents when it takes up this line -- more
particularly in the extreme socialistic conception of it. Let the
reader judge! First, the economic valuation of labour is
explained by the peculiar nature of labour -- that its employment
necessitates personal sacrifice. Then capital, after being
recognised as materialised labour, and so labour that has become
impersonal, is subjected to the same valuation; -- a proceeding
for which there is no possible justification. First, it is
asserted that labour is the only productive power; that it alone
produces, creates goods, creates value; that capital is merely
its dead instrument: and then capital emerges from its shell and
becomes labour, which contributes its part in determining the
cost value of goods. At first it is asserted that capital and
labour stand in the strongest opposition to one another, and then
every distinction disappears save the one, that capital, like
labour, may indeed give value, but may not, like it, receive
value. Materialised labour is labour, but no share in the return
shall be imputed to it. 
    It would not be right to entirely reject a theory on account
of its contradictions. There might be a kernel of truth in it,
and that kernel might be rejected along with the rest. We shall,
therefore, submit the contention we are discussing to a further
test, though, truth to tell, it will only be to find that seldom,
if ever, has so small a truth been clothed in so much error. 
    As we have seen, products are valued by their costs only when
they can be reproduced for the amount of the same. Capital, as a
rule, consists of products, and this proposition applies to
capital as to other products. Capital may be valued according to
its costs in so far as it can be reproduced for the amount of the
costs. The costs actually expended since the beginning of history
in gradually forming our present capital -- and it may be noted
in passing that no one knows the amount of these costs, and that
there has never been offered a less accurate standard for any
measurement whatever -- are taken as little into consideration as
any costs which, though actually expended, would never again be
so expended. If all that was wanted economically to replace the
capital consumed was to regain it by labour, then capital might
be economically measured by labour alone, and would represent
economically nothing but labour. If, for instance, coal consumed
could be replaced simply by the labourers bringing new coal to
the surface, without any assistance whatever beyond the labour of
their hands, the coal would be worth just so much labour as was
needed to bring it to the surface. If a machine could be made by
labourers, without any other assistance than that afforded by
other labourers collecting for them valueless materials, and
simply using their bodily strength to shape and combine them, the
value of this machine would be measured by the quantity of labour
that had been expended upon it. So long, however, as capital is
consumed in order to produce capital, the factor of capital
cannot be dismissed from among the costs of capital, and,
therefore, from the costs of all the products of capital; and, so
long as it is credited with the use value which experience
assures us may be received from it, this factor will continue to
be counted alongside of labour in the estimates of costs. 
    The idea that capital represents labour and nothing more, may
be held so long as economists draw their examples, as they
usually do, from the circumstances of a Crusoe or a savage, where
the chief features are the slaying of wild animals, primitive
bows and arrows, bark canoes, rude axes, and the like -- where
capital, so to speak, is always conceived of in a state of
nature. In face of the complicated economical phenomena of a
wealthy and developed society the idea loses all weight. The
labour theory, with its assumptions which take no count of
historical development, was well enough in a science belonging to
the time when men spoke of Natural Rights and the Philosophy of
Nature. At that period of history this theory was worth being
taken up by any gifted genius who could make it throw a first ray
of light into the dark mass of economic phenomena. Even at a
later period it might have tempted some thoughtful mind to give a
thorough systematic examination to its illusive ideas. But for
men who have gone through the school of the founders of our
science, and have had the benefit of all the experience and
elaboration of these founders, and of their successors, it is
only worthy of a schoolboy to hold for ever by the opinions of
the first teachers. A great thought may in the long run turn into
a childish error. 
    To the manufacturer who owns it, as to the labourers whom it
aids, and as indeed to every one, a machine is an instrument,
capable of certain useful work, whose production necessitates a
certain consumption of labour, of other machines, of tools, and
so forth. What must people think of a science which casts aside
this simple definition, and informs the manufacturer that, in his
machine, he possesses merely the "materialised" labour, the
"previous" labour, of all those who have ever contributed
anything towards the complete machine since the making of the
first rough tool onward? It is an ingenious way of looking at
things, no doubt, but one that lends extraordinary little aid
towards advancing the practical purposes of economic life. What
buyer has ever paid a price, or seller demanded one, what
producer ever expended costs, or what chancellor ever laid a tax
upon value, based upon such a consideration as this? Is it
conceivable that any one will ever allow his economic conclusions
to be guided by such a consideration? After all, in economic
theory we must make up our minds whether we intend to explain
economic life, or to pursue after useless and fanciful ideas. 

Chapter 11

The Cost Theories (continued). Interest as an Element of Cost

    In calculating the cost value of his products every
undertaker, in addition to the value of the capital consumed,
includes interest upon the whole capital sunk and bound up in the
production, even on that which remains unconsumed, for the period
during which the capital must remain sunk. It is a matter of
familiar observation that the exchange value of products, in so
far as it is influenced by costs, expresses also the interest
thus calculated. If the production of one article costs merely
labour and circulating capital, while that of another requires,
in addition to the same expenditure of labour and circulating
capital, a large outlay of fixed capital, the second product
(neglecting, of course, the quota for amortisation) will be
considered the more valuable by the interest on the whole fixed
capital. The question now arises whether we have, in this
circumstance also, a phenomenon of natural value; whether it is
in the interest of society generally, or merely in that of the
individual undertaker, that interest should be calculated among
costs, and whether this principle would require to be observed in
the communistic state also. 
    There is something that strikes one as peculiar in the idea
of including interest among costs. Torrens' objection is well
known. Interest, he says, is profit, and must first be earned
through production as the surplus of return over costs. Thus it
is impossible to reckon it among costs. 
    From the point of terminology Torrens' objection is certainly
justified. If we wish, on the one hand, to fix the net return, we
shall not impute interest to costs, but if, on the other hand, we
are seeking for the cost value of products, interest must be
included. In these two cases the term "costs" is used in an
entirely different sense. And this is an error in so far as the
double meaning remains unnoticed, and is, in any case, a
misfortune, whether noticed or not. It would be better to have a
second name for the second use of the term. 
    When we put the name on one side, and examine the actual
matter of Torrens' objection, we come to a different conclusion.
Here the objection entirely breaks down. It proves too much. It
is not only interest that is derived from the return and its
value, but the value of capital itself. Torrens' argument
expanded runs thus: -- the value of products is first; interest,
capital value, the value of production goods generally, second.
Right enough up to this point we have come to the same
conclusion, and argued from it that production goods have, as
against products, no independent power to create value. On the
other hand, we have acknowledged that they do possess the power
to equalise the value of products. In virtue of this power, and
of no higher one, do they influence cost value generally, and
this power cannot be denied to interest, on account of its origin
in the return, so far, that is to say, as the conditions in this
case are similar to those which hold as regards the elements of
costs hitherto considered. 
    This, as a matter of fact, is the case. As we know, there is
a constant tendency towards a uniform rate of increment for all
capital in one and the same market, and, on the whole, the rate
is realised. From this it follows, on the one hand, that nothing
can be produced whose use value does not at least yield the
universal increment on capital -- which is an indirect
determination of the value of products by interest, in the way of
determining the amounts produced. And it follows, on the other
hand, that every product whose use value, regarded by itself,
might yield a somewhat higher increment, can be valued only
according to the universal rate of interest, to the extent that
it can be reproduced at the price of the same which is a direct
determination of value. If things may not be produced under the
general rate of interest, and if they cannot be valued above the
general rate of interest, their final value must, along with the
other elements of costs, include the interest according to the
amount and duration of the capital employed. 
    The principle of including interest among costs follows from
a plan of production which aims at obtaining the highest rate of
increment from every employment of capital. And as it results
from this, so again has it a reflex influence in controlling the
plan and giving it definite limits. If interest were not
estimated among costs, or were not estimated on the whole amount
of capital expended, or for the entire length of time during
which the capital remains employed, the distribution of capital
goods among the individual branches of production could not be so
related as to attain the highest possible rate of increment. It
would then be permissible to employ capital where it only covered
its consumption, but brought no increment, or where it did not
obtain the highest increment, or the increment on the whole
amount of capital sunk, or the increment over the whole period of
time when it was sunk in the productive process. 
    Under certain circumstances it is necessary to include even
compound interest among costs; that is to say, when the period of
time during which the capital is sunk exceeds the period at the
end of which interest would usually be expected. Products are
themselves re-employed as interest bearing capital, and it is
therefore so far profitable to find productions which have a
shorter process. The products of longer processes of production
must receive an equivalent against this advantage of having
interest on interest at an earlier date, and they obtain it by a
corresponding increase in their use value. Only in this way is
the highest degree of utilisation in production as regards time
obtained and regulated.
    Connected with this is an exceedingly curious conclusion.
    In the cost value of products, undertakers include the
interest due to that portion of their money capital which they
must hold, for paying the wages of their labourers, until the
sale of the products takes place. In the communistic state this
money capital would not be required. It would, therefore, appear
that, in the communistic state, the interest expenditure in
production would be correspondingly lower, and that the present
manner of doing is so far opposed to the natural laws of
valuation. As a matter of fact this is not the case; in this
point also the interest of the undertaker is identical with that
of the community at large, and leads to the economic valuation of
goods. The undertaker, in including the interest on his wage
fund, simply estimates and expresses -- with reference to human
labour -- the differences in time of employment. It is not the
same thing to employ ten labourers during one year or to employ
one labourer during ten years, any more than it is the same thing
to employ a capital of ?00 for one year or a capital of ?0 for
ten years. In the former case as in the latter, the principles of
economic action require that, besides ordinary interest, compound
interest also be reckoned to the value of the product, if a
proper distribution of production is to be attained. 
    It needs no explanation that, in virtue of this, production
is the more limited the longer the period of the process, for the
reason that a corresponding increase in the value of the product
is required to make the longer process appear sufficiently
profitable. Productions of very long duration must yield a very
rich return if they are to bear the burden of the interest which
accumulates up till the time when they yield their first return. 

Chapter 12

The Cost Theories (continued). Land Rent as an Element in Cost

    Land -- understanding the word in that familiar theoretical
sense which refers to the indestructible part of land -- suffers
no loss of substance in production. Among the costs of
agricultural products, consequently, there is nothing to be
calculated for what we may call the "substance-value" of land.
Ricardo goes farther than this, and affirms that the rent of
land, like the value of land, cannot enter into costs. This
contention is entirely in harmony with his theory that rent is a
net differential rent, only ascribable to the better classes of
land employed, while the poorest classes, those which are
available in superfluity, yield no rent. If the classes of land
which are last employed are free and bear no rent, the
determining costs will, as a matter of fact, be made up without
consideration of rent, simply by the sum of costs in capital and
labour which are applied to the poorest classes of land. The rent
yielded by the better qualities of land originates, as we know,
from the surplus return of products which they assure to equal
costs of capital and labour and equal value of products. Rent is,
therefore, derived from the return, without finding expression in
the value of the products. 
    It is otherwise if rent is not merely a differential but a
general one. A general rent must enter into costs just as
interest does. It must be included in the calculation if the
determining amount of costs is to be obtained. Where all
qualities of lands and all powers of the land, even those of the
lowest class, are required to meet the demand, and all bear rent,
the circumstance that classes of land of the poorest quality are
devoted to a definite production, and so "tied up" throughout the
duration of that production, is not a matter of economic
indifference. For, so long as they remain tied up, their services
are withheld from other productions to which they might have been
devoted. In case of failure, their rent, which would otherwise
have been obtained, is lost. Their rent consequently belongs to
and must be included in the cost of the products. 
    For Ricardo it is of primary importance to persist in
maintaining the foregoing contention, that land rent is always
differential. His economic system cannot dispense with the
proposition depending upon it, that rent does not enter into the
value of products. He imagines it possible to bring the value of
products under a general law, and consider them simply as
multiples of units of capital and units of labour. The
intervention of interest already forms a disturbing element in
his law, but he believes himself able to prove that the
disturbing element thus introduced is of no great importance. But
if, besides, the element of rent plays a part in the value, the
whole laborious structure of his theory falls to the ground, and
his attempt to derive the value of products from labour, and to
unite empirical amounts of value with amounts philosophically
demanded, is completely overturned. 
    For the theory of value which we represent, on the other
hand, it is a matter of entire indifference whether the
circumstances are such that rent remains purely differential, and
thus does not enter into the value of products, or are such as
cause rent to become general, and thus to enter of necessity into
the value of products. The one case fits into our system as well
as the other. 
    Further, there are certain exceptions to the proposition that
a differential rent cannot enter into the value of products.
Alongside of those employments of land which may be regarded as
the principal ones, and of those forms of rent which might be
called the original ones, there exist others which are secondary
and derivative. The principal employment of fertile land is in
agriculture, but the building of a factory upon land suitable for
cultivation is an example of a secondary employment, -- of an
employment, to express it otherwise, for which land in general
will be less required, and which in itself would never exhaust
the available supply of lands, as the agricultural demand might
easily do. If a fertile field is employed as site for a factory
the agricultural rent which, in other circumstances, might be
expected from it, will have to be surrendered. The sacrifice of
this rent means an outlay of costs which cannot be neglected in
calculating the costs of the factory's products. Whatever the
amount of the rent, it must be deducted from the value of the
products made on that building ground, and it is not till the
remainder covers the costs of capital and labour that the
calculation is complete. 
    The case is similar with the ground-rents of dwelling-houses.
Ground-rent in a large town is never a simple differential rent.
At the periphery of the town, house-rent finds its measure in
agricultural rent, and rises towards the business centre,
according to desirability of situation. The more valuable for
cultivation the land round about the town is, the dearer will be
the houses in that town. To this extent agricultural rent acts as
a universal element of costs in the calculation of house-rents.
The differential rents received from favoured sites do not make
houses dearer, but are rather a result of the high valuation
placed upon houses in a favourable situation. And in so far as
the need for dwelling-houses and the need for business premises
compete with each other, does the one employment of land act upon
the other as an element of costs. 
    In following out this line of thought we see that Ricardo's
proposition gradually loses its applicability almost entirely, as
the cultivation of land becomes very artificial, and the uses of
land multiply. The various employments begin to compete with each
other, and one has always to make choice among several; thus the
differential rents which are surrendered take effect as costs.
Ricardo's proposition that the rent of land does not enter into
costs, can be legitimately applied only to land devoted of
necessity to one distinct use, such as mines, vineyards, and the
like. 

Chapter 13

The Service of Individual Economic Value in National Economy (1*)

    The supreme principle of economic action being utility, value
presents a means by which to grasp the utility of goods in a
simplified and comprehensive manner, and so to control the
employment of goods. Thus we have described the service of value
in economy generally, in doing which we have assumed that value
is estimated according to natural laws, and that we are concerned
with the valuation of goods in stocks, or marginal valuation.
    The return value of production goods and the cost value of
products are likewise phenomena of natural marginal value. They
afford us a simplified and widely comprehensive estimate of
utility in the most complicated circumstances of production. The
most heterogeneous kinds of production goods obtain a common
measure of valuation through their common products: their return
values are multiples of the value of the common marginal
products. The most heterogeneous products receive a common
measure of valuation through their common elements of cost; their
cost values are multiples of the value of the common cost goods.
Different return values, or different cost values, bear the same
relation to one another as amounts of goods which are multiples
of the same unit. In this way it becomes possible to estimate
these value relations in figures, although the value and the
amounts of value have their origin in the incalculable
intensities of want. 
    And yet, it is not this consideration that attracts our
attention at this point. Now when we have pursued the main
threads of the much-tangled web of productive combinations, first
from the return up to the co-operating production goods, and then
back again from the cost goods to the products, another
consideration forces itself to the front: namely, that in any
larger economy whatever, particularly in such a one as has the
compass of a national economy, and is based upon a complicated
system of production, it is quite impossible to dispense with
value if we wish to have any clear notion of the utility of
goods. A Robinson Crusoe does not require the aid of value; he
can arrive at a right decision in every instance by simply
testing what manner of treatment is likely to secure him the
greatest amount of utility on the whole. In a national economy,
on the other hand, with a complicated system of production, it is
impossible in any way to make the necessary economic decisions by
testing the utility of goods on the whole. No one can take in the
total result of a community's production at a glance. There are
too many goods, and too many possible employments of goods, to
permit of making one survey of the whole, and one comparison on
the whole. Things must be gone into individually; utility must be
divided up, and every good have measured out to it its share in
the total result; then only is it possible to recognise
individually which are the poorer, which the more profitable, and
which the best. But how otherwise is utility to be measured out
to individual goods than by applying to them the methods of
marginal valuation, the principle of which is, to give them that
utility which is dependent on the smallest quantity of goods that
is yet practically taken into consideration? 
    And, further, the economical employments of goods result from
the relations of supply and demand. It appears then that it would
be impossible to discover these economical employments if the
amounts of supply and demand were not known numerically. But who
knows the amounts of supply and demand in the widely-extended
economy of a nation, or, indeed, in the world economy, the
relations of which make themselves felt everywhere? Wholesale
merchants of course try to make themselves acquainted with them,
and do as a fact succeed in obtaining certain figures
representing what comes from production, which are tolerably
exact, especially as regards large production. But, on the other
hand, it is almost impossible for them to obtain, with any
measure of exactitude, the equally important figures of demand.
If, in spite of this, it can be maintained that economy on the
whole is capable of adjusting itself to the variations in supply
and demand, this is due solely to the aid afforded by marginal
valuation. Value, as marginal value, gives expression in the
marginal calculation to the effect produced by the existing
amounts of supply and demand, even if these amounts have not
hitherto been measured. No owner can attempt to get rid of a
good, no buyer can be eager to get one, without this circumstance
having an effect on the market, and influencing the sensitive
medium of value. Although no one is able, and even though no one
should attempt, to figure out the amounts of supply and demand,
value shows, with numerical exactitude and down to the finest
gradations that people usually make in practical life, the
relation between supply and demand in so far as these tend to
make themselves felt in exchange. Value shows the effect of
causes which in themselves are hidden. And through the fact that
we adapt ourselves to this effect, this value, it finally becomes
possible to adapt ourselves to the causes, the amounts of supply
and demand, and thus to regulate an economy with due regard to
economic laws. If at any given point of time the value of all
goods remains as it has hitherto been, we may be pretty sure of
acting economically and according to the standard of economical
insight already obtained, if we retain the disposition of all
goods in production and consumption unaltered. If value has
altered at any point, it is an indication that the present
disposition of goods must be changed, and changed in direct
accordance with the change of value. Where value has risen there
must new goods be directed, be it for production or for
consumption: where it has fallen these goods must be withdrawn.
and this transferring of goods from one point to another must be
continued until all values are brought once more into
equilibrium, and for every stock of goods the law of equal
valuation of all its units is re-established. 
    A knowledge of the values of goods, such as has existed in
every economy up till now, is consequently, in itself, one of the
most valuable of possessions. It is almost as valuable as the
possession of the goods themselves, inasmuch as it is the key to
their use. The sum of thousands of years of experience concerning
the sources of supply of goods, and the suitability or otherwise
of the conditions of their production, as well as concerning the
amount of demand for them, is represented in the figures of value
handed down to us. Were a nation to lose all remembrance of
these, it would be an enormous economic misfortune. An almost
incalculable period of time, an almost incalculable amount of
error and loss, would have to be gone through, before the nation
could again obtain mastery over the relations of goods formerly
expressed, with numerical clearness, for each individual good by
means of value. 
    By the socialist programme it is proposed to manage the
counting of stocks and calculation of demand, in the state of the
future, by means of government statistics. Could this plan be
sufficiently carried out it would be so far possible to dispense
with marginal value. On the other hand, it can never be dispensed
with where the finding of an expression for the utility in the
individual good is concerned. To dispense with it would be
equivalent to giving up the attempt to determine utility in the
individual case, and being content with making a general
determination as to the direction of production and consumption,
leaving out consideration of the quantities which it is desirable
to gain or consume. 
    Here I leave the sphere of conditions of value in private
economies. Clearly as I realise the imperfection of what I have
tried to do, I yet trust that the reader will have been convinced
that exchange value, as expressed in price, is not only governed
by price competition, but contains a deeper economic content;
that exchange value, although mixed with foreign elements, unites
in itself all the essential elements of the natural valuation of
goods, the valuation which is indispensable to economic action.
If the prices for all similar goods in one and the same market
are equal in amount, it is because, in the last resort, the
valuations of all similar goods in one and the same economy are
equal. If the prices for all goods in one stock are fixed at the
marginal point, it is because, in the last resort, the valuations
are so fixed. In so far as prices represent natural value, an
enormous and arduous mental labour of calculating the exchange
value of things is saved. By thousandfold weighing and
consideration of the productive and other economical relations,
each individual good gets measured out to it that amount of the
total return which must be directly imputed to it out of the
total amount of the total production, if the goods are to be
profitably dealt with. I have chosen the word "Imputation" after
much deliberation. It is not only to production goods that return
is imputed and distributed; all goods get imputed and distributed
out to them the utility which they give only when co-operating
with one another. There is no satisfaction that is not prepared
for and followed by others; all our satisfactions stand in mutual
action and reaction with each other. Every man's means are thus
linked together. Individual economic valuation succeeds,
nevertheless, in distributing this whole, and imputing to each
separate portion of wealth its share of return, in such a way
that, as a rule, every one is well advised who, within the sphere
of his own individual economy, takes the amount of value thus
ascertained as measure for his economic action. 
    Where exchange value diverges from natural value, something
else must of course obtain, but it is beyond our special task to
enter on this consideration. 
    It still remains to show how far natural laws require that
individual economic valuation be complemented by the economical
considerations of a community, or, more particularly, of a state.


NOTES:

1. See Ursprung des Werthes, p. 165.

