An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy



by James Steuart











An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy being an



Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations.



in which are particularly considered



Population, Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Money, Coin, Interest,



Circulation, Banks, Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes







by Sir James Steuart, Bart.







Ore trabit quodcumque potest atque addit acervo.



                Hor. Lib. I. Sat. 1







in Two Volumes.







London:



Printed for A. Millar, and T. Cadell, in the Strand.







MDCCLXVII











PREFACE







    It is with the greatest diffidence that I present to the



public this attempt towards reducing to principles, and forming



into a regular science, the complicated interests of domestic



policy. When I consider the time and labour employed in the



composition, I am apt to value it from selfish considerations.



When I compare it even with my own abilities, I still think



favourably of it, for a better reason; because it contains a



summary of the most valuable part of all my knowledge. But when I



consider the greatness of my subject, how small does the result



of my application appear!



    The imperfections, therefore, discovered in this work, must



be ascribed to the disproportion between the extent of the



undertaking, and that of my capacity. This, I can assure my



reader, has been exerted to the utmost: and if, after all, I have



failed, it may, at least, with justice, be said, that I have



miscarried in an attempt of the greatest importance to mankind.



    I no where, I think, have shewn a desire to make my court to



any particular minister, whose administration might have been



hinted at. I have freely followed the thread of my reasoning



without a bias, either in favour of popular opinions, or of any



of the numberless systems which have been formed by those who



have written upon particular parts of my subject. The warmth of



my temper may have led me sometimes into commendations when I



have been pleased; but when I felt the effects of ill humour on



being dissatisfied with particular circumstances, relating to



countries, to men, and to things, which I had in my eye at the



time I was writing, I was immediately aware of the danger of



blaming the steps of any administration, without being well



formed of the whole combination of circumstances which the



minister may have had before him at the time.



    This composition being the successive labour of many years



spent in travelling, the reader will find some passages in which



the unities of time and place have not been observed. These I



could have corrected with ease, had I not been advised to leave



them as characters to point out the circumstances under which I



wrote, and thereby to confirm the authenticity of certain facts.



    The modes of thinking, also, peculiar to the several



countries where I have lived, have, no doubt, had an influence on



what I have written concerning their customs: this work,



therefore, will not, in general, correspond to the meridian of



national opinions any where; and of this it is proper the reader



should be apprised, that he may not apply to the domestic



circumstances of his own country what was intended to refer to



those of other nations; nor impute to wilful prejudice, what was



the irresistible effect of my experience and conviction.



    Since the first publication of this work some criticisms upon



it have been published in which little regard has been paid to



this advertisement.



    The greater part of it by far, (the three first books



particularly) was composed abroad. Can it be supposed, that



during an absence of near twenty years, I should in my studies



have all the while been modelling my speculations upon the



standard of English notions.



    It has been alleged that I have imbibed prejudices abroad, by



no means consistent with the present state of England, and the



genius of Englishmen.



    To which I answer, that I flatter myself to have imbibed no



prejudices either abroad or at home, at least I think I have



exhibited none of them in my work; because there I have rejected



all party opinions whatever.



    According to my way of treating this subject no general rule



can be laid down in political matters: every thing there must be



considered according to the circumstances and spirit of the



nations to which they relate. Accordingly we shall find in this



inquiry some reasonings built on the principles of arbitrary



power, others on those of national liberty, others again on those



of democracy. Had I, in compliment to the sentiments of



Englishmen, suppressed every combination which might apply to the



circumstances of those very countries where I was studying my



subject, from the actual inspection of their policy, what merit



should I have had to plead with my own countrymen from my travels



and from my studies, any local English writer describing English



policy and sounding through every page the most peculiar opinions



of this nation, might have amused his readers far better than



ever I could pretend to.



    If, from this work, I have any merit at all, it is by



divesting myself of English notions, so far as to be able to



expose in a fair light, the sentiments and policy of foreign



nations, relatively to their own situation.



    Now the principal attention of an intelligent reader who



peruses a book like this, will be directed towards the



investigatory part of it: every step of the reasoning will be



weighed by him until the final conclusion be drawn; he will then



give his assent to it in proportion to the accuracy of the



induction; but he never will recoil from what he has once



assented to, in order to form a general notion conceding any



result by comparing it with his own animal feelings or with the



popular opinion of his countrymen.



    This much I am obliged to say in my own justification, with



respect to several passages which have been written at times when



England was very distant from my thoughts.



    I have read many authors on the subject of political



oeconomy; and I have endeavoured to draw from them all the



instruction I could. I have travelled, for many years, through



different countries, and have examined them, constantly, with an



eye to my own subject. I have attempted to draw information from



every one with whom I have been acquainted: this, however, I



found to be very difficult until I had attained to some previous



knowledge of my subject. Such difficulties confirmed to me the



justness of Lord Bacon's remark, that he who can draw information



by forming proper questions, must be already possessed of half



the science.



    I could form no consistent plan from the various opinions I



met with: hence I was engaged to compile the observations I bad



casually made, in the course of my travels, reading, and



experience. From these I formed the following work after



expunging the numberless inconsistencies and contradictions which



I found had arisen from my separate inquiries into every



particular branch.



    I had observed so many persons declining in knowledge as they



advanced in years, that I resolved early to throw upon paper



whatever I had learned; and to this I used to have recourse, as



others have to their memories. The unity of the object of all my



speculations, rendered this practice more useful to me than it



would be to one whose researches are more extended.



    Whoever is much accustomed to write for his own use merely,



must contract a more careless style than another who has made



language his study, and who writes in hopes of acquiring a



literary reputation. I never, till very lately, thought of



appearing as an author on this subject; and, in the frequent



perusals of what I had written, my corrections were chiefly in



favour of perspicuity. add to this, that the language in which I



now write was, for many years, foreign to those with whom I lived



and conversed. When these circumstances are added to the



intricacy of my subject, which constantly carried off my



attention from every ornament of language, I flatter myself that



those of my readers, at least, who enter as heartily as I have



done into the spirit of this work, will candidly overlook the



want of that elegance which adorns the style of some celebrated



authors in this Augustan age.



    I present this enquiry to the public as nothing more than an



essay which may serve as a canvass for better hands than mine to



work upon.



    It contains such observations only as the general view of the



domestic policy of the countries I have seen, has suggested. It



is a speculation, and no more. It is a rough drawing of a mighty



plan, proportioned in correctness to my own sagacity, to my



knowledge of the subject, and to the extent of my ideas.



    It goes little farther than to collect and arrange some



elements relating to the most interesting branches of modern



policy, such as population, agriculture, trade, industry, money,



coin, interest, circulation, banks, exchange, public credit, and



taxes. The principles deduced from all these topics, appear



tolerably consistent; and the whole is a train of reasoning,



through which I have adhered to the connection of subjects as



faithfully as I could: but the nature of the work being a



deduction of principles, not a collection of institutions, I



seized the opportunities which my reasoning threw in my way, to



connect every principle, as I went along, with every part of the



inquiry to which it could refer; and when I found the connexion



sufficiently shewn, I broke off such disquisitions as would have



led me from the object then present.



    When principles thus casually applied in one part, to matters



intended to be afterwards treated of in another, came to be taken



up a-new, they involved me in what may appear prolixity. This I



found most unavoidable, when I was led to thoughts which were new



to myself, and consequently such as must have cost me the



greatest labour to set in a clear and distinct point of view. Had



I been master of my subject on setting out, the arrangement of



the whole would have been rendered more concise: but had this



been the case, I should never have been able to go through the



painful deduction which forms the whole chain of my reasoning,



and upon which, to many readers slow in forming combinations, the



conviction it carries along with it in a great measure depends:



to the few, again, of a more penetrating genius, to whom the



slightest hint is sufficient to lay open every consequence before



it be drawn, in allusion to Horace, I offer this apology, Clarus



esse laboro, prolixus fio.



    The path I have taken was new to me, after all I had read on



the subject. I examined, by my own principles, what I had



gathered from others; and adopted it as far as I found it tally



with collateral circumstances. When, on the other hand, I found a



disagreement, I was apprized immediately of some mistake; and



this I found constantly owing to the narrowness of the



combinations upon which it had been founded.



    The great danger of running into error upon particular points



relating to this subject, proceeds from our viewing them in a



light too confined, and to our not attending to the influence of



concomitant circumstances, which render general rules of little



use. Men of parts and knowledge seldom fail to reason



consequentially on every subject; but when inquiries are made



concerning the complicated interests of society, the vivacity of



an author's genius is apt to prevent him from attending to the



variety of circumstances which render uncertain every



consequence, almost, which he can draw from his reasoning. To



this I ascribe the habit of running into what the French call



Systèmes. These are no more than a chain of contingent



consequences, drawn from a few fundamental maxims, adopted,



perhaps, rashly. Such systems are mere conceits; they mislead the



understanding, and efface the path to truth. An induction is



formed, from whence a conclusion, called a principle, is drawn



and defined; but this is no sooner done, than the author extends



its influence far beyond the limits of the ideas present to his



understanding, when he made his definition. The best method,



therefore, to detect a pretended system, is always to substitute



the definition in place of the term.



    The imperfection also of language engages us frequently in



disputes merely verbal; and instead of being on our guard against



the many unavoidable ambiguities attending the most careful



speech, we place a great part of our learning when at school, and



of our wit when we appear on the stage of the world, in the



prostitution of language. The learned delight in vague, and the



witty in equivocal terms. In general, we familiarize ourselves so



much to words, and think so little, when we speak and write, that



the signs of our ideas take the place of the images which they



were intended to represent.



    Every true proposition, when understood, must be assented to



universally. This is the case always, when simple ideas are



affirmed or denied of each other. Nobody ever doubted that sound



is the object of hearing, or colour that of sight, or that black



is not white. But whenever a dispute arises concerning a



proposition, wherein complex ideas are compared, we may often



rest assured, that the parties do not understand each other.



Luxury, says one, is incompatible with the prosperity of a state.



Luxury is the fountain of a nation's welfare and happiness, says



another. There may, in reality, be no difference in the



sentiments of these two persons. The first may consider luxury as



prejudicial to foreign trade, and as corrupting the morals of a



people. The other may consider luxury as the means of providing



employment for such as must live by their industry, and of



promoting an equable circulation of wealth and subsistence,



through all the classes of inhabitants. If each of them had



attended to the other's complex idea of luxury, with all its



consequences, they would have rendered their propositions less



general.



    The difference, therefore, of opinion between men is



frequently more apparent than real. When we compare our own



ideas, we constantly see their relations with perspicuity; but



when we come to communicate these relations to other people, it



is often impossible to put them into words sufficiently



expressive of the precise combination of them we have made in our



own minds.



    This being the case, I have avoided, as much as possible,



condemning such opinions as I have taken the liberty to review;



because I have examined such only as have been advanced by men of



genius and reputation; and since all matters of controversy



regard the comparison of our ideas, if the terms we use to



express them were sufficiently understood by both parties, most



political disputes would, I am persuaded, be soon at an end.



    Here it may be objected, that we frequently adopt an opinion,



without being able to give a sufficient reason for it; and yet we



cannot persuade ourselves to give it up, though we find it



combated by the strongest arguments. To this I answer, that in



such cases we do not adhere to our own opinions, but to those of



others received upon trust. It is our regard for the authority,



and not for the opinion, which makes us tenacious: for were the



opinion truly our own, we could not fail of seeing, or at least



we should not long be at a loss in recollecting, the ground upon



which it is built. But when we assent implicitly to any political



doctrine, there is no room for reason: we then satisfy ourselves



with the persuasion that those whom we trust have sufficient



reasons for what they advance. While our assent therefore is



implicit, we are beyond conviction; not because we do not



perceive the force of the arguments brought against our opinion,



but because we are ignorant of the force of those which can be



brought to support it: and as no body will sell what belongs to



him, without being previously informed of its value, so no body



will give up an implicit opinion, without knowing all that can be



said for it. To this class of men I do not address myself in this



inquiry.



    But I insensibly run into a metaphysical speculation, in



order to prove, that in political questions it is better for



people to judge from experience and reason, than from authority



to explain their terms, than to dispute about words; and to



extend the combinations of their own ideas, than to follow



conceits, however decorated with the name of systems. How far I



have avoided such defects, the reader will determine.



    Every writer values himself upon his impartiality; because he



is not sensible of his fetters. The wandering and independent



life I have led may naturally have set me free, in some measure,



from strong attachments to popular opinions. This may be called



impartiality. But as no man can be deemed impartial, who leans to



any side whatever, I have been particularly on my guard against



the consequences of this sort of negative impartiality; because I



have found it sometimes carrying me too far from that to which a



national prejudice might have led me.



    In discussing general points, the best method I found to



maintain a just balance in this respect, was to avert my eye from



the country in which I lived at the time; and to judge of absent



things by the absent. Objects which are present, are apt to



produce perceptions too strong to be impartially compared with



those recalled by memory only.



    When I have had occasion to dip into any question concerning



the preference to be given to certain forms of government above



others, and to touch upon points which have been the object of



sharp disputes, I have given my opinion with freedom, when it



seemed proper: but in stating the question, I have endeavoured to



avoid all trite, and, as I may call them, technical terms of



party; which in such disputes every side chuses to take in their



own acceptation: and as there is no sentiment of concord or



good-will in their hearts, instead of coming to explanations



together, they are charmed to find an occasion to differ



concerning general propositions, from those they hate for



particular considerations.



    I have sometimes entered so heartily into the spirit of the



statesman, as to be apt to forget my station in the society where



I live; and when as a private man I have read over the work of



the politician, my natural partiality in favour of individuals



has led me to condemn, as Machiavellian principles, every



sentiment, approving the sacrifice of private concerns in favour



of a general plan.



    In order, therefore, to reconcile me to myself in this



particular, and to prevent certain expressions here and there



interspersed, from making the slightest impression upon a reader



of delicate sentiments, I must observe, that nothing would have



been so easy as to soften many passages, where the politician



appears to have snatched the pen out of the hand of the private



citizen: but as I write for such only who can follow a close



reasoning, and attend to the general scope of the whole inquiry,



I have, purposely, made no correction; but continued painting, in



the strongest colours, every inconvenience which must affect



certain individuals living under our free modern governments,



whenever a wise statesman sets about correcting old abuses,



proceeding from idleness, sloth, or fraud in the lower classes,



arbitrary jurisdictions in the higher, and neglects in



administrations with respect to the interests of both. The more



any cure is painful and dangerous, the more ought men carefully



to avoid the disease. This leads me to say a word concerning the



connection between the theory of morals and that of politics.



    I lay it down as a general maxim, that the characteristic of



a good action consists in the conformity between the motive, and



the duty of the agent. Were there but one man upon earth, his



duty would contain no other precepts than those dictated by



self-love. If he come to be a father, a husband, a friend, his



self-love falls immediately under limitations: he must withhold



from himself, and give to his children; he must know how to



sacrifice some of his fancies, in order to gratify, now and then,



those of his wife, or of his friend. If he come to be a judge, a



magistrate; he must frequently forget that he is a friend, or a



father: and if he rise to be a statesman, he must disregard many



other attachments more comprehensive, such as family, place of



birth, and even, in certain cases, his native country. His duty



here becomes relative to the general good of that society of



which he is the head: and as the death of a criminal cannot be



imputed to the judge who condemns him, neither can a particular



inconvenience resulting to an individual, in consequence of a



step taken for a general reformation, be imputed to him who sits



at the helm of government.



    If it should be asked, of what utility a speculation such as



this can be to a statesman, to whom it is in a manner addressed



from the beginning to the end: I answer, that although it seem



addressed to a statesman, the real object of the inquiry is to



influence the spirit of those whom he governs; and the variety of



matter contained in it, may even suggest useful hints to himself.



But his own genius and experience will enable him to carry such



notions far beyond the reach of my abilities.



    I have already said that I considered my work as no more than



a canvass prepared for more able hands than mine to work upon.



Now although the sketch it contains be not sufficiently correct,



I have still made some progress, I think, in preparing the way



for others to improve upon my plan, by contriving proper



questions to be resolved by men of experience in the practical



part of government.



    I leave it therefore to masters in the science to correct and



extend my ideas: and those who have not made the principles of



policy their particular study, may have an opportunity of



comparing the exposition I have given of them with the commonly



received opinions concerning many questions of great importance



to society. They will, for instance, be able to judge how far



population can be increased usefully, by multiplying marriages,



and by dividing lands: how far the swelling of capitals, cities



and towns, tends to depopulate a country: how far the progress of



luxury brings distress upon the poor industrious man: how far



restrictions laid upon the corn trade, tend to promote an ample



supply of subsistence in all our markets: how far the increase of



public debts tends to involve us in a general bankruptcy: how far



the abolition of paper currency would have the effect of reducing



the price of all commodities: how far a tax tends to enhance



their value: and how far the diminution of duties is an essential



requisite for securing the liberty, and promoting the prosperity



and happiness of a people.



    Is it not of the greatest importance to examine, with



candour, the operations by which all Europe has been engaged in a



system of policy so generally declaimed against, and so contrary



to that which we hear daily recommended as the best? To shew,



from the plain principles of common sense, that our present



situation is the unavoidable consequence of the spirit and



manners of the present times; and that it is quite compatible



with all the liberty, affluence, and prosperity, which any human



society ever enjoyed in any age, or under any form of government?



A people taught to expect from a statesman the execution of



plans, big with impossibility and contradiction, will remain



discontented under the government of the best of Kings.







Book I







Of Population and Agriculture







Introduction







    Oeconomy, in general, is the art of providing for all the



wants of a family, with prudence and frugality.



    If any thing necessary or useful be found wanting, if any



thing provided be lost or misapplied, if any servant, any animal,



be supernumerary or useless, if any one sick or infirm be



neglected, we immediately perceive a want of oeconomy. The object



of it, in a private family, is therefore to provide for the



nourishment, the other wants, and the employment of every



individual. In the first place, for the master, who is the head,



and who directs the whole; next for the children, who interest



him above all other things; and last for the servants, who being



useful to the head, and essential to the well-being of the



family, have therefore a title to become an object of the



master's care and concern.



    The whole oeconomy must be directed by the head, who is both



lord and steward of the family. It is however necessary, that



these two offices be not confounded with one another. As lord, he



establishes the laws of his oeconomy; as steward, he puts them in



execution. As lord, he may restrain and give his commands to all



within the house as he thinks proper; as steward, he must conduct



with gentleness and address, and is bound by his own regulations.



The better the oeconomist, the more uniformity is perceived in



all his actions, and the less liberties are taken to depart from



stated rules. He is not so much master, as that he may break



through the laws of his oeconomy, although in every respect he



may keep each individual within the house, in the most exact



subordination to his commands. Oeconomy and government, even in a



private family, present therefore two different ideas, and have



also two different objects.



    What oeconomy is in a family, political oeconomy is in a



state: with these essential differences, however, that in a state



there are no servants, all are children: that a family may be



formed when and how a man pleases, and he may there establish



what plan of oeconomy he thinks fit; but states are found formed,



and the Oeconomy of these depends upon a thousand circumstances.



The statesman (this is a general term to signify the legislature



and supreme power, according to the form of government) is



neither master to establish what oeconomy he pleases, or, in the



exercise of his sublime authority, to overturn at will the



established laws of it, let him be the most despotic monarch upon



earth.(1*)



    The great art therefore of political oeconomy is, first to



adapt the different operations of it to the spirit, manners,



habits, and customs of the people; and afterwards to model these



circumstances so, as to be able to introduce a set of new and



more useful institutions.



    The principal object of this science is to secure a certain



fund of subsistence for all the inhabitants, to obviate every



circumstance which may render it precarious; to provide every



thing necessary for supplying the wants of the society, and to



employ the inhabitants (supposing them to be free-men) in such a



manner as naturally to create reciprocal relations and



dependencies between them, so as to make their several interests



lead them to supply one another with their reciprocal wants.



    If one considers the variety which is found in different



countries, in the distribution of property, subordination of



classes, genius of people, proceeding from the variety of forms



of government, laws, climate, and manners, one may conclude, that



the political oeconomy in each must necessarily be different, and



that principles, however universally true, may become quite



ineffectual in practice, without a sufficient preparation of the



spirit of a people.



    It is the business of a statesman to judge of the expediency



of different schemes of oeconomy, and by degrees to model the



minds of his subjects so as to induce them, from the allurement



of private interest, to concur in the execution of his plan.



    The speculative person who, removed from the practice,



extracts the principles of this science from observation and



reflection, should divest himself, as far as possible, of every



prejudice in favour of established opinions, however reasonable,



when examined relatively to particular nations: he must do his



utmost to become a citizen of the world, comparing customs,



examining minutely institutions which appear alike, when in



different countries they are found to produce different effects:



he should examine the cause of such differences with the utmost



diligence and attention. It is from such inquiries that the true



principles are discovered.



    He who takes up the pen upon this subject, keeping in his eye



the customs of his own or any other country, will fall more



naturally into a description of one particular system of it, than



into an examination of the principles of the science in general;



he will applaud such institutions as he finds rightly



administered at home; he will condemn those which are



administered with abuse; but, without comparing different methods



of executing the same plan in different countries, he will not



easily distinguish the disadvantages which are essential to the



institution, from those which proceed from the abuse. For this



reason a land-tax excites he indignation of a Frenchman, an



excise that of an Englishman. One who looks into the execution of



both, in each country, and in every branch of their management,



will discover the real effects of these impositions, and be able



to distinguish what proceeds from abuse, from what is essential



to the burden.



    Nothing is more effectual towards preparing the spirit of a



people to receive a good plan of oeconomy, than a proper



representation of it. On the other hand, nothing is better



calculated to keep the statesman, who is at the head of affairs,



in awe.



    When principles are well understood, the real consequences of



burdensome institutions are clearly seen: when the purposes they



are intended for are not obtained, the abuse of the statesman's



administration appears palpable. People then will not so much cry



out against the imposition, as against the misapplication. It



will not be a land-tax of four shillings in the pound, nor an



excise upon wines and tobacco, which will excite the murmurs of a



nation; it will be the prodigal dissipation and misapplication of



the amount of these taxes after they are laid on. But when



principles are not known, all inquiry is at an end, the moment a



nation can be engaged to submit to the burden. It is the same



with regard to many other parts of this science: while people



remain blind they are always mistrustful.



    Having pointed out the object of my pursuit, I shall only



add, that my intention is to attach myself principally to a clear



deduction of principles, and a short application of them to



familiar examples, in order to avoid abstraction as much as



possible. I farther intend to confine myself to such parts of



this extensive subject, as shall appear the most interesting in



the general system of modern politics; of which I shall treat



with that spirit of liberty, which reigns more and more every



day, throughout all the polite and flourishing nations of Europe.



    When I compare the elegant performances which have appeared



in Great Britain and in France with my dry and abstracted manner



of treating the same subject, in a plain language void of



ornament, I own I am discouraged on many accounts. If I be



obliged to set out by laying down, as fundamental principles, the



most obvious truths, I dread the imputation of pedantry, and of



pretending to turn common sense into science. If I follow these



principles through a minute detail, I may appear trifling. I



therefore hope the reader will believe me, when I tell him, that



these defects have not escaped my discernment, but that my



genius, the nature of the work, and the connection of the



subject, have obliged me to write in an order and in a style,



where every thing has been sacrificed to perspicuity.



    My principal aim shall be to discover truth, and to enable my



reader to touch the very link of the chain where I may at any



time go astray.



    My business shall not be to seek for new thoughts, but to



reason consequentially; and if any thing new shall be found, it



will be in the conclusions.



    Long steps in political reasoning lead to error: close



reasoning is tedious, and to many appears trivial: this, however,



must be my plan, and my consolation is, that the farther I



advance, I shall become the more interesting.



    Every supposition must be considered as strictly relative to



the circumstances presupposed; and though, in order to prevent



misapplication, and to avoid abstraction as much as possible, I



frequently make use of examples for illustrating every principle;



yet these, which are taken from matters of fact, must be supposed



divested of every foreign circumstance inconsistent with the



supposition.



    I shall combat no particular opinion in such intricate



matters; though sometimes I may pass them in review, in order to



point out how I am led to differ from them.



    I pretend to form no system, but, by tracing out a succession



of principles, consistent with the nature of man and with one



another, I shall endeavour to furnish some materials towards the



forming of a good one.







Chap. I







Of the Government of Mankind







    Man we find acting uniformly in all age, in all countries,



and in all climates, from the principles of self-interest,



expediency, duty, or passion. In this he is alike, in nothing



else.



    These motives of human actions produce such a variety of



circumstances, that if we consider the several species of animals



in the creation, we shall find the individuals of no class so



unlike to one another, as man to man. No wonder then if people



differ in opinion with regard to every thing almost which relates



to our species.



    As this noble animal is a sociable creature, both from



necessity and inclination, we find also, in all ages, climates



and countries, a certain modification of government and



subordination established among them. Here again we are presented



with as great a variety, as there are different societies; all



however agreeing in this, that the end of a voluntary



subordination to authority is with a view to promote the general



good.



    Constant and uninterrupted experience has proved to man, that



virtue and justice, in those who govern, are sufficient to render



the society happy, under any form of government. Virtue and



justice, when applied to government, mean no more than a tender



affection for the whole society, and an exact and impartial



regard for the interest of every class.



    All actions, and all things indeed, are good or bad by



relation only. Nothing is so complex as relations when considered



with regard to a society, and nothing is so difficult as to



discover truth, when involved and blended with these relations.



    We are not to conclude from this, that every operation of



government must become problematical and uncertain as to its



consequences: some are evidently good; others are notoriously



bad; those, the tendency of which is less evident, are always the



least essential, and the more complex they appear to a discerning



eye, the more trivial they are found to be in their immediate



consequences.



    A government must be continually in action, and one principal



object of its attention must be, the consequences and effects of



new institutions.



    Experience alone will shew, what human prudence could not



foresee; and mistakes must be corrected as often as expediency



requires.



    All governments have what they call their fundamental laws;



but fundamental, that is, invariable laws, can never subsist



among men, the most variable thing we know: the only fundamental



law, salus populi, must ever be relative, like every other thing.



But this is rather a maxim than a law.



    It is however expedient, nay absolutely necessary, that in



every state, certain laws be supposed fundamental and invariable:



both to serve as a curb to the ambition of individuals, and to



point out to the statesman the outlines, or sketch of that plan



of government, which experience has proved to be the best adapted



to the spirit of his people.



    Such laws may even be considered as actually invariable,



while a state subsists without convulsions or revolutions;



because then the alterations are so gradual, that they become



imperceptible to all, but the most discerning, who can compare



the customs and manners of the same people in different periods



of time and under different circumstances.



    As we have taken for granted the fundamental maxim, that



every operation of government should be calculated for the good



of the people, so we may with equal certainty decide, that in



order to make a people happy, they must be governed according to



the spirit which prevails among them.



    I am next to explain what I mean by the spirit of a people,



and to show how far this spirit must be made to influence the



government of every society.







Chap. II







Of the Spirit of a People







    The spirit of a people is formed upon a set of received



opinions relative to three objects; morals, government, and



manners: these once generally adopted by any society, confirmed



by long and constant habit, and never called in question, form



the basis of all laws, regulate the form of every government, and



determine what is commonly called the customs of a country.



    To know a people, we must examine them under these general



heads. We acquire the knowledge of their morals with ease, by



consulting the tenets of their religion, and from what is taught



among them by authority.



    The second, or government, is more disguised, as it is



constantly changing from circumstances, partly resulting from



domestic and partly from foreign considerations. A thorough



knowledge of their history, and conversation with their ministers



of state, may give one, who has access to these helps, a very



competent knowledge of this branch.



    The last, or the knowledge of the manners of a people, is by



far the most difficult to acquire, and yet is the most open to



every person's observation. Certain circumstances with regard to



manners are supposed by every one in the country to be so well



known, so generally followed and observed, that it seldom occurs



to any body to inform a stranger concerning them. In one country



nothing is so injurious as a stroke with a stick, or even a



gesture which implies a design or a desire to strike. in another



a stroke is not near so offensive as an opprobrious expression.



An innocent liberty with the fair sex, which in one country



passes without censure, is looked upon in another as the highest



indignity. In general, the opinion of a people with regard to



injuries is established by custom only, and nothing is more



necessary in government, than an exact attention to every



circumstance peculiar to the people to be governed.



    The kingdom of Spain was lost for a violence committed upon



chastity;(2*) the city of Genoa for a blow;(3*) the kingdoms of



Naples and Sicily have ever been ready to revolt; because having



been for many ages under the dominion of strangers, the people



have never been governed according to the true spirit of their



manners. Let us consult the revolutions of all countries, and we



shall find, that the most trivial circumstances have had a



greater influence on such events, than the more weighty reasons,



which are always set forth as the real motives. I need not



enlarge upon this subject, my intention is only to suggest an



idea which any one may pursue, and which will be applied upon



many occasions as we go along; for there is no treating any point



which regards the political oeconomy of a nation, without



accompanying the example with some supposition relative to the



spirit of the people.



    I have said, that the most difficult thing to learn



concerning a people, is the spirit of their manners.



Consequently, the most difficult thing for a stranger to adopt,



is their manner. Men acquire the language, nay even lose the



foreign accent, before they lose the peculiarity of their manner.



The reason is plain. The inclinations must be changed, the taste



for amusements must be new-modelled; established maims upon



government, manners, nay even upon some moral actions, must



undergo certain new modifications, before the stranger's



conversation and behaviour can become consistent with the spirit



of the people with whom he lives.



    From these considerations, we may find the reason, why



nothing is more heavy to bear than the government of conquerors,



in spite of all their endeavours to render themselves agreeable



to the conquered. Of this, experience has ever proved the truth,



and princes are so much persuaded of it, that when a country is



subdued in our days, or when it otherwise changes masters, there



is seldom any question of altering, but by very slow degrees and



length of time, the established laws and customs of the



inhabitants. I might safely say, there is no form of government



upon earth so excellent in itself, as, necessarily, to make the



people happy under it. Freedom itself, imposed upon a people



groaning under the greatest slavery, will not make them happy,



unless it is made to undergo certain modifications, relative to



their established habits.



    Having explained what I mean by the spirit of a people, I



come next to consider, how far this spirit must influence



government.



    If governments be taken in general, we shall find them



analogous to the spirit of the people. But the point under



consideration is, how a statesman is to proceed, when expediency



and refinement require a change of administration, or when it



becomes necessary from a change of circumstances.



    The great alteration in the affairs of Europe within these



three centuries, by the discovery of America and the Indies, the



springing up of industry and learning, the introduction of trade



and the luxurious arts, the establishment of public credit, and a



general system of taxation, have entirely altered the plan of



government every where.



    From feudal and military, it is become free and commercial. I



oppose freedom in government to the feudal system, to mark only



that there is not found now that chain of subordination among the



subjects, which made the essential part of the feudal form. The



head there had little power, and the lower classes of the people



little liberty. Now every industrious man, who lives with



oeconomy, is free and independent under most forms of government.



Formerly, the power of the barons swallowed up the independency



of all inferior classes. I oppose commercial to military; because



the military governments now are made to subsist from the



consequences and effects of commerce only. that is, from the



revenue of the state, proceeding from taxes. Formerly, every



thing was brought about by numbers; now, numbers of men cannot be



kept together without money.



    This is sufficient to point out the nature of the revolution



in the political state, and of consequence in the manners of



Europe.



    The spirit of a people changes no doubt of itself, but by



slow degrees. The same generation commonly adheres to the same



principles, and retains the same spirit. In every country we find



two generations upon the stage at a time; that is to say, we may



distribute into two classes the spirit which prevails; the one



amongst men between twenty and thirty, when opinions are forming;



the other of those who are past fifty, when opinions and habits



are formed and confirmed. A person of judgment and observation



may foresee many things relative to government, from an exact



attention to the rise and progress of new customs and opinions,



provided he preserve his mind free from all attachments and



prejudices, in favour of those which he himself has adopted, and



in that delicacy of sensation necessary to perceive the influence



of a change of circumstances. This is the genius proper to form a



great minister.



    In every new step the spirit of the people should be first



examined; and if this be not found ripe for the execution of the



plan, it ought to be put off, kept entirely secret, and every



method used to prepare the people to relish the innovation.



    The project of introducing popery into England was blown



before it was put in practice, and so miscarried. Queen Elizabeth



kept her own secret, and succeeded in a similar attempt. The



scheme of a general excise was pushed with too much vivacity, was



made a matter of party, was ill-timed, and the people nowise



prepared for it; hence it will be the more difficult to bring



about at another time, without the greatest precautions.



    In turning and working upon the spirit of a people, nothing



is impossible to an able statesman. When a people can be engaged



to murder their wives and children, and to burn themselves,



rather than submit to a foreign enemy, when they can be brought



to give their most precious effects, their ornaments of gold and



silver, for the support of a common cause; when women are brought



to give their hair to make ropes, and the most decrepit old men



to mount the walls of a town for its defence; I think I may say,



that by properly conducting and managing the spirit of a people,



nothing is impossible to be accomplished. But when I say, nothing



is impossible, I must be understood to mean, that nothing



essentially necessary for the good of the people is impossible;



and this is all that is required in government.



    That it requires a particular talent in a statesman to



dispose the minds of a people to approve even of the scheme which



is the most conducive to their interest and prosperity, appears



from this, that we see examples of wise, rich, and powerful



nations languishing in inactivity, at a time when every



individual is animated with a quite contrary spirit; becoming a



prey to their enemies, like the city of Jerusalem, while they are



taken up with their domestic animosities, merely because the



remedies proposed against these evils contradict the spirit of



the times.



    The great art of governing is to divest oneself of prejudices



and attachments to particular opinions, particular classes, and



above all to particular persons; to consult the spirit of the



people, to give way to it in appearance, and in so doing to give



it a turn capable of inspiring those sentiments which may induce



them to relish the change, which an alteration of circumstances



has rendered necessary.



    Can any change be greater among free men, than from a state



of absolute liberty and independence to become subject to



constraint in the most trivial actions? This change has however



taken place over all Europe within these three hundred years, and



yet we think ourselves more free than ever our fathers were.



Formerly a gentleman who enjoyed a bit of land, knew not what it



was to have any demand made upon him, but in virtue of



obligations by himself contracted. He disposed of the fruits of



the earth, and of the labour of his servants or vassals, as he



thought fit. Every thing was bought, sold, transferred,



transported, modified, and composed, for private consumption, or



for public use, without ever the state's being once found



interested in what was doing. This, I say, was formerly the



general situation of Europe, among free nations under a regular



administration; and the only impositions commonly known to affect



landed men, were made in consequence of a contract of



subordination, feudal or other, which had certain limitations;



and the impositions were appropriated for certain purposes.



    Daily experience shews, that nothing is more against the



inclinations of a people than the imposition of taxes; and the



less they are accustomed to them, the more difficult it is to get



them established.



    The great abuse of governors in the application of taxes



contributes not a little to entertain and augment this repugnancy



in the governed: but besides abuse, there is often too little



management used to prepare the spirits of the people for such



innovations; for we see them upon many occasions submitting with



cheerfulness to very heavy impositions, provided they he



well-timed, and consistent with their manners and disposition. A



French gentleman, who cannot bear the thought of being put upon a



level with a peasant in paying a land-tax, pays contentedly, in



time of war, a general tax upon all his effects, under a



different name. To pay for your head is terrible in one country;



to pay for light appears as terrible in another.



    It often happens, that statesmen take the hint of new



impositions from the example of other nations, and not from a



nice examination of their own domestic circumstances. But when



these are rightly attended to, it becomes easy to discover the



means of executing the same plan, in a way quite adapted to the



spirit, temper, and circumstances of the people. When strangers



are employed as statesmen, the disorder is still greater, unless



there be extraordinary penetration, temper, and, above all,



flexibility and discretion.



    Statesmen have sometimes recourse to artifice instead of



reason, because their intentions often are not upright. This



destroys all confidence between them and the people; and



confidence is necessary when you are in a manner obliged to ask a



favour, or when what you demand is not indisputably your right. A



people thus tricked into an imposition, though expedient for



their prosperity, will oppose violently, at another time, a like



measure, even when essential to their preservation.



    At other times, we see statesmen presenting the allurement of



present ease, precisely at the time when people's minds are best



disposed to receive a burden. I mean when war threatens, and when



the mind is heated with a resentment of injuries. Is it not



wonderful, at such a time as this, to increase taxes in



proportion only to the interest of money wanted; does not this



imply a shortsightedness, or at least an indifference as to what



is to come? Is it not more natural, that a people should consent



to come under burdens to gratify revenge, than submit to repay a



large debt when their minds are restored to a state of



tranquility.



    From the examples I have given, I hope what I mean by the



spirit of a people is sufficiently understood, and I think I have



abundantly shewn the necessity of its being properly disposed, in



order to establish a right plan of oeconomy. This is so true,



that many examples may be found, of a people's rejecting the most



beneficial institutions, and even the greatest favours, merely



because some circumstance had shocked their established customs.



No wonder then, if we see them refuse to come under limitations,



restraints, and burdens, when the utmost they can be flattered



with from them, is a distant prospect of national good.



    I have found it necessary to premise these general



reflections, in order to obviate many objections which might



naturally enough occur in the perusal of this inquiry. I shall



have occasion to make a number of suppositions, and to draw



consequences from them, which are abundantly natural, provided a



proper spirit in the people be presupposed, but which would be



far from being natural without this supposition. I suppose, for



example, that a poor man, loaded with many children, would be



glad to have the state maintain them; that another, who has waste



lands, would be obliged to one who would gratuitously build him a



farm-house upon it. yet in both suppositions I may prove



mistaken; for fathers there are, who would rather see their



children dead than out of their hands; and proprietors are to be



found, who, for the sake of hunting, would lay the finest country



in Europe into a waste.



    In order to communicate an adequate idea of what I understand



by political oeconomy, I have explained the term, by pointing out



the object of the art; which is, to provide food, other



necessaries, and employment to every one of the society.



    This is a very simple and a very general method of defining a



most complicated operation.



    To provide a proper employment for all the members of a



society, is the same as to model and conduct every branch of



their concerns.



    Upon this idea may be formed, I think, the most extensive



basis for an inquiry into the principles of political oeconomy.



    The next thing to be done, is to fall upon a distinct method



of analysing so extensive a subject, by contriving a train of



ideas, which may be directed towards every part of the plan, and



which, at the same time, may be made to arise methodically from



one another.



    For this purpose I have taken a hint from what the late



revolutions in the politics of Europe have pointed out to be the



regular progress of mankind, from great simplicity to complicated



refinement.



    This first book shall then set out with taking up society in



the cradle, as I may say. I shall here examine the principles



which influence their multiplication, the method of providing for



their subsistence, the origin of their labour, the effects of



their liberty and slavery, the distribution of them into classes,



with some other topics which relate to mankind in general.



    Here we shall find the principles of industry influencing the



multiplication of mankind, and the cultivation of the soil. This



I have thrown in on purpose to prepare my reader for the subject



of the second book; where he will find the same principle (under



the wings of liberty) providing an easy subsistence for a



numerous populace, by the means of trade, which sends the labour



of an industrious people over the whole world.



    From the experience of what has happened these last two



hundred years, we find to what a pitch the trade and industry of



Europe has increased alienations, and the circulation of money. I



shall therefore closely adhere to these, as the most immediate



consequences of the preceding improvement; and, by analysing



them, I shall form my third and fourth books, in which I intend



to treat of money and credit.



    We see also how credit has engaged nations to avail



themselves of it in their wars, and how, by the use of it, they



have been led to contract debts; which they never can satisfy and



pay, without imposing taxes. The doctrine, then, of debts and



taxes will very naturally follow that of credit in this great



chain of political consequences.



    By this kind of historical clue, I shall conduct myself



through the great avenues of this extensive labyrinth; and in my



review of every particular district, I shall step from



consequence to consequence, until I have penetrated into the



inmost recesses of my own understanding.



    When a subject is broken off, I shall render my transitions



as gradual as I can, by still preserving some chain of connexion;



and although I cannot flatter myself (in such infinite variety of



choice, as to order and distribution) to hit at all times on that



method, which may appear to every reader the most natural and the



most correct, yet I shall spare no pains in casting the materials



into different forms, so as to make the best distribution of them



in my power.







Chap. III







Upon what Principles, and from what natural Causes do Mankind



multiply? And what are the Effects of Procreation in Countries



where Numbers are found to increase?







    The multiplication of mankind has been treated of in



different ways; some have made out tables to show the progression



of multiplication, others have treated the question historically.



The state of numbers in different ages of the world, or in



different countries at different times, has been made the object



of inquiry; and the most exact scrutiny has been made into



ancient authors, as the means of investigating the truth of this



matter. All passages relative to the subject have been laid



together, and accompanied with glosses and interpretations the



most plausible, in order to determine the main question. The



elaborate performances of Mr Hume, and Dr Wallace, who have



adopted opposite opinions in regard to the populousness of the



ancient world, have left nothing new to be said upon this



subject; at least the application they appear to have given in



examining the ancients, is a great discouragement to any one who



might otherwise still flatter himself to find out circumstances



in them, proper to cast a new light upon the question.



    My intention in this chapter is not to decide, nor even to



give my opinion upon that matter, far less to combat the



arguments advanced on either side. I am to consider the question



under a different point of view; not to inquire what numbers of



people were found upon the earth at a certain time, but to



examine the natural and rational causes of multipliCation. If we



can discover these, we may perhaps be led to judge how far they



might have operated in different ages and in different countries.



    The fundamental principle of the multiplication of all



animals, and consequently of man, is generation; the next is



food: generation gives existence, food preserves it. Did the



earth produce of itself the proper nourishment for man with



unlimited abundance, we should find no occasion to labour in



order to procure it. Now in all countries found inhabited, as in



those which have been found desolate, if the state of animals be



inquired into, the number of them will be found in proportion to



the quantity of food produced by the earth, regularly throughout



the year, for their subsistence. I say, regularly throughout the



year, because we perceive, in those animals which produce in



great abundance, such as all the feathered sort, that vast



multitudes are destroyed in winter; they are brought forth with



the fruits of the earth, and fall in proportion to their decay.



This principle is so natural, that I think it can hardly be



controverted.



    As to man, the earth does not spontaneously produce



nourishment for him in any considerable degree. I allow that as



some species of animals support life by devouring others, so may



man; but it must be observed, that the species feeding must



always be much inferior in number to the species fed upon. This



is evident in reason and in fact.



    Were the earth therefore uncultivated, the numbers of mankind



would not exceed the proportion of the spontaneous fruits which



she offers for their immediate use, or for that of the animals



which might be the proper nourishment of man.



    There is therefore a certain number of mankind which the



earth would be able to maintain without any labour: allow me to



call this quantity (A). Does it not, from this exposition of the



matter, appear plain, that without labour (A) never can increase



any more than animals, which do not work for themselves, can



increase beyond the proportion of food provided for them by



nature? Let it be however observed, that I do not pretend to



limit (A) to a determinate number. The seasons will no doubt



influence the numbers of mankind, as we see they influence the



plenty of other animals; but I say (A) will never increase beyond



the fixed proportion above mentioned.



    Having resolved one question with regard to multiplication,



and shewn that numbers must become greater or smaller according



to the productions of nature, I come to the second thing proposed



to be treated of in the chapter; to wit, what will become of the



generative faculty after it has produced the full proportion of



(A), and what effects will afterwards follow.



    We see how beneficent, I might have said prodigal, nature is



in bestowing life by generation. Several kinds of animals,



especially insects, multiply by thousands, and yet the species



does not appear annually to increase. Nobody can pretend that



particular individuals of any species have a privilege to live,



and that others die from a difference in their nature. It is



therefore reasonable to conclude, that what destroys such vast



quantities of those produced, must be, among other causes, the



want of food. Let us apply this to man.



    Those who are supposed to be fed with the spontaneous fruits



of the earth, cannot, from what has been said, multiply beyond



that proportion; at the same time the generative faculty will



work its natural effects in augmenting numbers. The consequence



will be, that certain individuals must become worse fed,



consequently weaker. consequently, if, in that weakly state,



nature should withhold a part of her usual plenty, the whole



multitude will be affected by it; a disease may take place, and



sweep off a far greater number than that proportioned to the



deficiency of the season. What results from this? That those who



have escaped, finding food more plentiful, become vigorous and



strong. generation gives life to additional numbers, food



preserves it, until they rise up to the former standard.



    Thus the generative faculty resembles a spring loaded with a



weight, which always exerts itself in proportion to the



diminution of resistance: when food has remained some time



without augmentation or diminution, generation will carry numbers



as high as possible; if then food come to be diminished, the



spring is overpowered; the force of it becomes less than nothing.



Inhabitants will diminish, at least, in proportion to the



overcharge. If, upon the other hand, food be increased, the



spring which stood at 0, will begin to exert itself in proportion



as the resistance diminishes; people will begin to be better fed;



they will multiply, and, in proportion as they increase in



numbers, the food will become scarce again.



    I must here subjoin a remark very analogous to this subject.



That the generative faculty in man (which we have compared to a



spring), and the care and love we have for our children, first



prompt us to multiply, and then engage us to divide what we have



with our little ones. Thus from dividing and subdividing it



happens, that in every country where food is limited to a certain



quantity, the inhabitants must be subsisted in a regular



progression, descending down from plenty and ample subsistence,



to the last periods of want, and even sometimes starving for



hunger.



    Although the examples of this last extremity are not common



in some countries, yet I believe they are more so than is



generally imagined; and the other stages of want are productive



of many diseases, and of a decay which extinguishes the faculty



of generation, or which weakens it, so as to produce children



less vigorous and less healthy. I appeal to experience, if this



reasoning be not just.



    Put two or three pairs of rabbits into a field proper for



them, the multiplication will be rapid; and in a few years the



warren will be stocked: you may take yearly from it a hundred



pairs, I shall suppose, and keep your warren in good order: give



over taking any for some years, you will perhaps find your



original stock rather diminished than increased, for the reasons



above mentioned. Africa yearly furnishes many thousands for the



cultivation of America; in this she resembles the warren. I have



little doubt but that if all her sons were returned to her at



once, by far the greater part would die of hunger.







Chap. IV







Continuation of the same Subject, with regard to the natural and



immediate Effects of Agriculture, as to Population







    I now suppose man to add his labour and industry to the



natural activity of the soil: so far, as by this he produces an



additional quantity of food, so far he lays a foundation for the



maintenance of an additional number. This number I shall call



(B). From this I conclude, that as (A) is supposed to be in a



constant proportion to the spontaneous fruits, so (B) must be in



proportion to agriculture (by this term I understand at present



every method of augmenting food by labour), consequently the



number maintained by the labour of mankind must be to the whole



number of mankind as (B) is to (A + B), or as (B) is to (A) and



(B) jointly.



    By this operation we find mankind immediately divided into



two classes; those who, without working, live upon the



spontaneous fruits of the earth; that is, upon milk, cattle,



hunting, &c. The other part, those who are obliged to labour the



soil. It is proper next to inquire what should naturally oblige a



man to labour; and what are the natural consequences of it as to



multiplication.



    We have already said, that the principle of generation is



inherent in man, and prompts him to multiply. Another principle,



as naturally inherent in the mind, as the first is in the body,



is self-love, or a desire of ease and happiness, which prompts



those who find in themselves any superiority, whether personal or



political, to make use of every natural advantage. Consequently,



such will multiply proportionably: because by appropriating to



themselves the fruits of the earth, they have the means of



subsisting their offspring. The others, I think, will very



naturally become their servants; as this method is, of all



others, the most easy to procure subsistence. This is so



analogous to the nature of man, that we see every where, even



among children, that the smallest superiority in any one over the



rest, constantly draws along with it a tribute of service in one



way or other. Those who become servants for the sake of food,



will soon become slaves: for slavery is but the abuse of service,



established by a civil institution; and men who find no



possibility of subsisting otherwise, will be obliged to serve



upon the conditions prescribed to them.



    This seems a consequence not unnatural in the infancy of the



world: yet I do not pretend to affirm that this was the origin of



slavery. Servants, however, there have always been; and the abuse



of service is what we understand by slavery. The subordination of



children to their parents, and of servants to their masters,



seems to be the most rational origin of society and government.



The first of these is natural, and follows as the unavoidable



consequence of an entire dependence: the second is political, and



may very naturally take place as to those who cannot otherwise



procure subsistence. This last species of subordination may, I



think, have taken place, the moment man became obliged to labour



for subsistence, but no sooner.



    The wants of man are not confined to food, merely. When food



is to be produced from the rude surface of the earth, a great



part of his time must be taken up with this object, even



supposing him to be provided with every utensil proper for the



exercise of his industry: he must therefore be in a worse



condition to provide for his other wants: consequently, he may be



willing to serve any one who will do it for him. Whereas, on the



other hand, if we suppose all mankind idle and fed, living upon



the spontaneous fruits of the earth, the plan of universal



liberty becomes quite natural: because under such circumstances



they find no inducement to come under a voluntary subordination.



    Let us now borrow the idea of a primitive society, of a



government, of a king, from the most ancient history we have, the



better to point out the effects of agriculture and



multiplication. The society is the whole taken together; it is



Jacob, his sons, their wives, their children, and all the



servants. The government regards the institutions prescribed by



Jacob, to every one of the family, concerning their respective



subordination and duty. Multiplication will here go forward, not



in proportion to the generative faculty, but according to the



employment of the persons already generated. If Jacob continue



pasturing his herds, he must extend the limits of his right of



pasture; he must multiply his stock of cattle, in proportion as



the mouths of his family augment. He is charged with all this



detail: for he is master, and director, and statesman, and



general provider. His servants will work as they are ordered; but



if he has not had the proper foresight, to break up lands so soon



as his family comes nearly up to that proportion which his flocks



can easily feed; if in this case, a dry season should burn up the



grass in Palestine, he will be obliged to send some of his stock



of cattle, by some of his family, to market, there to be sold;



and with the price he must buy corn. For in this early age, there



was money, there were manufactures of sackcloth, of common



raiment, and of party-coloured garments; there was a trade in



corn, in spicery, balm, and myrrh. Jacob and his family were



shepherds, but they lived not entirely on flesh; they eat bread:



consequently there was tillage in those days, though they



exercised none. The famine however was ready to destroy them, and



probably would have done it, but for the providential



circumstance of Joseph's being governor of Egypt. He relieved



their distress, he gave to his family the best country in the



whole kingdom for pasture; and they had a gratuitous supply of



bread.



    No doubt, so long as these favourable circumstances



subsisted, multiplication would go on apace. What supernatural



assistance God was pleased to grant for the increase of his



chosen people, does not concern my inquiry.



    I have mentioned transiently this example of the patriarch,



to point out only how ancient the use of money, the invention of



trade and manufactures appear to have been. Without such previous



establishments, I consider mankind as savages, living on the



spontaneous fruits of the earth, as in the first supposition; and



confined, as to numbers, to the actual extent of these



productions.



    From what has been said, we may conclude, that the numbers of



mankind must depend upon the quantity of food produced by the



earth for their nourishment; from which, as a corollary, may be



drawn.



    That mankind have been, as to numbers, and must ever be, in



proportion to the food produced; and that the food produced will



be in the compound proportion of the fertility of the climate,



and the industry of the inhabitants.



    From this last proposition it appears plain, that there can



be no general rule for determining the number of inhabitants



necessary for agriculture, not even in the same country. The



fertility of the soil when laboured, the ease of labouring it,



the quantity of good spontaneous fruits, the plenty of fish in



the rivers and sea, the abundance of wild birds and beasts, have



in all ages, and ever must influence greatly the nourishment,



and, consequently, regulate the multiplication of man, and



determine his employment.



    To make an establishment in a country not before inhabited,



to root out woods, destroy wild and venomous animals, drain



marshy grounds, give a free course to water, and to lay down the



surface into corn fields, must surely require more hands than to



cultivate the same after it is improved. For the truth of this, I



appeal to our American brethren.



    We may therefore conclude, that the most essential requisite



for population, is that of agriculture, or the providing of



subsistence. Upon this all the rest depends: while subsistence is



upon a precarious footing, no statesman can turn his attention to



any thing else.



    The great importance of this object has engaged some to



imagine, that the luxurious arts, in our days, are prejudicial



both to agriculture and multiplication. It is sometimes of ill



consequence to fix one's attention too much upon any one object,



however important. Nobody can dispute that agriculture is the



foundation of multiplication, and the most essential requisite



for the prosperity of a state. But it does not follow from this,



that every body almost in the state should be employed in it;



that would be inverting the order of things, and turning the



master into the servant. The duty and business of man is not to



feed; he is fed, in order to do his duty, and to become useful in



his profession; whether agriculture, art, or science.



    It is not sufficient for my purpose to know, that the



introduction of agriculture, by multiplying the quantity of the



earth's productions, does evidently tend to increase the numbers



of mankind. I must examine the political causes which must



concur, in order to operate this effect.



    For this purpose, my next inquiry shall be directed towards



discovering the true principles which influence the employment of



man, with respect to agriculture. I shall spare no pains in



examining this point to the bottom, even though it should lead me



to anticipate some branches of my subject.



    I shall endeavour to lay down principles consistent with the



nature of man, with agriculture, and with multiplication, in



order, by their means, to discover both the use and abuse of the



two last. When these parts are well understood, the rest will go



on more smoothly, and I shall find the less occasion to interrupt



my subject, in order to explain the topics upon which the whole



depends.







Chap. V







In what Manner, and according to what Principles, and political



Causes, does Agriculture augment Population?











    I have already shewn, how the spontaneous fruits of the earth



provide a fund of nourishment for a determinate number of men,



and have slightly touched upon the consequences of adding labour



to the natural activity of the soil.



    Let me now carry this inquiry a little farther. Let me



suppose a country fertile in spontaneous productions, capable of



improvements of every kind, inhabited by a people living under a



free government, and in the most refined simplicity, without



trade, without the luxurious arts, and without ambition. Let me



here suppose a statesman, who shall inspire a taste for



agriculture and for labour into those who formerly consumed the



spontaneous fruits of the earth in ease and idleness. What will



become of this augmentation of food produced by this additional



labour?



    The sudden increase of food, such as that here supposed, will



immediately diffuse vigour into all; and if the additional



quantity be not very great, no superfluity will be found. No



sooner will the inhabitants be fully nourished, but they will



begin to multiply a-new: then they will come to divide with their



children, and food will become scarce again.



    Thus much is necessary for the illustration of one principle;



but the effects, which we have been pointing out, will not be



produced barely by engaging those who lived by hunting (I



suppose) to quit that trade, and turn farmers. The statesman must



also find out a method to make the produce of this new branch of



industry circulate downwards, so as to relieve the wants of the



most necessitous: Otherwise, the plenty produced, remaining in



the hands of those who produced it, will become to them an



absolute superfluity; which, had they any trade with a



neighbouring state, they would sell, or exchange, and leave their



fellow-citizens to starve. And as we suppose no trade at all,



this superfluity will perish like their cherries, in a year of



plenty; and consequently the farmers will immediately give over



working.



    If, to prevent this inconveniency, the statesman shall force



certain classes to labour the soil, and, with discretion,



distribute the produce of it to all that have occasion for



subsistence, taking in return their services for the public



benefit; this will prove an infallible way of multiplying



inhabitants, of making them laborious, and of preserving a



simplicity of manners; but it is also the picture of ancient



slavery, and is therefore excluded from the supposition.



    If he acts consistently with that spirit of liberty, which we



have supposed to animate his subjects, he has no method left, but



to contrive different employments for the hands of the



necessitous, that, by their labour, they may produce an



equivalent which may be acceptable to the farmers, in lieu of



this superfluity; for these last certainly will not raise it, if



they cannot dispose of it; nor will they dispose of it, but for a



proper equivalent. This is the only method (in a free state) of



procuring additional food, and of distributing it through the



society, as the price of those hours which before were spent in



idleness: and, as this will prove a more certain and more



extensive fund of subsistence, than the precarious productions of



spontaneous fruits, which cannot be increased at discretion, and



in proportion to demand, it will greatly increase numbers; but,



on the other hand, it must evidently destroy that simplicity of



manners which naturally reigns among nations who do not labour.



    A people, therefore, who have an industrious turn, will



multiply in proportion to the superfluity produced by their



farmers; because the labour of the necessitous will prove an



equivalent for it.



    Now this additional number of inhabitants, being raised and



fed with the superfluity actually produced by the farmers, can



never be supposed necessary for providing this quantity, which



(though relatively to the farmers it be called a superfluity) is



merely a sufficiency relatively to the whole society. and,



therefore, if it be found necessary to employ the new inhabitants



also in farming, it must be with a view only to a still greater



multiplication.



    Farther, we may lay it down as a principle, that a farmer



will not labour to produce a superfluity of grain relatively to



his own consumption, unless he finds some want which may be



supplied by means of that superfluity'. neither will other



industrious persons work to supply the wants of the farmer for



any other reason than to procure subsistence, which they cannot



otherwise so easily obtain. These are the reciprocal wants which



the statesman must create, in order to bind the society together.



Here, then, is one principle: Agriculture among a free people



will augment population, in proportion only as the necessitous



are put in a situation to purchase subsistence with their labour.



    If, in any country which actually produces nourishment for



its inhabitants, according to the progression above-mentioned, a



plan is set on foot for the extension of agriculture; the



augmentation must be made to bear a due proportion to the



progress of industry and wants of the people, or else an outlet



must be provided for disposing of the superfluity. And if, at



setting out, a foreign consumption cannot be procured for the



produce of husbandry, the greatest caution must be had to keep



the improvement of the soil within proper bounds: for, without



this, the plan intended for an improvement will, by over-doing,



turn out to the detriment of agriculture. This will be the case,



if the fruits of the earth be made to increase faster than the



numbers and the industry of those who are to consume them. For if



the whole be not consumed, the regorging plenty will discourage



the industry of the farmer.



    But if, together with an encouragement to agriculture, a



proper outlet be found for the superfluity, until the numbers and



industry of the people, by increasing, shall augment the



home-consumption, which again by degrees will diminish the



quantity of exportation, then the spring will easily overcome the



resistance; it will dilate; that is, numbers will continue to



increase.



    From this may be derived another principle: That agriculture,



when encouraged for the sake of multiplying inhabitants, must



keep pace with the progress of industry; or else an outlet must



be provided for all superfluity.



    In the foregoing example, I have supposed no exportation, the



more to simplify the supposition: I was, therefore, obliged to



throw in a circumstance, in order to supply the want of it; to



wit, an augmentation of inland demand from the suspension of



hunting; and I have supposed those who formerly supported



themselves by this, to consume the superfluous food of the



farmers for the price of their labour. This may do well enough as



a supposition, and has been made use of merely to explain



principles. but the manners of a people are not so easily



changed; and therefore I have a little anticipated the



supposition of trade, to shew only how it must concur with



industry, in the advancement of agriculture and multiplication.



    Let me next consider the consequences of an augmentation of



agriculture in a country where the inhabitants are lazy; or where



they live in such simplicity of manners, as to have few wants



which labour and industry can supply. In this case, I say, the



scheme of agriculture will not succeed; and, if set on foot, a



part of the grounds will soon become again uncultivated.



    The laziest part of the farmers, disgusted with a labour



which produces a plenty superfluous to themselves, which they



cannot dispose of for any equivalent, will give over working, and



return to their ancient simplicity. The more laborious will not



furnish food to the necessitous for nothing: such therefore who



cannot otherwise subsist, will naturally serve the industrious,



and thereby sell their service for food. Thus by the diminution



of labour, a part of the country, proportional to the quantity of



food which the farmers formerly found superfluous, will again



become uncultivated.



    Here then will be found a country, the population of which



must stop for want of food; and which, by the supposition, is



abundantly able to produce more. Experience every where shews the



possible existence of such a case, since no country in Europe is



cultivated to the utmost: and that there are many still, where



cultivation, and consequently multiplication, is at a stop. These



nations I consider as in a moral incapacity of multiplying: the



incapacity would be physical, if there was an actual



impossibility of their procuring an augmentation of food by any



means whatsoever.



    These principles seem to be confirmed by experience; whether



we compare them with the manner of living among the free American



savages, or among the free, industrious, and laborious Europeans.



We find the productions of all countries, generally speaking, in



proportion to the number of their inhabitants; and, on the other



hand, the inhabitants are most commonly in proportion to the



food.



    I beg that this may not be looked upon as a quibble, or what



is called a vicious circle. I have qualified the general



proposition by subjoining that it is found true most commonly;



and from what is to follow, we shall better discover both the



truth and meaning of what is here advanced. While certain causes



operate, food will augment, and mankind will increase in



proportion; when these causes cease, procreation will not augment



numbers; then the general proposition will take place; numbers



and food will remain the same, and balance one another. This I



imagine to be so in fact; and I hope to shew that it is rational



also. Let me now put an end to this chapter, by drawing some



conclusions from what has been laid down, in order to enlarge our



ideas, and to enable us to extend our plan.



    First, One consequence of a fruitful soil, possessed by a



free people, given to agriculture, and inclined to industry, will



be the production of a superfluous quantity of food, over and



above what is necessary to feed the farmers. Inhabitants will



multiply; and, according to their increase, a certain number of



the whole, proportional to such superfluity of nourishment



produced, will apply themselves to industry and to the supplying



of other wants.



    Secondly, From this operation produced by industry, we find



the people distributed into two classes. The first is that of the



farmers who produce the subsistence, and who are necessarily



employed in this branch of business; the other I shall call free



hands; because their occupation being to procure themselves



subsistence out of the superfluity of the farmers, and by a



labour adapted to the wants of the society, may vary according to



these wants, and these again according to the spirit of the



times.



    Thirdly, If, in the country we are treating of, both money



and the luxurious arts be supposed to be unknown, then the



superfluity of the farmers will be in proportion to the number of



those whose labour will be found sufficient to provide for all



the other necessities of the inhabitants; and, so soon as this is



accomplished, the consumption and produce becoming equally



balanced, the inhabitants will increase no more, or at least very



precariously, unless their wants be multiplied.







Chap. VI







How the Wants of Mankind promote their Multiplication











    If the country we were treating of in the former chapter be



supposed of a considerable extent and fruitfulness, and if the



inhabitants have turn for industry, in a short time luxury, and



the use of money (or of something participating of the nature of



money), will infallibly be introduced.



    By LUXURY, I understand the consumption of any thing produced



by the labour or ingenuity of man, which flatters our senses or



taste of living, and which is neither necessary for our being



well fed, well clothed, well defended against the injuries of the



weather, or for securing us against every thing which can hurt



us.(4*)



    By MONEY, I understand any commodity, which purely in itself



is of no material use to man for the purposes above-mentioned,



but which acquires such an estimation from his opinion of it, as



to become the universal measure of what is called value, and an



adequate equivalent for any thing alienable.(5*)



    Here a new scene opens. This money must be found in the hands



of some of the inhabitants; naturally, of such as have had the



wit to invent it, and the address to make their countrymen fond



of it, by representing it as an equivalent value for food and



necessaries; that is to say, the means of procuring, without work



or toil, not only the labour of others, but food itself.



    Here then is produced a new object of want. Every person



becomes fond of having money; but how to get it is the question.



The proprietors will not give it for nothing, and, by our former



supposition, every one within the society was understood to be



abundantly supplied with food and necessaries; the farmers, from



their labouring the ground; the free hands, by the return of



their own ingenuity, in furnishing necessaries. The proprietors



therefore of this money have all their wants supplied, and still



are possessors of this new kind of riches, which we now suppose



to be coveted by all.



    The natural consequence here will be, that those who have the



money will cease to labour, and yet will consume; and they will



not consume for nothing, for they will pay with money.



    Here then is a number of inhabitants, who live and consume



the produce of the earth without labouring; food will soon become



scarce; demand for it will rise, and that will be paid with



money, this is the best equivalent of all; many will run to the



plough; the superfluity of the farmers will augment; the rich



will call for superfluities; the free hands will supply them, and



demand food in their turn. These will, the rich, who not be found



a burden on the husbandman, as formerly hired of them their



labour or service, must pay them with money, and this money in



their hands will serve as an equivalent for the superfluity of



nourishment produced by additional agriculture.



    When once this imaginary wealth (money) becomes well



introduced into a country, luxury will very naturally follow; and



when money becomes the object of our wants, mankind become



industrious, in turning their labour towards every object which



may engage the rich to part with it; and thus the inhabitants of



any country may increase in numbers, until the ground refuses



farther nourishment. The consequences of this will make the



subject of another chapter.



    Before we proceed, something must be said, in order a little



to restrain these general assertions.



    We have supposed a very rapid progress of industry, and a



very sudden augmentation of inhabitants, from the introduction of



money. But it must be observed, that many circumstances have



concurred with the money to produce this effect.



    We have supposed a country capable of improvement, a



laborious people, a taste for refinement and luxury in the rich,



an ambition to become so, and an application to labour and



ingenuity in the lower classes of men. According to the greater



or less degree of force, or concurrence of these and like



circumstances, will the country in question become more or less



cultivated, and consequently peopled.



    If the soil be vastly rich, situated in a warm climate, and



naturally watered, the productions of the earth will be almost



spontaneous: this will make the inhabitants lazy. Laziness is the



greatest of all obstacles to labour and industry. Manufactures



will never flourish here. The rich, with all their money, will



not become luxurious with delicacy and refinement; for I do not



mean by luxury the gratification of the animal appetites, nor the



abuse of riches, but an elegance of taste and in living, which



has for its object the labour and ingenuity of man; and as the



ingenuity of workmen begets a taste in the rich, so the



allurement of riches kindles an ambition, and encourages an



application to works of ingenuity, in the poor.



    Riches therefore will here be adored as a god, but not made



subservient to the uses of man; and it is by the means of swift



circulation only (as shall be observed in its proper place) that



they become productive of the effects mentioned above.(6*)



    When money does not circulate, it is the same thing as if it



did not exist; and as the treasures found in countries where the



inhabitants are lazy do not circulate, they are rather ornamental



than useful.



    It is not therefore in the most fruitful countries of the



world, nor in those which are the best calculated for nourishing



great multitudes, that we find the most inhabitants. It is in



climates less favoured by nature, and where the soil produces to



those only who labour, and in proportion to the industry of every



one, where we may expect to find great multitudes; and even these



multitudes will be found greater or less, in proportion as the



turn of the inhabitants is directed to ingenuity and industry.



    In such countries where industry is made to flourish, the



free hands (of whom we have spoken above) will be employed in



useful manufactures, which, being refined upon by the ingenious,



will determine what is called the standard of taste; this taste



will increase consumption, which again will multiply workmen, and



these will encourage the production of food for their



nourishment.



    Let it therefore never be said, that there are too many



manufacturers employed in a country; it is the same as if it were



said, there are too few idle persons, too few beggars, and too



many husbandmen.



    We have more than once endeavoured to shew, that these



manufacturers never can be fed but out of the superfluity of the



farmers. It is a contradiction, I think, to say, that those who



are fed upon the surplus of those who cultivate the soil are



necessary for producing a sufficiency to themselves. For if even



this surplus were to diminish, the manufacturers, not the



labourers, would be the first to be extinguished for want of



nourishment.



    The importance of the distributive proportion of mankind into



labourers and free hands appears so great, and has so intimate a



connection with this subject, that it engages me to seek for an



illustration of the principles I have been laying down, in an



example drawn from facts, as they are found to stand in one of



the greatest and most flourishing nations in Europe. But before I



proceed farther in this part of my subject, I must examine the



consequences of slavery with regard to the subject we are now



upon. Relations here are so many and so various, that it is



necessary to have sometimes recourse to transitions, of which I



give notice to my reader, that he may not lose the connection.







Chap. VII







The Effects of Slavery upon the Multiplication and Employment of



Mankind







    Before I go on to follow the consequences of the above



reasoning, I must stop to consider a difference of no small



importance between ancient and modern times, which will serve to



illustrate the nature of slavery, with regard to population and



the employment of mankind.



    We have endeavoured to lay down the principles which seem to



influence this question, supposing all to be free. In this case,



I imagine the human species will multiply pretty much in



proportion to their industry; their industry will increase



according to their wants, and these again will be diversified



according to the spirit of the times.



    From this I conclude, that the more free and simple the



manners of any country are, caeteris paribus, the fewer



inhabitants will be found in it. This is proved by experience



every where. The Tartars, who freely wander up and down a country



of vast extent, multiply but little; the savages in America, who



live upon hunting, in a state of great independence; the



inhabitants of several mountainous countries in Europe, where



there are few manufactures, and where the inhabitants do not



leave the country; in all such places mankind do not multiply.



What is the reason of this? One would imagine, where there is a



great extent of ground capable of producing food, that mankind



should multiply until the soil refused to give more. I imagine



the answer may be easily discovered from the principles above



laid down.



    Where mankind have few wants, the number of free hands



necessary to supply them is very small, consequently very little



surplus from the farmers is sufficient to maintain them. When



therefore it happens, that any poor family in the class of free



hands is very numerous, division there comes to be carried to its



utmost extent, and the greatest part become quite idle, because



there is no demand for their work. As long as they can be fed by



the division of the emoluments arising from the labour of their



parents, or by the charity of others, they live; when these



resources fail, they become miserable. In so wretched a situation



it is not easy to find bread. The farmers will not double their



diligence from a charitable disposition. Those who have land will



not allow those indigent people a liberty to raise grain in it



for nothing; and although they should, the poor are not in a



capacity to provide what is necessary for doing it. All other



work is fully stocked, the wretched die, or extinguish without



multiplying.



    To make this more evident, let us suppose the wants of



mankind, in any polite nation of Europe, which lives and



flourishes in our days upon the produce of its own soil, reduced



all at once to the simplicity of the ancient patriarchs, or even



to that of the old Romans. Suppose all the hands now employed in



the luxurious arts, and in every branch of modern manufactures,



to become quite idle, and all foreign trade to be cut off, how



could they be subsisted? What oeconomy could be set on foot, able



to preserve so many lives useful to the state? Yet it is plain by



the supposition, that the farmers of the country are capable of



maintaining them, since they actually do so. It would be absurd



to propose to employ them in agriculture, since there are enough



employed in this, to provide food for the whole.



    If it be certain that such people would die for want without



any resource; must it not follow that, unless their parents had



found the means of maintaining them when children, and they



themselves the means of afterwards subsisting by their industry



in supplying wants, they could not have existed beyond their



first infancy?



    This seems to strike deep against the populousness of the old



world, where we know that the wants of mankind, with regard to



trades and manufactures, were so few.



    But in those days the wants of mankind were of a different



nature. At present, there is a demand for the ingenuity of man;



then, there was a demand for his person and service. Now,



provided there be a demand for man, whatever use he be put to,



the species will multiply; for those who stand in need of them



will always feed them, and, as long as food is to be found,



numbers will increase.



    In the present times food cannot, in general, be found, but



by labour, and that cannot be found but to supply wants. Nobody



will feed a free man, more than he will feed the wild birds or



beasts of the field, unless he has occasion for the labour of the



one or flesh of the other.



    In the old world the principles were the same, but the spirit



of nations was different. Princes wanted to have numerous armies.



Free states sought for power in the number of their citizens. The



wants of Mankind being few, and a simplicity of manners



established, to have encouraged industry, excepting in



agriculture, which in all ages has been the foundation of



population, would have been an inconsistency. To make mankind



labour beyond their wants, to make one part of a state work to



maintain the other gratuitously, could only be brought about by



slavery, and slavery was therefore introduced universally.



Slavery was then as necessary towards multiplication, as it would



now be destructive of it. The reason is plain. If mankind be not



forced to labour, they will labour for themselves only; and if



they have few wants, there will be little labour. But when states



come to be formed, and have occasion for idle hands to defend



them against the violence of their enemies, food at any rate must



be procured for those who do not labour; and, as by the



supposition, the wants of the labourers are small, a method must



be found to increase their labour above the proportion of their



wants.



    For this purpose slavery was calculated: it had two excellent



effects with respect to population. The first, that, in



unpolished nations, living upon the spontaneous fruits of the



earth, and almost continually in war, lives were preserved for



the sake of making slaves of the captives. These, sold to private



people, or different states, were sure of being fed; whereas,



remaining in their own country, they occupied a place only,



which, by the force of the generative faculty, as has been



observed, was soon to be filled up by propagation: for it must



not be forgot, that when numbers are swept off, by any sudden



calamity, which does not proportionally diminish subsistence, a



new multiplication immediately takes place. Thus we perceive the



hurt done by plagues, by war, and by other devastations, either



among men, or cattle, repaired in a few years, even in those



countries where the standard number of both is seldom found to



increase. What immense quantities of cattle are yearly



slaughtered ! Does any body imagine that if all were allowed to



live, numbers would increase in proportion? The same is true of



men.



    The second advantage of slavery was, that in countries where



a good police prevailed, and where the people had fewer wants by



far than are felt in modern times, the slaves were forced to



labour the soil which fed both them and the idle freemen, as was



the case in Sparta; or they filled all the servile places which



freemen fill now, and they were likewise employed, as in Greece



and in Rome, in supplying with manufactures those whose service



was necessary for the state.



    Here then was a violent method making mankind laborious in



raising food; and provided this be accomplished, (by any means



whatever,) numbers will increase.



    Trade, industry, and manufactures, tend only to multiply the



numbers of men, by encouraging agriculture. If it be therefore



supposed, that two states are equally extended, equally fruitful,



and equally cultivated, and the produce consumed at home, I



believe they will be found equally peopled. But suppose the one



laboured by free men, the other by slaves, what difference will



be found in making war? In the first, the free hands must, by



their industry and labour, purchase their food, and a day lost is



in a manner a day of fasting: in the last, the slaves produce the



food, they are first fed, and the rest costs nothing to the body



of free men, who may be all employed in war, without the smallest



prejudice to industry.



    From these principles it appears, that slavery in former



times had the same effect in peopling the world that trade and



industry have now. Men were then forced to labour because they



were slaves to others; men are now forced to labour because they



are slaves to their own wants.



    I do not, however, pretend, that in fact slavery in ancient



times did every where contribute to population, any more than I



can affirm that the spirit of industry in the Dutch is common to



all free nations in our days. All that is necessary for my



purpose is, to set forth the two principles, and to shew the



natural effects of the one and the other, with respect to the



multiplication of mankind and advancement of agriculture, the



principal objects of our attention throughout this book.



    I shall at present enlarge no farther upon this matter, but



return to where I left off in the preceding chapter, and take up



the farther examination of the fundamental distribution of



inhabitants into labourers and free hands.







Chap. VII







What Proportion of Inhabitants is necessary for Agriculture, and



what Proportion may be usefully employed in every other



Occupation?







    I have proposed this question, not with an intention to



answer it fully, but to point out, how, with the proper lights



given, it may be answered.



    As I write under circumstances not the most favourable for



having recourse to books, I must employ those I have. The article



Political Arithmetic, of Mr Chambers's Cyclopedia, furnishes me



with some extracts from Sir William Petty, and Dr Davenant, which



I here intend to employ, towards pointing out a solution of the



question proposed. These authors consider the state of England as



it appeared to them, and what they say is conclusive with respect



to that state only.



    Sir William Petty supposes the inhabitants of England to be



six millions, the value of grain yearly consumed by them ten



millions sterling, the bushel of wheat reckoned at 5s., and that



of barley at 2s. 6d. If we cast the two together, and reckon upon



an average, this will make the quarter, or eight bushels of



grain, worth 1l. 10s.: but in regard, the barley cannot amount to



one half of all the grain consumed, especially as there is a good



quantity of rye made use of, which is worth more than the barley,



though less than the wheat; let us suppose the grain worth 32s.



per quarter, at a medium; then ten millions sterling will



purchase six millions of quarters of grain, or thereabouts;



which, used for nourishment, in bread and beer, gives the mean



quantity of one quarter, or 512 pounds troy of grain for every



inhabitant, including the nourishment of his proportional part of



animals; supposing that Sir William attended to this



circumstance, for it is not mentioned by Chambers. And I must



observe, by-the-bye, that this computation may hold good as to



England, where people eat so little bread; but would not answer



in France, nor in almost any other country I have seen.



    Dr Davenant, correcting Sir William's calculation, makes the



inhabitants 5,545,000. These, according to Sir William's prices



and proportions, would consume to the amount of 8,872,000l.



sterling. but the Dr carries it, with reason, a little higher,



and states it at 9,075,000l. sterling; the difference, however,



is inconsiderable. From this he concludes the gross produce of



the corn-fields to be about 9,075,000l. sterling. I make no



criticism upon this computation. 



    Next, as to the value of other lands; I find Sir William



reckons the gross produce of them in butter, cheese, milk, wool,



horses yearly bred, flesh for food, tallow, hides, hay, and



timber, to amount to 12,000,000l. sterling: The amount therefore



of the gross produce of all the lands in England must be equal to



these two sums added together, that is, to 21,075,000l. sterling.



    From these data, the Dr values the yearly rent of corn-lands



at two million sterling, and those of pasture, &c. at seven



millions; in all, nine millions.



    From this it appears, that the land-rents of England are to



the gross produce, as nine is to twenty-one, or thereabouts.



    Let me now examine some other proportions. 



    The rents of the corn-lands are to the gross produce of them,



as two is to nine; those of pasture, as seven to twelve.



    Now it is very certain, that all rents are in a pretty just



proportion to the gross produce, after deducting three principal



articles.



    First, The nourishment of the farmer, his family, and



servants. 



    Secondly, The necessary expences of his family, for



manufactures, and instruments for cultivating the ground.



    Thirdly, His reasonable profits, according to the custom of



every country.



    Of these three articles, let us distinguish what part implies



the direct consumption of the pure produce, from what does not.



    Of the first sort are the nourishment of men and cattle, wool



and flax for clothing, firing, and other smaller articles.



    Of the second are all manufactures bought, servants' wages,



the hire of labourers occasionally, and profits, either spent in



luxury, (that is, superfluity,) lent, or laid up.



    The three articles above mentioned (which we have distributed



under two heads) being deducted from the gross produce, the



remaining value shews the land-rent.



    This being the case, I am next to examine the cause of the



great disproportion between the rents of corn-lands, and those of



pasture, when compared with the gross produce, in order to draw



some conclusion, which may lead to the solution of the question



here proposed.



    This difference must proceed from the greater proportion of



labouring and other inhabitants employed in consequence of



tillage; which makes the expence of it far greater than that of



pasture. And since, in the one and the other, every article of



necessary expence or consumption ought naturally to be



proportionally equal among those concerned in both, that is,



proportional to the number of labouring inhabitants; it follows,



that the proportion of people employed in agriculture, and upon



the account of it, in different countries, is nearly in the ratio



of the gross produce, to the land-rent; or, in other words, in



the proportion of the consumption made by the farmers, and by



those employed necessarily by them, to the net produce, which is



the same thing.



    Now as the consumption upon corn-farms is 7/9, and that upon



pasture 5/12, the proportion of these two fractions must mark the



ratio between the populousness of pasture-lands, and those in



tillage; that is to say, tillage-lands in England were, at that



time, peopled in proportion to pasture-lands, as 84 is to 45, or



as 28 to 15.



    This point being settled, I proceed to another: to wit, the



application of this net produce or surplus of the quantity of



food and necessaries remaining over and above the nourishment,



consumption, and expence, of the inhabitants employed in



agriculture; and which we have observed above to be equal to the



land-rents of England, that is to say, to nine millions yearly.



    Must not this of necessity be employed in the nourishment,



and for the use of those whom we have called the free hands; who



may be employed in manufactures, trades, or in any other way,



according to the taste of the times?



    Now the numbers of a people, I take to be very nearly in the



proportion of the quantity of food they consume; especially when



a society is taken thus, in such accumulative proportion, and



when all are supposed to be under the same circumstances as to



the plenty of the year.



    The whole gross produce of England we have said to be



21,000,000 l. sterling, of which 9 millions have remained for



those not employed in agriculture; the farmers, therefore, and



their attendants, must annually consume 12 millions; consequently



the last class is to the first as 12 is to 9. If, therefore,



according to Dr Davenant, there be 5,545,000 people in that



kingdom, there must be about 3,168,571 employed or dependent upon



agriculture, and 2,376,429 free hands for every other occupation.



But this proportion of farmers will be found far less, if we



reflect, that we have reckoned for them the total amount of the



three articles above mentioned, that is to say, the total



consumption they make, as well in manufactures, profits upon



their labour, &c. as for food and necessaries: whereas there has



been nothing reckoned for the free hands, but the land-rent;



consequently there should be added to the number of the latter as



many as are employed in supplying with all sorts of manufactures



the whole of the farmers of England, and all those who depend



upon them; and this number must be taken from one and added to



the other class. If this number be supposed to amount to four



hundred thousand, it will do more than cast the balance upon the



opposite side.



    From these matters of fact (so far as they are so) we may



conclude:



    First, That the raising of the rents of lands shows the



increase of industry, as it swells the fund of subsistence



consumed by the industrious; that is, by those who buy it.



    Secondly, That it may denote either an increase of



inhabitants, or the depopulation of the land, in order to



assemble the superfluous mouths in villages, towns, &c, where



they may exercise their industry with greater convenience.



    While the land-rents of Europe were very low, numbers of the



inhabitants appeared to be employed in agriculture; but were



really no more than idle consumers of the produce of it. This



shall be further illustrated in the subsequent chapters.



    Thirdly, The more a country is in tillage, the more it is



inhabited, and the smaller is the proportion of free hands for



all the services of the state. The more a country is in pasture,



the less it is inhabited, but the greater is the proportion of



free hands.



    I do not pretend, as I have said above, that there is any



calculation to be depended on in this chapter; I have only



endeavoured to point out how a calculation might be made, when



the true state of England comes to be known.



    This question not being of a nature to enter into the chain



of our reasoning, may be considered rather as incidental than



essential; I have therefore treated it superficially and chiefly



for the sake of the conclusions.



    Our next inquiry will naturally be into the principles which



determine the residence of inhabitants, in order to discover why,



in all flourishing states, cities are now found to be every where



on the growing hand.







Chap. IX







What are the Principles which regulate the Distribution of



Inhabitants into Farms, Hamlets, Villages, Towns, and City?







    Having pointed out the natural distribution of inhabitants



into the two capital classes of which we have been treating, I am



going to examine how far their employment must decide as to their



place of residence.



    First, When mankind is fed upon the spontaneous fruits of the



earth, the distribution of their residence depends upon the



division of the lands. If these are in common to all, then the



inhabitants will be scattered abroad, or gathered together,



according as the productions of the earth are equally distributed



over the face of the country, or confined to some fruitful spots



only.



    Hence the Tartars wander with their flocks and feed upon



them: hence the hunting Indians are scattered in small societies,



through the woods, and live upon game: hence others, who feed



upon the fruits of the earth, are collected in greater numbers



upon the sides of rivers, and in watered valleys.



    Where therefore the surface of the earth is not appropriated,



there the place producing the food determines the place of



residence of every one of the society, and there mankind may live



in idleness, and remain free from every constraint.



    Secondly, When the earth is not in common to those who live



upon her spontaneous fruits, but is appropriated by a few, there



either slavery or industry must be introduced among those who



consume the surplus of the proprietors; because these will expect



either service or work in return for their superfluity. In this



case, the residence of the inhabitants will depend upon the



circumstances we are going to consider; and the object of



agriculture in countries where the surface of the earth is not



broken up, being solely directed towards the gathering in of



fruits, will determine the residence of those only who are



necessary for that purpose: consequently it will follow, that in



climates where the earth produces spontaneously, and in vast



abundance, there may be found large cities; because the number of



those who are necessary for gathering in the fruits is small in



proportion to the quantity of them; whereas in other countries,



where the earth's productions are scanty, and where the climate



refuses those of the copious and luxuriant kind, there will



hardly be found any considerable town, because the number of



those who are necessary for collecting the subsistence, bears a



great proportion to the fruits themselves. I do not say, that in



the first case there must be large towns, or that in the other



there can be none; but I say that, in the first case, those who



may be gathered into towns, bear a great proportion to the whole



society; and that, in the second, they bear a small one.



    I think I have found this principle confirmed by experience.



When I compare the bulk and populousness of the cities of



Lombardy, and still more, those of the watered provinces of



Spain, with the inhabitants of the territory which maintains



them, I find the proportion of the first vastly greater than in



those of France and England; and still more again in these two



last mentioned kingdoms, than in the more northern countries and



provinces, where the earth's productions bear a less proportion



to the labour bestowed in producing them. Now, although I allow



that neither the one or the other is fed by spontaneous



productions, yet still it may be inferred, that the more the



climate contributes to favour the labour of man, the more the



productions participate of the spontaneous nature.(7*)



    Again, in countries where labour is required for feeding a



society, the smaller the proportion of labourers, the greater



will be that of the free hands. Fruits which are produced by



annual labour, and still more, such as are the consequence of a



thorough cultivation, (such as luxuriant pasture,) give returns



far superior to the nourishment of those employed in the



cultivation; consequently, all the surplus is consumed by people



not employed in agriculture; consequently, by those who are not



bound to reside upon the spot which feeds them, and who may



choose the habitation best adapted for the exercise of that



industry which is most proper to produce an equivalent to the



farmers for their superfluities.



    From this it is plain that the residence of the farmers only



is essentially attached to the place of cultivation. Hence, farms



in some provinces, villages in others.



    I now proceed to the other class of inhabitants; the free



hands who live upon the surplus of the farmers.



    These I must subdivide into two conditions. The first, those



to whom this surplus directly belongs, or who, with a revenue in



money already acquired, can purchase it. The second, those who



purchase it with their daily labour or personal service.



    Those of the first condition may live where they please;



those of the second, must live where they can. The residence of



the consumers determines, in many cases, that of the suppliers.



In proportion, therefore, as those who live where they please



choose to live together, in this proportion must the others



follow them. And in proportion as the state thinks fit to place



the administration of government in one place, in the same



proportion must the administrators, and every one depending upon



them, be gathered together. These I take to be principles which



influence the swelling of the bulk of capitals, and smaller



cities.



    When the residence of the consumer does not determine that of



him who supplies it, other considerations are allowed to operate.



This is the case in what may properly be called manufactures,



distinguished from trades, whether they be for home-consumption,



or foreign exportation. These considerations are,



    First, Relative to the place and situation of the



establishment; which gives a preference to the sides of rivers



and rivulets, when machines wrought by water are necessary; to



the proximity of forests and collieries, when fire is employed;



to the place which produces the substance of the manufacture; as



in mines, collieries, brick-works, &c.



    Secondly, Relative to the convenience of transportation, as



upon navigable rivers, or by great roads.



    Thirdly, Relative to the cheapness of living, consequently



not (frequently) in great cities, except for their own



consumption. But it must be observed, that this last



consideration can hardly ever be permanent: for the very



establishment being the means of raising prices, the advantage



must diminish in proportion as the undertaking comes to succeed.



The best rule therefore is, to set down such manufactures upon



the banks of navigable rivers, where all necessary provisions may



be brought from a distance at a small cost. This advantage is



permanent, the others are not; and may prove in time hurtful, by



a change in those very circumstances which decided as to the



choice of the situation. From the establishment of manufactures



we see hamlets swell into villages, and villages into towns.



    Sea-ports owe their establishment to foreign trade. From one



or other of these and similar principles, are mankind gathered



into hamlets, villages, towns, and cities.







Chap. X







Of the Consequences which result from the Separation of the two



principal Classes of a People, the Farmers and the Free Hands,



with regard to their Dwelling







    I am next going to examine the consequences resulting to the



state, to the citizens, and to the landed interest, from this



kind of separation, as I may call it, between the parent earth



and her laborious children, which naturally takes place every



where in proportion to the progress of industry, luxury, and the



swift circulation of money.



    As to the state, it is, I think, very plain, that, without



such a distribution of inhabitants, it would be impossible to



levy taxes. For as long as the earth nourishes directly those who



are upon her surface, as long as she delivers her fruits into the



very hand of him who consumes them, there is no alienation, no



occasion for money, consequently no possibility of establishing



an extensive taxation, as shall in its place be fully explained.



From this principle is, I imagine, to be deduced the reason, why



we find taxation so little known under the feudal form of



government.



    The personal service of the vassals, with their cattle and



servants upon all occasions, made the power and wealth of the



lords, and their rents were mostly paid in kind. They lived upon



their lands, were commonly jealous of one another, and had



constant disputes. This was a very good reason to keep them from



coming together. Towns were situated round their habitations.



These were mostly composed of the few tradesmen and manufacturers



that were in the country. The lord's judge, his fiscal, and his



court of record, added to these numbers; lawsuits, and the lord's



attendance, brought the vassals frequently together; this gave



encouragement to houses of entertainment; and this I take to be



the picture of the greatest part of small towns, if we ascend



three or four hundred years from the present time.



    Cities were the residence of bishops. These lords were very



independent of the civil government, and had at the same time the



principal direction in it. They procured privileges to their



cities, and these communities formed themselves by degrees into



small republics: taxes here have ever been familiar. The feudal



lords seldom appeared here, and the inferior classes of the



people enjoyed liberty and ease in these cities only.



    In some countries of Europe, as in Germany, the principal



citizens, in time, became patricians. In France certain offices



of public trust sometimes procured nobility to those who bore



them, and always consideration. The representatives of the



citizens were even admitted into the states, and formed the tiers



êtat. Elsewhere they received casual marks of distinction from



the sovereign, as the Lord Mayor of London does to this day



usually receive knighthood. In short, the only dawning of public



liberty to be met with during the feudal government, was in the



cities; no wonder then if they increased.



    Upon the discovery of America and the East-Indies, industry,



trade, and luxury, were soon introduced in the kingdoms of Spain,



France, and England: the grandeur and power of the Hanstowns had



already pointed out to sovereigns the importance of these



objects.



    The courts of princes then became magnificent; the feudal



lords insensibly began to frequent them with more assiduity than



formerly. The splendor of the prince soon eclipsed those rays



which shone around them upon their own lands. They now no more



appeared to one another as objects of jealousy, but of emulation.



They became acquainted, began to relish a court life, and every



one proposed to have a house in the capital. A change of



habitation made a change of circumstances, both as to city and



country. As to the city; so far as inhabitants were increased, by



the addition of the great lords, and of those who followed their



example, so far demand increased for every sort of provision and



labour; and this quickly drew more inhabitants together. Every



one vied with another in magnificence of palaces, clothes,



equipages. Modes changed and by turns enlivened the different



branches of ingenuity. Whence came so great a number of



inhabitants all of a sudden? He who would have cast his eyes on



the deserted residences of the nobility, would quickly have



discovered the source; he would there have seen the old people



weeping and wailing, and nothing heard among them but complaints



of desolation: the youth were retired to the city: there was no



change as to them.



    This is no doubt a plain consequence of a sudden revolution,



which never can happen without being attended with great



inconveniences. Many of the numerous attendants of the nobility



who uselessly filled every house and habitation belonging to the



great man, were starving for want. He was at court, and calling



aloud for money, a thing he was seldom accustomed to have



occasion for, except to lock up in his chest. In order to procure



this money, he found it expedient to convert a portion of the



personal services of his vassals into cash: by this he lost his



authority. He then looked out for a farmer (not a husbandman) for



an estate which he formerly consumed in its fruits. This



undertaker, as I may call him, began by dismissing idle mouths.



Still greater complaints ensued. At last, the money spent in the



city began to flow into the hands of the industrious: this raised



an emulation and the children of the miserable, who had felt the



sad effects of the revolution, but who could not foresee the



consequences, began to profit by it. They became easy and



independent in the great city, by furnishing to the extravagance



of those under whose dominion they were born.



    This progression is perhaps too minutely traced to be exact;



I therefore stop, to consider the situation of affairs at that



period, when all the inconveniences of the sudden revolution had



ceased, and when things were come to the state in which we now



find them. Capitals swelled to a great extent; Paris and London



appearing monstrous to some, as being a load upon the rest of the



country. This must be examined.



    We agree, I suppose, that the inhabitants of cities are not



employed in agriculture, and we may agree that they are fed by



it: we have examined into the causes of the increase of cities,



and we have seen the fund provided for their subsistence, to wit,



the surplus of fruits produced by husbandmen.



    What are then the advantages resulting to the citizens from



this great increase of their city? I cannot find any great



benefit resulting to each individual from this circumstance; but



I conclude, that the same advantages which many find in



particular, must be common to great numbers, consequently great



numbers are gathered together.



    The principal objections against great cities are, that



health there is not so good, that marriages are not so frequent



as in the country, that debauchery prevails, and that abuses are



multiplied.



    To this I answer, that these objections lie equally against



most cities, and are not peculiar to those complained of for



their bulk; and that the evils proceed more from the spirit of



the inhabitants, than from the size of the capital.



    It is further urged, that the number of deaths exceeds the



number of births in great cities; consequently smaller towns, and



even the country, is stripped of its inhabitants, in order to



recruit these capitals.



    Here I first deny, that in all capitals the number of deaths



exceeds the number of births; for in Paris it is otherwise. But



supposing the assertion to be true, what conclusion can be drawn



from it, except that many people who are born in the country die



in town. That the country should furnish cities with inhabitants



is no evil. What occasion has the country for supernumerary



hands? If it has enough for the supply of its own wants, and of



the demands of cities, has it not enough? Had it more, the



supernumeraries would either consume without working, or, if



added to the class of labourers, instead of being added to the



number of free hands, would overturn the balance between the two



classes; grain would become too plentiful, and that would cast a



general discouragement upon agriculture: whereas, by going to



cities, they acquire money, and therewith purchase the grain they



would have consumed, had they remained in the country; and this



money, which their additional labour in cities will force into



circulation, would otherwise have remained locked up, or at least



would not have gone into the country, but in consequence of the



desertion of the supernumeraries. The proper and only right



encouragement for agriculture, is a moderate and gradual increase



of demand for the productions of the earth: this works a natural



and beneficial increase of inhabitants; and this demand must come



from cities, for the husbandmen never have occasion to demand; it



is they who offer to sale.



    The high prices of most things in large cities is a benefit



surely, not a loss to the country. But I must observe, that the



great expence of living in capitals does not affect the lower



classes, nor the moderate and frugal, in any proportion to what



it does the rich. If you live on beef, mutton, bread, and beer,



you may live as cheap in London and in Paris as in most cities I



know. These articles abound, and though the demand be great, the



provision made for supplying it is in proportion. But when you



come to fish, fowl, and game; delicacies of every kind brought



from far, by the post, by ships, and by messengers; when you have



fine equipages, large houses, expensive servants, and abundance



of waste in every article, without one grain of oeconomy in any,



it is no wonder that money should run away so fast. I do not,



from what has been said, conclude, that there is any evident



advantage in having so overgrown a capital as London in such a



kingdom as England; but that I do not find great force in the



objections I have met with against it. That there may be others



which I do not know, I will not deny, because I am not



sufficiently acquainted with that kingdom to be a competent judge



of the matter.



    Let me now conclude this chapter, by mentioning in what



respects I think cities an advantage, in general, to a country;



and, as I go along, I shall point out wherein they prove a



disadvantage, in particular, to some parts of it.



    The general advantages of them are:



    First, To remove the necessary load upon the land; those idle



people, who eat up a part of the produce of labour without



contributing to it.



    Secondly, The opportunity of levying taxes, and of making



these affect the rich, in proportion to the consumption they



make, without hurting industry or exportation.



    Thirdly, The advantages resulting to the landed interest are



no less considerable. This is proved by universal experience; for



we see every where, that the moment any city, town, or village,



begins to encrease, by the establishment of trade or



manufactures, the lands round about immediately rise in their



value. The reason of this seems easily deduced from the above



principles.



    When a farmer has got his oeconomy under right regulations,



not one supernumerary, nor useless mouth, but abundance of hands



for every kind of labour, which is generally the case near towns



and cities, the proximity of them discharges him of every



superfluity. His cattle consume the exact quantity of grain and



of forage necessary; what remains is money, a superfluous egg is



money; a superfluous day of a cart, of a horse, a superfluous



hour of a servant, is all money to the farmer. There is a



constant demand for every thing he can do or furnish. To make



this the more sensibly perceived, remove into a province, far



from a town, and compare situations. There you find abundance of



things superfluous, which cannot be turned into money, which



therefore are consumed without much necessity, and with little



profit. It is good to have an estate there, when you want to live



upon it; it is better to have one near the great town, when you



do not.



    It may be alleged, that the disadvantages felt by the distant



farmer and proprietor, when they compare situations with those



residing near the town, proceed from the town: this must be



examined.



    If the town consume the produce of this distant farm, it must



consume it in competition with every place at a smaller distance;



consequently this competition must do more good than harm to the



distant farm. If the city consume none of the produce, wherein



does it affect it? It may be answered, that, by entering into



competition with the distant farmer for the labouring



inhabitants, these desert agriculture, in favour of a more



lucrative occupation, to be found in the city. Scarcity of hands



in the country raises the price of labour on one hand, while it



diminishes the price of subsistence on the other; consequently



the farmer suffers a double disadvantage. Of this there can be no



doubt; but as these revolutions cannot by their nature be sudden,



it becomes the duty of the statesman, whom I suppose constantly



awake, directly to set on foot some branch of industry in every



such distant part of the country; and as prices of subsistence



will diminish for a while, for the reasons above-mentioned, this



will prove an encouragement to the establishment; this again will



accelerate propagation, as it will prove an outlet for children,



and, in a short time, the farmer will find himself in a better



situation than ever. But even without this assistance from



industry the state, a few years will set all to rights, provided



the spirit of is kept up: for cities, by swelling, extend their



demand to the most distant corners of a country; the inhabitants



who desert do not cease to consume, and thereby they repair the



hurt they do by their desertion. I appeal to experience for the



truth of this. Do we not perceive demand extending every year



farther and farther from great capitals? I know places in France



which, twenty years ago, never knew what it was to send even a



delicacy to Paris, but by the post, and which now send thither



every week loaded waggons, with many thousand weight of



provisions, so much that I may almost say, that a fatted chicken



in the most distant province of that country can be sold with



great profit in the Paris market during all the winter season;



and cattle carry thither their own flesh cheaper than any waggon



can. What distant farm then can complain of the greatness of that



noble city? There is however a case, where a distant part of a



country may suffer in every respect, to wit, when the revolution



is sudden; as when a rich man, who used to spend his income in



his province, for the encouragement of industry, goes to Paris or



London, and stays away for a year or two, without minding the



interest of the estate he abandons. No doubt this must affect his



province in proportion; but in every revolution which comes on



gradually by the desertion of such only as lived by their



industry, new mouths are born and supply the old. The only



question is about employing them well: while you have superfluous



food and good oeconomy, a country will always reap the same



benefit from her natural advantages.



    Fourthly, Another advantage of cities is, the necessity



arising from thence of having great roads, and these again prove



a considerable encouragement to agriculture.



    The miserable condition of roads over all Europe almost, till



within these hundred years, is a plain proof of the scanty



condition of the cities, and of the small encouragement formerly



given towards extending the improvement of the soil.



    Let any one examine the situation of the landed interest



before the making of great roads in several provinces in France,



and compare it with what it is at present. If this be found a



difficult inquiry, let him compare the appearance of young



gentlemen of middling fortune, as he finds them at Paris, or in



their regiment, with that of their fathers, who live in their



province in the old way, and he will have a very good opportunity



of perceiving the progress of ease and refinement in this class,



which has proceeded from no other cause than the improvement of



the soil. People complain that prices are risen; of this there is



no doubt with regard to many articles. Is not this quite



consistent with our principles? It is not because there is now a



larger mass of money in the kingdom, though I allow this to be



true, and also that this circumstance may have contributed to



raise prices; but the direct principle which has influenced them,



and which will always regulate their rise and fall, is the



increase of demand. Now the great roads in a manner carry the



goods to market; they seem to shorten distances, they augment the



number of carriages of all sorts, they remove the inconveniences



above-mentioned resulting from the distance of the city. The more



distant parts of the country come to market, in competition with



the farmers in the neighbourhood of the cities. This competition



might make the rents of lands lying round such cities as were the



first to encourage industry, sink in their value. But the hurt in



this respect done to the proprietors of these lands would soon be



repaired. The cities would increase in bulk, demand would



increase also, and prices would rise a-new. Every thing which



employs inhabitants usefully promotes consumption; and this again



is an advantage to the state, as it draws money from the



treasures of the rich into the hands of the industrious. The easy



transportation of fruits produces this effect: the distant farmer



can employ his idle hours in providing, and the idle days of his



servants and cattle in sending things to market, from farms which



formerly never knew what it was to sell such productions.



    I shall carry these speculations no farther, but conclude by



observing, that the making of roads and navigable canals must



advance population, as they contribute to the advancement of



agriculture.







Chap. XI







Of the Distribution of Inhabitants into Classes; of the



Employment and Multiplication of them







    Having deduced the effects of modern policy, in assembling so



large a proportion of inhabitants into cities, it is proper to



point the principles which should direct the statesman to the



proper means of providing, supporting, and employing them.



Without this they neither can live nor multiply. Their parent,



Earth, has in a manner banished them from her bosom; they have



her no more to suckle them in idleness; industry has gathered



them together, labour must support them, and this must produce a



surplus for bringing up children. If this resource should fail,



misery will ensue: the depopulation of the cities will be



followed by the ruin of the lands, and all will go to wreck



together. We have already laid down the principles which appear



the most natural to engage mankind to labour, supposing all to be



free and we have observed how slavery, in former times, might



work the same effect, as to peopling the world, that trade and



industry do now; men were then forced to labour because they were



slaves to others, men are forced to labour now because they are



slaves to their own wants: provided man be made to labour, and



make the earth produce abundantly, and provided that either



authority, industry, or charity, can make the produce circulate



for the nourishment of the free hands, the principle of a great



population is brought to a full activity.



    I shall now suppose these principles to be well understood.



Wants promote industry, industry gives food, food increases



numbers: the next question is, how numbers are to be well



employed?



    It is a general maxim in the mouth of every body; increase



the inhabitants of the state: the strength and power of a state



is in proportion to the number of its inhabitants.



    I am not fond of condemning opinions; but I am very much for



limiting general propositions. I have hardly ever escaped being



led into error by every one I have laid down. Nothing is so



systematical, nothing so pretty in a treatise as general maxims;



they facilitate the distribution of our ideas, and I have never



been able to dash them out but with a certain regret.



    As I often recur to private oeconomics for clearing up my



ideas it be a general rule, that concerning the political, I have



asked myself, if it be a general rule, that, the master of a



family should increase the mouths of it, to the full proportion



of all he can feed? Now it is my opinion, that in a small family



well composed, and where every one is properly employed, both



master and servants are much happier than in others vastly more



numerous, where the same order and regularity is not kept up; and



that a small number of well disciplined soldiers is more



formidable, and really stronger, than the numerous populace of a



large city.



    The use of inhabitants is to be mutually serviceable one to



another in particular, and to the society in general.



Consequently, every state should, in good policy, first apply



itself to make the inhabitants they have answer this purpose,



before they carry their views towards augmenting their numbers. I



think it is absurd to wish for new inhabitants, without first



knowing how to employ the old; and it is ignorance of the real



effects of population, to imagine that an increase of numbers



will infallibly remove inconveniences which proceed from the



abuses of those already existing.



    I shall then begin by supposing that inhabitants require



rather to be well employed than increased in numbers.



    If I know the number of inhabitants, I may know the



proportion which die every year: consequently, I know how many



pairs of breeders are necessary to keep up the stock. If I want



to raise twenty bushels of grain only, I do not sow my lands with



twenty bushels. If I have as many children born as there are



people who die, I have enough by the supposition. But these



children must be raised proportionally, from the different



classes of inhabitants, which I here consider as distributed into



two conditions; those who do not labour, and those who do. May I



not venture to say, that there is no absolute necessity that



those of the first class should multiply in order to recruit the



second. If then the second class is kept up to its proper



standard by its own multiplication, and if their work be all



consumed, will it not be found that the diminution of those



mouths who do not work, and which appear useful in consideration



only of the consumption they make, is no real loss to the nation?



But to this it is objected, that if the number of the first class



be diminished, the work of the second will lie upon hand.



    Here I look for my answer from what daily experience points



out. Two persons (A) and (B) have each 1000 l. a year; (A) has



many children, (B) has none: they both spend their income; (A)



upon the necessaries of life for his family, and for the



education of his children; for the supplying of which, those of



the working class only are employed, for whoever does or gives



any thing for money, I consider as a worker: (B) spends his



income as a fashionable young gentleman: he has a fine chariot,



abundance of footmen in laced liveries; in short, without



examining into the particulars of his expence, I find the whole



1000 l. spent at the end of the year. Neither (A) or (B) do any



work; or are any of (A's) children necessary as a supply to the



working hands, by the supposition. Is it not true then, that (B)



has consumed as much work or service, for these I consider as the



same thing, as (A) with his family? Nay, I may still go farther,



and affirm, that (B) has contributed as much, if not more, to



population than (A). For if it he true, that he who gives food



gives numbers, I say, that the expence of (B) has given food to



the children of the industrious employed by him: consequently,



instead of having directly contributed to the increase of the



idle of the state, which is the case with (A), he has indirectly



contributed to the multiplication of the industrious. What good



then does the state reap from (A's) children, from his marriage,



from his multiplication? Indeed, I see no harm although he had



remained a batchelor: for those who produce idle consumers only,



certainly add neither riches, strength, or ease to a state. And



it is of such people alone that there is any question here.



    From this I conclude, that there can be no determinate number



of rich idle consumers necessary to employ a determinate number



of industrious people, no more than of masters to employ a fixed



number of menial servants. Do we not see a single man frequently



attended by more servants than are necessary when he gets a wife



and family? nay, it many times happens, that a young man, upon



his marriage, diminishes the number of his domestics, in order to



give bread to his children.



    If riches be calculated, as I hope to prove, for the



encouragement of industry; if circulation is to be accelerated by



every method, in order to give bread to those who are disposed to



work, or, in other words, who are disposed to become vigorous



members of the commonwealth, by contributing with their strength,



their ingenuity, or their talents, to supply her wants, to



augment her riches, to promote and administer a good government



at home, or to serve it abroad: then, I say, the too great



multiplication of those who come under none of these classes, the



idle consumers as I have called them, contribute directly to make



the other part languish.



    There is no governing a state in perfection, and consequently



no executing the plan for a right distribution of the



inhabitants, without exactly knowing their situation as to



numbers, their employment, the gains upon every species of



industry, the numbers produced from each class. These are the



means of judging how far those of a particular trade or



occupation are in a situation to bring up a family. To examine,



on the other hand, the state of the higher classes who do not



labour, the ease of their circumstances, and the use the state



has for their service; this may appear superfluous; since those



who do not work, must be supposed to have wherewithal to live;



and consequently, not to stand in need of assistance. But this is



not every where, nor always the case; and many excellent subjects



are lost to a state, for want of a proper attention in the



statesman to this object.



    I have observed how necessary a thing it is to govern a



people according to their spirit; now by governing I understand,



protecting, cherishing, and supporting, as well as punishing,



restraining, and exacting. If, therefore, there be found in any



country, a very numerous nobility, who look upon trade and the



inferior arts as unbecoming their birth; a good statesman must



reflect upon the spirit of former times, and compare it with that



of the present. He will then perceive, that these sentiments have



been transmitted from father to son, and that six generations are



not elapsed since, over all Europe, they were universally



adopted: that, although the revolution we talked off in the 10th



chapter has in effect rendered them less adapted to the spirit of



the present times, they are however productive of excellent



consequences; they serve as a bulwark to virtue, against the



allurements of riches; and it is dangerous to force a set of men



who form a considerable body in a state, from necessity, to



trample under foot, what they have been persuaded from their



infancy to be the test of a noble and generous mind.



    About two hundred years ago, the nobility of several nations,



(I mean, by this term, all people well born, whether adorned with



particular marks of royal favour or not,) used to live upon the



produce of their lands. In those days there was little luxury,



little circulation; the lands fed numbers of useless mouths, in



the modern acceptation of useless, consequently produced a very



moderate income in money to the proprietors, who notwithstanding



were the most considerable persons in the state. This class of



inhabitants remaining inactive in the country, during the



revolution above mentioned, have, in consequence of the



introduction of industry, trade and luxury, insensibly had the



balance of wealth, and consequently of consideration turned



against them. Of this there is no doubt. This class however has



retained the military spirit, the lofty sentiments; and



notwithstanding their depression in point of fortune, are found



calculated to shine the brightest, when set in a proper



elevation. In times of peace, when trade flourishes, the lustre



of those who wallow in public money, the weight and consideration



of the wealthy merchant, and even the ease and affluence of the



industrious tradesman, eclipse the poor nobility; they become an



object of contempt to bad citizens, an object of compassion to



the good; and political writers imagine they render them an



important service, when they propose to receive them into the



lower classes of the people. But when danger threatens from



abroad, and when armies are brought into the field, compare the



behaviour of those conducted by a warlike nobility, with those



conducted by the sons of labour and industry; those who have



glory, with those who have gain for their point of view. Let the



state suffer only this nobility to languish without a proper



encouragement, there is no fear but they will soon disappear;



their lands will become possessed by people of a way of thinking



more *-la-mode, and the army will quickly adopt new sentiments,



more analogous to the spirit of a moneyed interest.



    I find nothing more affecting to a good mind, than to see the



distress of a poor nobility in both sexes. Some have proposed



trade for this class. Why do you not trade? I answer, for the



nobility; because, in order to trade, I must have money. This



objection is unanswerable. Why then do you not apply to other



branches of industry? If it is the state who is supposed to ask



the question, I ask, in my turn, What advantage she can reap from



their industry? What profit from their becoming shop-keepers,



weavers, or taylors? Are not, or ought not all these employments



to be provided with hands from their own multiplication? What



advantage can she reap by the children of one class taking the



bread out of the mouths of another?



    If the sentiments in which the nobility have been educated,



prove detrimental to the state, throw a discouragement upon them.



If birth is to be no mark of distinction, let it not be



distinguished by any particular privilege, which in appearance



sets this class above the level of those with whom the state



intends it should be incorporated. You do not make your



valet-de-chambre get behind your coach, though upon an occasion



it might be convenient, and though perhaps he had been your



footman the day before; you would even turn him out of doors, did



he not change his company with his rank.



    If you cannot afford to have a nobility, let it die away:



grant, as in England, the title of noble to one of a family only,



and let all the rest be commoners; that is to say, distinguished



by no personal privilege whatsoever from the lowest classes of



the people. But if you want them to serve you as soldiers, and



wish they should preserve those sentiments you approve of in a



soldier, take care at least of their children. If these appear to



you poor and ragged, while they are wandering up and down their



father's lands, chasing a wretched hare or a partridge compare



them, when in the troops, with those of your wealthy neighbours,



if any such you have.



    The establishment of an hôtel militaire shews that there are



some people at least who lend an ear to such representations. I



do not propose that a prince should divert into this channel



those streams of wealth which flow from every part of the state,



though nothing is more reasonable than for men to pay in order to



protect their gains; but let a tax be imposed upon noble



property, and let it be appropriated for the education of the



generous youth from their earliest years. There the state will



have all under her eye, they are her children, her subjects, and



they ask no more than to be taken from the obscurity of their



habitations, and rendered capable of being employed while young



and vigorous. When they have done their task, the country which



produced them will receive them back into her warm bosom; there



they will produce others like themselves, and support the spirit



and propagation of their own class, without becoming any charge



upon others.



    A statesman should make it his endeavour to employ as many of



every class as possible, and when employment fails in the common



run of affairs, to contrive new outlets for young people of every



denomination. The old and idle are, in many particulars, lost



beyond recovery.



    The mutual relations likewise, through industry, between



class and class, should be multiplied and encouraged to the



utmost. Relations by marriage, I am apt to believe, prove here



more hurtful than beneficial. That is to say, I would rather



discourage the intermarriage of the persons of different classes;



but I would encourage, as much as possible, all sorts of mutual



dependences between them, in the way of their trades. The last



tends to keep every one employed, according to the wants and



spirit of his class; the first is productive in general of no



good effect that I can perceive; which is reason sufficient for a



state to give at least no encouragement to such marriages, and



this is all the restraint proper to be imposed.



    Such members of the society as remain unemployed, either from



natural infirmities or misfortunes, and who thereby become a load



upon others, are really a load upon the state. This is a disease



which must be endured. There is no body, no thing, without



diseases. A state should provide retreats of all sorts, for the



different conditions of her decayed inhabitants: humanity, good



policy, and christianity, require it. Thus much may be said in



general upon the principles which direct the employment and



distribution of inhabitants, which in every state must be



different, according to circumstances relating to the extension,



situation, and soil of the country, and above all, to the spirit



of the people. I am next to offer some considerations with regard



to the proper methods of augmenting numbers.







Chap. XII







Of the great Advantage of combining a well digested Theory and a



perfect Knowledge of Facts with the practical Part of Government,



in order to make a People multiply







    We have the happiness to live in an age where daily



opportunities offer, of perceiving the difference between



exercising an art according to the mechanical received practice,



and according to the principles which study and refinement have



introduced for bringing it to perfection. This will appear in the



strongest light to one who compares the operation of building an



ordinary house, with that of executing a great public work, where



the most able architects are employed; the making a common parish



road, with that of a military way, through mountains, forests,



and marshes. In the first, every difficulty appears



unsurmountable: in the second, the greatest obstacles are made to



vanish. By comparing these things, we distinguish between the



artist, who proceeds by the rules of the science, and the



ordinary tradesman, who has no other resource than common



practice, aided by his own ingenuity.



    Every branch of science must be carried to perfection by a



master in it, formed by the hand of nature, and improved by



application and experience. The great genius of Mr de Colbert saw



through the confusion and perplexity of the administration of the



French finances; he invented resources for swelling the public



treasure, which never would have been liable to so many



inconveniences as are complained of, had the administration been



conducted with as much disinterestedness, as it was set on foot



with ability. The genius of Mr Law was original as to figures and



paper credit. Sir Robert Walpole discovered new principles of



taxation; he extended the plan of public credit, and reduced the



application of it to a science. These were horn statesmen in the



common acceptation of the word, they were creators of new ideas,



they found out new principles for the government of men, and led



them by their interest to concur in the execution of their plans.



Men of a speculative disposition may broach hints, although the



force of theory, destitute of practice, and unassisted by



experiment, be not sufficient to carry them the length of forming



a plan. A great genius, with power and authority, has occasion



for no more than a hint to strike out the system, and to carry



it, with success, into execution.



    No problems of political oeconomy seem more obscure than



those which influence the multiplication of the human species,



and which determine the distribution and employment of them, so



as best to advance the prosperity of each particular society.



    I have no where found these matters treated to my wish, nor



have I ever been able to satisfy myself concerning them. There



are many clouds which still cover the fruitful fields of this



science; and until these be dissipated, the political eye cannot



take in the whole landscape, nor judge of the deformities which



appear in the many representations which our modern painters are



daily giving of it.



    I may here, without an imputation of vanity, put myself so



far upon a level with the great Montesquieu, as to adopt the



saying of Correggio, Io anche son pittore; I am also a dauber;



for I frankly acknowledge my own incapacity to treat this subject



with all the perspicuity it deserves: my frequent repetitions,



and my often returning to it at different times, in order to



clear up my ideas and those of my readers, shews plainly, that I



am sensible of my own insufficiency. By setting it, however, in



different lights, and viewing it as it were from different



stations, perhaps both my reader and I may come at last to see a



little clearer.



    In a former chapter, I have endeavoured to lay down the



principles which influence multiplication; but alas! they are all



so general, that they can be considered only as the most remote.



They may satisfy a slight speculation, but can be of little use



in practice. I have principally insisted upon those which are



found to operate at all times among societies where primitive



simplicity prevails. Now this matter comes to be examined in a



more complex light, as relative to the manners of modern mankind,



which no statesman, however able, can change; where trade,



industry, luxury, credit, taxes, and debts, are introduced. In



these the most polite nations of Europe are involved. This is a



chain of adamant, it hangs together by a cohesion, which the



successive revolutions of three centuries have so cemented with



the spirit of nations, that it appears to be indissoluble. It is



not my business to examine how far the modern system is to be



preferred to the ancient; my point of view is, to investigate how



a statesman may turn the circumstances which have produced this



new plan of oeconomy to the best advantage for mankind, leaving



the reformation of such a plan to time and to events, of which I



am not the master. Schemes for recalling ancient simplicity and



for making mankind honest and virtuous, are beautiful



speculations: I admire them as much as any body, but not enough



to believe them practicable in our degenerate age.



    If therefore the principles I here lay down appear



contradictory to so amiable a system of policy, let no man thence



conclude any thing to my disadvantage upon the account of my



particular opinion concerning it, which is a matter of no



importance whatsoever. My object is to examine the consequences



of what we feel and see daily passing, and to point out how far



the bad may be avoided, and the good turned to the best



advantage.



    The loss of ancient simplicity, and the introduction of this



complicated scheme of living, has rendered the mechanism of



government infinitely more difficult, and almost every disorder



in the political body affects multiplication. Depopulation is as



certain a mark of political diseases, as wasting is of those of



the human body. The increase of numbers in a state shews youth



and vigour: when numbers do not diminish, we have an idea of



manhood, and of age when they decline.



    The importance of the subject therefore requires me to bring



it once more upon the carpet, in order to inquire into the proper



methods of restoring and preserving youth, and of diffusing



vigour into every articulation, into every vein, into every



nerve, as I may say, of a modern society.



    In the republic of Lycurgus an unmarried man met with no



respect; because no reason but debauchery could prevent his



marrying. Marriage was no load in a state where all were fed and



taken care of at the public charge. A Spartan who did not marry,



was considered as one who refused to contribute towards



recruiting of the army, merely to gratify a vicious habit.



    The jus trium liberorum, and the other encouragements given



by Augustus Caesar to engage the Romans to marry, were calculated



chiefly for the nobility, and for the citizens only, but not at



all for the inferior class (the slaves) bound to labour. The vice



to be corrected, and that which the emperor had in his eye in



those institutions, was the prodigal and dissolute life of rich



men who lived in celibacy. This affected the Roman state, and



deprived it of its principal force, the military power, the



equites. Judge of the force of this class by the numbers of them



destroyed at Cannae. In those days, the chief encouragement to



multiplication was to be directed towards the higher classes: the



lower classes of the people (by far the most numerous in all



countries and in all ages) were easily recruited, by the



importation of slaves, as they are now in the West Indies, where,



consequently, the same principle must naturally operate, which



fixed the attention of the wise emperor. The state of affairs in



Europe, and in England particularly, is changed entirely, by the



establishment of universal liberty. Our lowest classes are



absolutely free; they belong to themselves, and must bring up



their own children, else the state becomes depopulated. There is



no resource to us from importation, whether by ships, or acts of



parliament for naturalization. We shall always have a numerous



and free common people, and shall constantly have the same



inconveniences to struggle with, as long as the lowest classes



remain in such depression as not to be able to support their own



numbers. Here then lies the difficulty. In order to have a



flourishing state, which Sir William Temple beautifully compared



to a pyramid, we must form a large and solid basis of the lowest



classes of mankind. As the classes mount in wealth, the pyramid



draws narrower until it terminate in a point, (as in monarchy,)



or in a small square, as in the aristocratical and mixed



governments. This lowest class therefore must be kept up, and, as



we have said, by its own multiplication. But where every one



lives by his own industry, a competition comes in, and he who



works cheapest gains the preference. How can a married man, who



has children to maintain, dispute this preference with one who is



single? The unmarried therefore force the others to starve; and



the basis of the pyramid is contracted. Let this short sketch of



a most important part of our subject suffice at present; it shall



be taken up and examined at more length, in the chapter



concerning physical necessaries, or natural wants.



    From this results the principal cause of decay in modern



states: it results from liberty, and is inseparably connected



with it.



    Several modern writers upon this subject, recommend marriage,



in the strongest manner, to all classes of inhabitants; yet a



parish priest might, properly enough, be warranted not to join a



couple unless they could make it appear that their children were



not likely to become a burden to the parish. Could any fault be



found, reasonably, with such a regulation? Those who are



gratuitously fed by others are a load upon the state, and no



acquisition, certainly, so long as they continue so. Nothing is



so easy as to marry; nothing so natural, especially among the



lower sort. But as in order to reap, it is not sufficient to plow



and to sow, so in order to bring up children, it is not



sufficient to marry. A nest is necessary for every animal which



produces a helpless brood: a house is the nest for children; but



every man who can beget a child cannot build or rent a house.



    These reflections lead me to make a distinction which I



apprehend may be of use in clearing up our ideas concerning



population. Let me therefore consider the generation of man in a



political light, and it will present itself under two forms. The



one as a real multiplication; the other as procreation only.



    Children produced from parents who are able to maintain them,



and bring them up to a way of getting bread for themselves, do



really multiply and serve the state. Those born of parents whose



subsistence is precarious, or which is proportioned to their own



physical necessary only, have a precarious existence, and will



undoubtedly begin their life by being beggars. Many such will



perish for want of food, but many more for want of ease; their



mendicity will be accompanied with that of their parents, and the



whole will go to ruin; according to the admirable expression of



the Marechal de Vauban, in his Dixime Royale. La mendicite, says



he, est un mal qui tue bientot son homme. He had many examples of



the truth of it before his eyes; whoever has not, must have seen



little of the world.



    When marriage is contracted without the requisites for



multiplication, it produces a procreation, attended with the



above mentioned inconveniences; and as by far the greater part of



inhabitants are in the lower classes, it becomes the duty of a



statesman to provide against such evils, if he intends, usefully



to increase the number of his people.



    Every plan proposed for this purpose, which does not proceed



upon an exact recapitulation of the inhabitants of a country,



parish by parish, will prove nothing more than an expedient for



walking in the dark. Among such recapitulations or lists I would



recommend, as an improvement upon those I have seen in the



Marechal de Vauban's excellent performance above cited, and in



the states of his Prussian Majesty, or elsewhere, to have one



made out, classing all the inhabitants, not only by the trades



they exercise, but by those of their fathers, with a view to



distinguish those classes which multiply, from those which only



procreate. I should be glad also to see bills of mortality made



out for every class, principally to compare the births and deaths



of the children in them.



    Let me take an example. Suppose then, that I have before me a



general recapitulation of all the inhabitants of a country,



parish by parish, where they may appear distributed under the



respective denominations of their fathers' employment. I shall



immediately find a considerable number produced from the higher



classes; from those who live upon an income already provided, and



upon branches of industry which produce an easy and ample



subsistence. These have no occasion for the assistance of the



state in bringing up their children, and you may encourage



marriage, or permit celibacy in such classes, in proportion to



the use you find for their offspring when they are brought up.



When I come to the lower classes, I examine, for example, that of



shoemakers, where I find a certain number produced. This number I



first compare with the number of shoemakers actually existing,



and then with the number of marriages subsisting among them, (for



I suppose recapitulations of every kind,) from which I discover



the fertility of marriage, and the success of multiplication in



this part. When the state of the question is examined, class by



class, I can decide where marriage succeeds, and where it does



not. I have said, that I imagine it an advantage that every class



should support at least its own numbers; and when it does more, I



should wish (were it possible) that the higher classes might be



recruited from the lower, rather than the lower from the higher;



the one seems a mark of prosperity, the other of decay: but I



must confess that the first is by far the most difficult to be



obtained.



    According therefore to circumstances, and in consistence with



these principles, I would encourage marriage by taking the



children off the hands of their parents. Where marriage succeeds



the worst, if it happens to be in a very low class, great



encouragement should be given to it; perhaps the whole children



should be taken care of. Certain trades may be left with the care



of one child, others with two, and so progressively. But of this,



more in another place. I beg it may not here be imagined that I



propose, that the whole of the lower classes of people should



marry and propagate, and that the state should feed all their



offspring. My view extends no farther, than to be assured of



having such a number of children yearly taken care of as shall



answer the multiplication proposed, and that these be



proportionally raised from each class, and from each part of the



country, and produced from marriages protected by the state,



distinguished from the others, which under a free government



never can be prevented, but which must always be found exposed to



the inconveniences of want and misery. To guard against such



evils ought to be another object of public care. Hospitals for



foundlings are an admirable institution; and colonies are an



outlet for superfluous inhabitants. But I insensibly enter into a



detail which exceeds my plan. To lay down a scheme, you must



suppose a particular state to be perfectly known. This lies



beyond my reach, and therefore I shall go no farther, but



illustrate what I have said, by some observations and reflections



which seem analogous to the subject.



    I have not here proposed plans of multiplication inconsistent



with the spirit of the nations with which I am a little



acquainted; nor with the religion professed in Europe, for many



reasons, obvious to any rational man. But principally, because, I



believe, it will be found, that a sufficient abundance of



children are born already; and that we have neither occasion for



concubinage, or polygamy, to increase their numbers. But we want



a right method of taking care of those we have, in order to



produce a multiplication proportioned to the possibility of our



providing nourishment and employment. I have therefore proposed,



that a statesman, well informed of the situation of his people,



the state of every class, the number of marriages found in each,



should say, let a particular encouragement be given to so many



marriages among the lower classes and let these be distributed in



a certain proportion for every parish, city, borough, &c. in the



country; let rules be laid down to direct a preference, in case



of a competition, between different couples; and let the



consequence of this approbation be, to relieve the parents of all



children above what they can maintain, as has been said. I



propose no new limitations upon marriage, because I am a friend



to liberty, and because such limitations would shock the spirit



of the times. I therefore would strongly recommend hospitals for



foundlings over all the country; and still more strongly the



frugal maintenance of children in such hospitals, and their being



bred up early to fill and recruit the lowest classes of the



people.



    From what has been throw out in this chapter, let no one



conclude, that such oeconomical principles would lead to



regulations much too minute to be consistent with a just spirit



of manly freedom and self-government in the common affairs of



life. The regulations I have been recommending, regard those only



who cannot support their families without the assistance of the



state. In vain do we look for self-government or manly freedom



among such classes of inhabitants.







Chap. XIII







Continuation of the same Subject, with regard to the Necessity of



having exact Lists of Births, Deaths, and Marriages, for every



Class of Inhabitants in a modern Society







    Mr Derham has furnished some tables, which shew the



proportion between marriages and births in England, to be as 1 to



4; that of births to burials as 1 12/100 to 1: from which it



appears that multiplication there goes on, though slowly: a mark



of youth and vigour. Dr Davenant values this augmentation at 9000



a year. Could matters be kept at that standard, I should prefer



it by far to a more rapid multiplication: it amounts to about a



million in a century (without entering into accumulations or



exact calculations), and the longer youth is preserved so much



the better. A rapid multiplication will stop at some period, and



this stop, which marks distress, must produce great



inconveniences.



    These calculations, founded on very precarious suppositions,



shew how necessary it is to have authentic recapitulations:



since, precarious as they are, it is from these and the like,



that Dr Halley, and others, have calculated the value of



annuities, which (at a time when all the states of Europe are



borrowing money at the expence of every man's private industry or



property) ought to be valued at their real worth. Now, in all



these calculations of mortality, it appears that what we have



called the abuse of marriage or mere procreation is included.



    If it be true, as I think it is, from what I have seen and



observed, that numbers, especially of children, among the lower



classes, perish from the effects of indigence; either directly by



want of food, or by diseases contracted gradually from the want



of convenient ease; and that others perish for want of care, when



the slightest assistance of a surgeon to let them blood, would be



sufficient to preserve them against the inflammatory distempers



to which they are chiefly exposed: If these things be so, must we



not infer, that calculations formed upon a conclusion drawn from



the births and deaths of mankind in general, cannot possibly be



so exact as if the like were drawn from those of every class of



inhabitants taken separately.



    It may here be answered, that among the rich and easy, there



are found diseases which sweep off numbers, in as great a



proportion as other distempers do among the poor: that we see



very large families brought up among the lowest classes, while a



great man has all the pains in the world to preserve one boy from



the wreck of a number of children.



    All this I agree may be true; but I should be glad to see in



what proportion it is so, and to be made certain of the fact. I



want to know the diseases of the rich and of the poor; I want to



have as particular details of the births and deaths of every



class, as I can have of those of the cities of Paris, London, or



Breslaw. I want to know from what parents are sprung those



multitudes of poor which I find every where; and most of all to



have such accounts from different countries, where different



manners prevail. For no just conclusion can be drawn from the



comparison of facts, without examining circumstances. The most



barren class in one country, may be the most fruitful in another.



As an example of this, let any one compare the state of marriage



among the footmen of London where most of them are single, and of



Paris where most of them have families.



    I find error concealed every where under general



propositions. The children of the poor, says one, thrive better



than those of the rich. If it be so, it ought not to be so in



common reason. But the same person will tell you, I have made my



son a merchant; he will be a rich man Why? Because (A B) was a



merchant, who, from nothing, died worth a hundred thousand



pounds. But if you go through all the letters of the alphabet



following (A B), among those who set out as he did, you will



find, that perhaps every one of them died a bankrupt. Those who



prove successful are remarkable: those who miscarry are never



heard of. It is just so with respect to the question before us.



But to return to our tables, and what are called calculations.



    In England, one marriage produces four children at a medium.



If you reckon 6,000,000 of people in that country, and that 1/30



part dies annually, then to keep up the stock it is sufficient



that 200,000 be annually born; add to this the yearly increase of



9000, the total of births will then be 209,000: for if 200,000



die this year, and if 209,000 be born, this must certainly imply



an increase of 9000, provided we suppose the acquisition of



foreigners to be equal to the exportation of the natives. As this



is meant as an illustration only, I need not examine the matter



of fact. The next question is, How many marriages, properly



contracted or encouraged as above, will give this increase? For



we may know that these subsisting in that kingdom, joined with



the effects of extramatrimonial conjunctions, is just sufficient



to produce it. I imagine that nothing but experiment can give the



solution of this question. Mr King supposes every 104th person in



England to marry yearly, that is, 57,682 persons, or 28,841



couples. If this number of marriages be supposed to subsist with



fertility for seven years, producing a child every year, the



number of 200,000 births would be procured; but I apprehend that



marriages, rightly contracted, subsist much longer in general



than seven years, even with fertility, though not in proportion



to a child every year: consequently the number of marriages



constantly subsisting with fertility in England, where it is



supposed that 28,841 are yearly contracted, must be much greater



than seven times that number, or than 201,887. If we suppose the



whole of the 209,000 births to be produced by marriages, at three



marriages to every child annually produced, then the number of



marriages subsisting will be 627,000. From these speculations



(for I do not pretend to call them calculations) I conclude, that



the more fruitful marriages are rendered, (not with regard to



procreation, merely, but to multiplication, which I have above



distinguished,) the fewer become necessary; and the fewer



unnecessary marriages are contracted, the better for the state,



and the less misery for those who contract them. I shall here



stop, and leave to the reader to draw his conclusions, putting



him in mind of the wide difference that is always found between



theory and practice.



    From this reasoning I infer, that no exact judgement can be



formed, as to the numbers in any society, from the single datum



of the annual number of deaths among them; and although the just



proportion between numbers and deaths may exactly be determined



in one particular place, yet that proportion will not serve as a



general standard, and being taken for granted may lead to error.



    Here are the reasons for my opinion:



    Were nobody to marry but such as could maintain their



children, the bills of births and burials would, I apprehend,



diminish, and yet numbers might remain as before; and were every



body to marry who could procreate, they certainly would increase,



but still numbers would never exceed the proportion of



Subsistence. Could we but see bills of births and deaths for the



city of Rome, while in all its glory or indeed for the



sugar-colonies in America, where slaves are imported, adding the



number of those imported to that of births, and suppossing the



colony neither upon the growing or the declining hand, then the



deaths and births would be equal; but the proportion of them to



all in the colony, I apprehend, would be far less than in any



state in Europe, where slavery does not prevail.



    It may be alleged that, were all to marry, the consequence



would be a great multiplication. I say not; or if it were, what



sort of multiplication would it be? A multitude of children who



never could come to manhood; or who would starve their parents,



and increase misery beyond expression. All therefore that can be



learned from bills of mortality, &c. is, that if the births



exceed the deaths, and that all remain in the country, numbers



are increasing; that if the deaths exceed the births, numbers are



diminishing; but, while they stand at par, no conclusion can be



drawn as to numbers in general: these will be in a less



proportion as abusive procreation goes forward: and, vice versa,



they will be in a greater.



    There still hangs a cloud upon this subject: let me therefore



reason upon an example. Suppose the inhabitants of a country to



stand at 6,000,000; one thirtieth to die every year, and as many



to be born, that is, the births and burials to stand at 200,000;



that every three marriages subsisting produce one child every



year, that is 600,000 marriages; let the quantity of food be



supposed the same, without a possibility of being augmented.



Would not the consequence be, that numbers could not increase?



Now let me suppose marriages carried to 1,000,000, I say the



effect would be, either that they would become in general less



fruitful, or if they suffered no diminution in this particular,



that the bills of births and deaths would rise to 333,333; that



is to say, they would be to the number of inhabitants as 1 to 18,



instead of being as 1 to 30. Now this increase of mortality



proceeding from want of food, either the old would starve the



young, or the young would starve the old; or a third case, more



probable than either, would happen; those who could purchase



subsistence, would starve those who could not. What would be the



consequences in all these three suppositions? In the first, the



number of 6,000,000 would be found to diminish; because the



proportion of large consumers would rise, and mortality would



increase among the children. In the second, the standard number



would augment, because the proportion of small consumers would



rise, and mortality would increase among the parents. In the



third, misery and distress would lay all the lower classes waste.



It is computed that one half of mankind die before the age of



puberty in countries where numbers do not augment; from this I



conclude, that too many are born. If methods therefore are fallen



upon to render certain diseases less mortal to children, all the



good that will be got by it, in general, will be to render old



people of the lower classes more wretched; for if the first are



brought to live, the last must die.



    From these speculations I cannot help wishing to see bills of



mortality made out for different classes, as well as for



different ages. Were this executed, it would be an easy matter to



perceive, whether the mortality among children proceeds from



diseases to which infancy is necessarily exposed, or from abusive



procreation. I am pretty much convinced, before I see the



experiment, that it proceeds from the latter; but should



experience prove it, the principles I have laid down would



acquire an additional force. In the mean time, I must conclude,



that it is not for want of marrying that a people does not



increase, but from the want of subsistence; and it is miserable



and abusive procreation which starves so many, and is the



fountain of so much wretchedness.



    Upon the whole, I may say, that were it possible to get a



view of the general state of births and burials in every class of



the inhabitants of a country, marriage might surely be put upon a



better footing than ever it has been, for providing every year a



determinate number of good and wholesome recruits towards



supporting national multiplication. This is walking in the light,



and is a means of procuring whatever augmentation of hands you



wish for. What difficulties may be found in the execution,



nothing but experience can shew. and this, to a judicious eye,



will point out the remedy. This, in my opinion, will be far



better than a general naturalization, which I take to be a leap



in the dark. For, however easy it may be to naturalize men, I



believe nothing is so difficult as to naturalize customs and



foreign habits; and the greatest blessing any nation can enjoy,



is an uniformity of opinion upon every point which concerns



public affairs and the administration of them.



    When God blesses a people, he makes them unanimous, and



bestows upon them a governor who loves them, and who is beloved,



honoured, and respected by them; this, and this only, can create



unanimity.



    Let this suffice at present, as to the distribution,



employment, and increase of a people. Upon the proper employment



of the free hands, the prosperity of every state must depend:



consequently the principal care of a statesman should be, to keep



all employed, and for this purpose he must acquire an exact



knowledge of the state of every denomination, in order to prevent



any one from rising above, or sinking below that standard which



is best proportioned to the demand made for their particular



industry. As the bad consequences resulting from the loss of this



exact balance are not immediate, a moderate attention, with the



help of the proper recapitulations, will be sufficient to direct



him.



    This and the two preceding chapters have in a manner wholly



treated of the employment of the free hands: I must now consider



the effects of an overcharge of those employed in agriculture.



Here we shall still discover inconveniences, resulting from the



want of that just proportion in the distribution of classes,



which gives health and vigour to a state; and we shall see how it



may happen, that even an overcharge of inhabitants in general may



become a political disease; as an abundance of blood, however



rich and good, may affect the health of the human body.











Chap. XIV







Of the Abuse of Agriculture and Population







    I have taken above of two performances, wherein the authors



with equal ability, have treated of the numbers of manors, with



notice a subject which has a very close connection with political



oeconomy.



    Although (as I have said) I do not pretend to decide between



them as to the point in dispute, I find that in this chapter I



shall be naturally led into a chain of reasoning very



unfavourable to that of Mr Wallace, which is a thing I should



have dispensed with, did not the merit of his performance in the



eyes of the learned world appear sufficient to draw my attention.



    Agriculture is, without all doubt, the foundation of



multiplication, which must ever be in proportion to it; that is,



to the earth's productions, as has been said. But it does not



follow, that in proportion to multiplication those produced must



of course become useful to one another, and useful to the society



in general. Now I consider multiplication as no otherwise useful



to a state, than so far as the additional number becomes so to



those who are already existing, whom I consider as the



body-politic of the society. When it therefore happens, that an



additional number produced do no more than feed themselves, then



I perceive no advantage gained to the society by their



production. If, without rendering any equivalent service, they



are fed by others, there is a loss.



    Agriculture may be said to be carried to its utmost extent,



when the earth is so laboured as to produce the greatest quantity



of fruits possible for the use of man; and in judging of the



improvement of two spots of ground of the same extent, that may



be said to be most improved which produces the greatest quantity



of food: but as to population, the question does not stop here;



for let the quantity be equal on both, yet if the inhabitants of



the one be more frugal livers than those of the other, this



circumstance alone will make an inequality. If agriculture



therefore be considered with respect to population only, we must



consider that country as the best peopled, where productions are



the most abundant, and where the inhabitants are the most sober.



Thus much with regard to the extent of agriculture and



population: we come now to consider the inconveniences which may



result to a society from an over-stretch, or from what I call an



abuse of either the one or the other.



    I call every thing an abuse in society which implies a



contradiction to the spirit of it, or which draws along with it



an inconvenience to certain classes, which is not compensated by



the general welfare.



    The political oeconomy of government is brought to



perfection, when every class in general, and every individual in



particular, is made to be aiding and assisting to the community,



in proportion to the assistance he receives from it. This conveys



my idea of a free and perfect society, which is, a general tacit



contract, from which reciprocal and proportional services result



universally between all those who compose it.



    Whenever therefore any one is found, upon whom nobody



depends, and who depends upon every one, as is the case with him



who is willing to work for his bread, but who can find no



employment, there is a breach of the contract, and an abuse. For



the same reason, if we can suppose any person entirely taken up



in feeding himself, depending upon no one, and having nobody



depending on him, we lose the idea of society, because there are



no reciprocal obligations between such a person and the other



members of the society.



    Those who are for employing the whole of a people in



agriculture may answer, that all their time cannot be employed in



this occupation, and that in the intervals they may apply



themselves to supply reciprocal wants.



    I very readily agree, that any person, who would calculate



his labour in agriculture, purely for his own subsistence, would



find abundance of idle hours. But the question is, whether in



good oeconomy such a person would not be better employed in



providing nourishment for others, than in prodding for any other



want. When he provides food, he surely provides for a want; and



experience shews, that it is better for a man to apply close to



one trade, than to turn himself to several.



    Hence I conclude, that the best way of binding a free society



together is by multiplying reciprocal obligations, and creating a



general dependence between all its members. This cannot be better



effected, than by appropriating a certain number of inhabitants,



for the production of the quantity of food required for all, and



by distributing the remainder into proper classes for supplying



every other want. I say farther, that this distribution is not



only the most rational, but that mankind fall naturally into it;



and misery attends and has ever attended those who have been



found without a particular employment.



    It must not be concluded from this reasoning that abuse is



always implied when we find any of the classes of the free hands



of a state casually employed in agriculture.



    There is such a variety of circumstances in every country,



that without a peculiar talent of laying principles together, so



as to answer every combination, the most perfect theory which can



be proposed must appear defective.



    In countries ill-improved, where industry begins only to take



root, we are not to conclude, that good policy requires a sudden



and immediate separation between the dwellings of the husbandmen



and free hands. Sudden revolutions are constantly hurtful, and a



good statesman ought to lay down his plan for arriving at



perfection by gradual steps.



    If he find, as is the case of rude and uncivilized societies,



that many are occupied, partly, in providing subsistence for



their own family, partly, in other useful pursuits, he may by



degrees attach as many as he can to agriculture alone. The most



wealthy are the most proper to carry this branch to any degree of



perfection. The landed men ought to be encouraged by every means



to apply to the study of farming. This employment has been



considered as honourable in all ages of the world, and very well



suits the rank, the interest, and the amusement of gentlemen.



    The next step is to introduce manufactures into the country,



and to provide a ready market abroad for every superfluous part



of them. The allurement of gain will soon engage every one to



pursue that branch of industry which succeeds best in his hands.



By these means many will follow manufactures and abandon



agriculture; others will prosecute their manufactures in the



country, and avail themselves, at the same time, of small



portions of land, proper for gardens, grass for cows, and even



for producing certain kinds of fruit necessary for their own



maintenance.



    This I do not consider as a species of farming. It is more



properly, in a political light, a sort of village-life; the



village here appears dispersed only over a large extent; and I



call it a village-life, because here the occupation of the



inhabitants is principally directed towards the prosecution of



their trades: agriculture is but a subaltern consideration, and



will be carried on so far only, as it occasions no great



avocation from the main object. It will however, have the effect



to parcel out a small part of the lands into small possessions: a



system admirably calculated for the improvement of a barren soil,



and advantageous to industry is not thereby checked. This is



population, when the spirit of not the case when the possessors



of small lots apply totally to agriculture, and content



themselves with a bare subsistence from it, without industry, or



forming any plan which prosecuting any other branch of may enable



themselves or their children to emerge from so circumscribed a



sphere of life: from this alone proceeds, in most countries, the



inconvenience of a minute subdivision of land-property.



    We shall presently see, by various examples, the truth of



this proposition; and, from what observations I have been able to



make, it appears, that a great inconvenience flows from it; the



property of the lands, and not the bare possession of them, is



vested in the lower classes. While they remain as tenants only,



the interest of the proprietor, on one hand, will lead him to



incorporate these small possessions into larger farms, the moment



the possessors are no longer able to pay a rent above the value



of the grounds when let in farms; and the interest of these



tenants, on the other hand, will frequently lead them to abandon



such small possessions, when the prosecution of their trades,



which ought to be their principal occupation, demands a change of



habitation. Thus the interest of agriculture will go hand in hand



with that of industry, and classes will separate their



habitations according as their respective interests require.



    It is certainly the interest of every landlord whose lands



are ill improved, to multiply the habitations on them; provided



the possessors can be made to live by some other branch of



industry than bare agriculture: and in many cases, it may be his



advantage to incorporate such small possessions into farms, as



soon as they have been sufficiently improved by the possessors;



whose habitations may then be removed to other barren lands. By



following this plan he will improve his estate; he will multiply



the useful inhabitants; and he will, at the same time, share the



profits of their industry beyond the value which any farmer can



pay for the lands which he gives them to possess.



    By these means has the woollen manufacture in England, and



the linen in Ireland and Scotland been greatly augmented. But as



the improvement of land goes on, this oeconomy will decline:



towns will swell in consequence of the principles we are now



going to deduce; the lands will become more thinly inhabited; and



farms will by degrees grow more extensive. I appeal to experience



for the justness of this observation.



    Hence it plainly appears, that, in every light this matter



can be represented, we still find it impossible usefully to



employ in agriculture above a certain part of a people. The next



question is, how to determine the just proportion. For this



purpose we must have recourse to facts, not to theory. We have,



in a former chapter, examined the state of this question with



regard to one country. I shall here only add, that, in proportion



to the culture of the soil, and to the number of crops it is made



to produce, a greater or less number will be required; and in



proportion to the surplus of food above what is necessary to



maintain the labourers, will a number of free hands be provided



for. If therefore a species of agriculture can be found



established, which produces little or no surplus, there little or



no industry can be exercised; few wants can be supplied: this



will produce a wonderful simplicity of manners, will ruin the



system of modern policy, and produce what I must call an abuse.



Let me look for some examples of this, in order to set the



question in a clearer light.



    In the wine-provinces of France, we find the lands which lie



round the villages divided into very small lots, and there



cultivation is carried to a very extraordinary height. These



lands belong, in property, (not by lease,) to the peasants who



cultivate the vines. No frugality can be greater than in the



consumption of this produce, and the smallest weed which comes up



among the grain, is turned to account, for the food of animals.



The produce of such lands, I may say, is entirely consumed by the



proprietor and his family, who are all employed in the



cultivation, and there is no superfluous quantity here produced



for the maintenance of others. Does not this resemble the



distribution of lands made by the Romans in favour of 5000 Sabine



families, where each received two plethra of ground. (See Numbers



of Mankind, p. 117) Now let me examine the political state of



agriculture, and of other labour performed by my French



vine-dresser.



    By the supposition we imply, that the bit of land is



sufficient for maintaining the man and his family, and nothing



more; he has no grain to sell, no food can by him be supplied to



any other person whatever; but the state of other lands capable



of yielding a surplus, such as the vineyard, produces a demand



for his labour. This labour, considered with respect to the



vine-dresser, is a fund for providing all his wants in



manufactures, salt, &c. and what is over must be considered as



his profits, out of which he pays the royal impositions. The same



labour, considered with regard to the proprietor of the vineyard,



enters into that necessary deduction out of the fruits, which,



when deducted, leaves the remainder, which we call surplus, or



what answers to the land-rent. This belongs to the proprietor,



and becomes a fund for supplying all his wants.



    Here we have an idea of society. The vine-dresser depends



upon the proprietor for the price of his labour, the proprietor



upon the vinedresser for his surplus. But did we suppose all the



kingdom parcelled out, and laboured, as the spot which lies round



the village, what would become of the vine-dresser with regard to



all his other wants; there would be no vines to dress, no surplus



nourishment any where to be found, consequently no employment,



not even life, for those who had no land. From this example we



discover the difference between agriculture exercised as a trade



and as a direct means of subsisting: a distinction to be attended



to, as it will very frequently occur in the prosecution of our



subject. We have the two species in the vine-dresser: he labours



the vineyard as a trade, and his spot of ground for subsistence.



We may farther conclude, that, as to the last part, he is useful



to himself only; but, as to the first, he is useful to the



society, and becomes a member of it: consequently, were it not



for his trade, the state would lose nothing, though the



vine-dresser and his land were both swallowed up by an



earthquake. The food and the consumers would both disappear



together, without the least political harm to any body:



consequently, such a species of agriculture is no benefit to a



state; and consequently, neither is that species of



multiplication, implied by such a distribution of property, any



benefit. Thus an over-extension of agriculture and subdivision of



lands become an abuse, and so, consequently, does an



over-multiplication of farmers.



    Here I am obliged to conclude, that those passages of Roman



authors which mention the frugality of that people, and the small



extent of their possessions, cannot be rightly understood,



without the knowledge of many circumstances relative to the



manners of those times. For if you understand such a distribution



of lands to have extended over all the Roman territory, the



number of the citizens would have far exceeded what they appear



to have been by the Census, and even surpass all belief. But



farther, I may be allowed to ask, whether or no it be supposed



that these frugal Romans laboured this small portion of lands



with their own hands and consumed the produce of it? If I am



answered in the affirmative (which is necessary to prove the



advantages of agriculture's being exercised by all the classes of



a people), then I ask, from whence were the inhabitants of Rome,



and other cities, subsisted? who fed the armies when in the



field? If these were fed by foreign grain imported or plundered



from their neighbours, where was the advantage of this



sub-division of lands, and of this extensive agriculture, which



could not feed the inhabitants of the state? If it be said, that



notwithstanding this frugal distribution of property among the



citizens, there were still found surplus enough to supply both



Rome and the armies, will it not then follow, that there was no



necessity for employing all the people in agriculture, since the



labour of a part might have sufficed?



    That number of husbandmen, therefore, is the best, which can



provide food for all the state; and that number of inhabitants is



the best, which is compatible with the full employment of every



one of them.



    Idle mouths are useful to themselves only, not to the state;



consequently, are not an object of the care of the state, any



farther than to provide employment for them; and their welfare



(while they remain useless to others) is, in a free country,



purely a matter of private concern. Let me take another example



for the farther illustration of this matter.



    Those who travel into the southern provinces of Spain, find



large tracts of land quite uncultivated, producing only a scanty



pasture for herds of the lesser cattle. Here and there are found



interspersed some spots of watered lands, which, from the



profusion of every gift which nature can bestow, strike a



northern traveller with an idea of paradise. In such places



villages are found, and numbers of inhabitants. It must be



allowed that industry and labour do not here go forward as in



other countries; but to supply this want charity steps in.



Charity in Spain (in proportion to its extent) is as powerful a



principle towards multiplication as industry and labour. Whatever



gives food gives numbers: but charity cannot extend beyond



superfluity, and this must ever be in proportion to industry.



These watered lands are well laboured and improved. The value of



them, in one sense, is in proportion to their fertility, and the



surplus of the labourers should naturally be given for an



equivalent in money or work: But this equivalent cannot be found;



because the poor of the village have neither the one or the other



to give; and the charitable farmer considers it to be his duty,



to bestow on them gratis whatever he can spare. If the Spaniards



therefore were not the most charitable people upon earth, it is



very plain that the labouring of those watered spots would



diminish until it came upon a level with the demand of such



people of the village only, as could purchase the farmer's



surplus. But here it is otherwise; labour goes on mechanically;



the farmer never complains of the burden of giving, charity; and



the poor live in ease in proportion to plenty of the year.



    Here then is a third principle of multiplication. The first



is slavery, or a violent method of making mankind labour; the



second is industry, which is a rational excitement to it; the



third is charity, which resembles the manna in the desert, the



gift of God upon a very extraordinary occasion, and when nothing



else could have preserved the lives of his people. Whether, in



all cases, this principle of christianity advances the prosperity



of a modern society (when complied with from obedience to



precept, without consulting reason as to the circumstances of



times and situations), is a question which lies out of my road to



examine. The action, considered in the intention of the agent,



must in every case appear highly beautiful; and we plainly see



how far it contributes to multiplication, though we do not so



plainly perceive how such a kind of multiplication can be



advantageous to society.



    Now if we examine the state of agriculture in this Spanish



village, considered as one large family, we find, upon the whole,



no more surplus of fruits than upon the French vine-dresser's



portion of land; consequently, if all Spain was laboured and



inhabited like this village and its small garden, as it is



called, it would be the most populous country in the world, the



most simple in the manner of living; but it never could



communicate the idea of a vigorous or a flourishing state. It is



the employment alone of the inhabitants which can impress this



character.



    Now in this last example, what a number of free hands do we



find! Are not all the poor of this class? Would it not be better



if all these by their labour could purchase their subsistence,



than be obliged to receive it in the precarious manner they do?



Can one suppose all these people industrious, without implying



what I call superfluity of labour? and does not superfluity of



labour imply luxury, according to my definition of it? Where



would be the harm if the Spanish farmer, who gives a third of his



crop in charity, should in return receive some changes of



raiment, some convenient furniture for his house, some



embellishment to his habitation: these things would cost him



nothing; he would receive them in exchange for what he now gives



from a principle of charity, and those who have a precarious,



would have a certain livelihood. Let us travel a little farther



in search of the abuse of population.



    In Germany, we find many small towns, formed into



corporations, which enjoy certain privileges. The freedom of such



towns is not easily purchased; and one, upon considering outward



circumstances, must be not a little surprized to hear of the sums



refused, when offered, to obtain it. Round these towns there is a



small territory divided into very small portions, and not able to



maintain the inhabitants: these lands therefore are infinitely



over-stocked with husbandmen; for every proprietor, less or more,



concerns himself with the cultivation. Here, one who should



aspire to extend his possession, would, according to the



sentiment of Manius Curius Dentatus, certainly be considered as a



dangerous citizen, and a hurtful member of the society. These



lots are divided among the children of the proprietors, who are



free of the town, by which means they are constantly splitting by



multiplication, and consolidating by death, and by marriage:



these nearly balance one another, and property remains divided as



before. A stranger is at a loss to find out the reason, why the



liberty of so poor a little town should be so valuable. Here it



is; first there are certain advantages enjoyed in common, such as



the privilege of pasture on the town-lands, and others of a like



nature; but I find that the charges which the burgesses are



obliged to pay, may more than compensate them. The principal



reason appears to be, that no one who has not the liberty of a



town, can settle in a way of industry so as to marry and have a



family: because without this, his labour can be directed towards



furnishing the wants of peasants only, who live in villages;



these are few, and little ingenuity is required for it. In towns



there is found a greater diversity of wants, and the people there



have found out mechanically, that if strangers were allowed to



step in and supply them, their own children would starve;



therefore the heads of the corporation, who have an interest to



keep up the price of work, have also an interest to hold the



liberty of their town at a high value. This appears to me a



pretty just representation of the present state of some towns I



have seen, relative to the present object of inquiry.



    But as industry becomes extended, and trade and manufactures



are established, this political oeconomy must disappear.



    Such a change, however, will not probably happen without the



interposition of the sovereign, and a new plan of administration;



what else can give a turn to this spirit of idleness, or rather,



as I may call it, of this trifling industry? Agriculture never



can be a proper occupation for those who live in towns: this



therefore is an abuse of it, or rather indeed an abuse of



employment.



    Ease and plenty never can enter a little town, but by the



means of wealth; wealth never can come in but by the produce of



labour going out; and when people labour purely for their own



subsistence, they make the little money only they have to



circulate, but can acquire nothing new and those who with



difficulty can maintain themselves, never can hope to increase



their numbers.



    If in spite of the little industry set on foot in such towns,



the generative faculty shall work its effect and increase



numbers, this will make the poor parents still divide, and misery



will ensue; this may excite compassion, and this again will open



the chests of those who have a charitable disposition: hospitals



are founded for the relief of the poor, they are quickly filled,



and as many necessitous remain as ever. The reason is plain; the



hospital applies a palliative for the abuse, but offers no cure.



A tree is no sooner discharged of its branches than it pushes new



ones. It has been said, that numbers are in proportion to food;



consequently, poor are in proportion to charity. Let the King



give his revenue in charity, he will soon find poor enough to



consume it. Let a rich man spend 100,000 l. a year upon a table,



he will find guests (the best in the kingdom) for every cover.



These things, in my way of considering them, are all analogous,



and flow from the same principle. And the misery found in these



little German towns, is another modification of the abuse of



population. These examples shew the inconveniences and abuses



which result from a misapplication of agriculture, which produces



a population more burthensome than beneficial to a modern state.



    If the simplicity of the ancients be worthy of imitation, or



if it appear preferable to the present system, which it is not my



business to decide, then either slavery must be introduced to



make those subsist who do not labour, or they must be fed upon



charity. Labour and industry can never, I think, be recommended



on one hand, and the effects of them proscribed on the other. If



a great body of warlike men (as was the case in Sparta) be



considered as essential to the well-being of the state; if all



trade and all superfluity be forbid amongst them, and no



employment but military exercises allowed; if all these warriors



be fed at public tables, must you not either have a set of



Helotes to plow the ground for them, or a parcel of charitable



Spanish farmers to feed them gratis.



    Thus much I have thought might be of use to say to illustrate



the principles I have laid down. I find it very unfavourable to



the reasoning which runs through the whole of the performance



which I mentioned above, and which I have had in my eye. A more



particular examination of it might be useful, and even amusing;



but it would engage me in too long a disquisition for the nature



of this work. I cannot however help, in this place, adding one



observation more, in consequence of our principles, which seems



contrary to the strain of our ingenious author's reasoning. I say



seems, because all difference almost of opinion upon such



subjects proceeds from the defect of language in clearly



transmitting our ideas, when complex or abstract.



    The effect of diseases which sweep off numbers of people does



not essentially diminish population, except when they come



suddenly or irregularly, any more than it would necessarily



dispeople the world if all mankind were to be swept off the stage



at the age of forty-six years. I apprehend that in man, as in



every other animal, the generative faculty is more than able to



repair all losses occasioned by regular diseases; and I have



shewn, I think, more than once, that multiplication never can



stop but for want of food. As long then as the labour of man can



continue annually to produce the same quantity of food as at



present, and that motives are found to make him labour, the same



numbers may be fed, and the generative faculty, which from one



pair has produced so many millions, would certainly do more than



keep up the stock, although no person were to pass the age above



mentioned. Here is the proof; were the life of man confined to



forty-six years, the state of mortality would be increased in the



proportion which those who die above forty-six bear to those who



die under this age. This proportion is, I believe, as 1 to 10;



consequently, mortality would increase 1/10, consequently,



numbers would be kept up by 1/10 upon births; and surely the



generative faculty of man far exceeds this proportion, when the



other requisites for propagation, to wit, food, &c. are to be



found, as by the supposition. 







Chap. XV







Application of the above Principles to the State of Population in



Great Britain







    A letter from Dr Brakenridge, F.R.S. addressed to George



Lewis Scott, Esq; which I found in the Danish Mercury for March



1758, furnishes me with a very good opportunity of applying the



principles we have been laying down to the state of population in



Great-Britain. I shall therefore, according to my plan, pass in



review that gentleman's opinion, without entering upon any



refutation of it. I shall extract the propositions he lays down,



examine the conclusions he draws from them, and then shew wherein



they differ from those which result from the theory established



in this inquiry.



    The author's calculations and suppositions as to matters of



fact shall be taken for granted, as I believe the first are as



good as any that can be made, upon a subject where all the data



required for solving the problem are quite a piece of guess-work.



    I must follow the Mercury, not having the original. 



    Prop. I. After a very close examination, says our author, I



find, that our islands gain, as to population, absolutely no more



than what is requisite for repairing their losses, and that, in



England itself, numbers would diminish, were they not recruited



from Ireland and Scotland.



    Prop. II. Men, able to carry arms, that is from 18 to 56



years, make, according to Dr Halley, the fourth part of a people;



and when a people increase in numbers, every denomination, as to



age, increases in this proportion: consequently in England, where



the number of inhabitants does not exceed six millions, if the



annual augmentation upon the whole do not exceed 18,000, as I am



pretty sure it does not, the yearly augmentation of those fit to



carry arms will be no more than 4,500.



    Prop. III. In England, burials are to births as 100 is to



113. I suppose, that in Scotland and Ireland, they may be as 100



is to 124. And as there may be in these two last kingdoms about



two millions and a half of inhabitants, the whole augmentation



may be stated at 15,000; and consequently that of such as are fit



to carry arms, at 3,750. Add this number to those annually



produced in England, and the sum total of the whole augmentation



in the British isles will be about 8,250.



    Prop. IV. The strangers, who arrive in England, in order to



settle, are supposed to compensate those who leave the country



with the same intent.



    Prop. V. It is out of this number of 8,250, that all our



losses are to be deduced. If the colonies, wars, and navigation,



carry off from us annually 8,000 men, the British isles cannot



augment in people: if we lose more, numbers must diminish.



    Prop. VI. By calculations, such as they are, our author



finds, that, upon an average of 66 years, from 1690 to 1756, this



number of 8,000 has been annually lost, that is, they have died



abroad in the colonies, in war, or on the account of navigation. 



    Prop. VII. That, since the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland



are about 8,000,000, and that the augmentation is annually about



8,000, we may conclude in general for all Europe, that, for every



million of habitants, there is an annual augmentation of 1,000;



consequently, every thousand men slain in war must destroy all



the augmentation of a million of inhabitants during a year.



Consequently France, which contains 14 millions, according to Sir



William Petty, having lost above 14,000 men a-year, during the



same 66 years, cannot have augmented in population.



    Prop. VIII. That the progress of trade and navigation



augmenting the loss of people by sea, must consequently have



diminished population over all Europe.



    Prop. IX. The exportation of our corn proves what the above



propositions have demonstrated. For supposing the progress of



agriculture to compensate the additional quantity distilled of



late years, there is still one-sixth of the crop exported, which



proves that our numbers are small, and that they do not augment.



    From these propositions our author concludes, that what stops



multiplication in the British isles is, first, That living in



celibacy is become a-la-mode: secondly, That wars have been



carried on beyond the nation's force: thirdly, That the use of



spirituous liquors destroys great numbers of inhabitants.



    I shall now shortly apply the principles I have been laying



down, in order to resolve every phenomenon here described, as to



the population of Great Britain. These phenomena I shall



willingly take for granted, as it is of no consequence to my



reasoning, whether they be exact or not: it is enough that they



may be so; and the question here is only to account for them.



    England, says he, would diminish in numbers, were it not



recruited from Scotland and Ireland. This, I say, is a



contingent, not a certain consequence: for did those grown-up



adventurers cease to come in, the inhabitants of England



themselves would undoubtedly multiply, provided an additional



number of breeders could be found, able to bring up their



children. Now the importation of grown men into a country so far



resembles the importation of slaves into our colonies, that the



one and the other diminishes the price of labour, and thereby



prevents marriage among certain classes of the natives, whose



profits are not sufficient for bringing up a family: and when any



such do marry notwithstanding, they do not multiply, as has been



said. Now were the Scots and Irish to come no more into England,



the price of labour would rise; those who now cannot bring up



children, might then be enabled to do it, and this would make the



English multiply themselves; that is, it would augment the number



of their own breeders. On the other hand, did the price of labour



continue too low to prove a sufficient encouragement for an



additional number of English breeders, the contingent consequence



would take place; that is, numbers would diminish, according to



our author's supposition, and the exportation of grain would



increase, in proportion to that diminution; and did foreign



demand for grain diminish also, then agriculture would suffer,



and every thing would decline.



    The representation he gives of the state of population in



these countries, is one modification of what I have called a



moral incapacity of a people's increasing in numbers. It is just



so in Africa, where the inhabitants are sold: just so in



Switzerland, and in many mountainous countries, where inhabitants



desert in order to seek their fortunes elsewhere. The national



stock remains at an equal standard, and the augmentation upon



births above burials is constantly in proportion to the



exportation of inhabitants. Let this proportion rise ever so



high, an increase of national population is noways essentially to



be implied from this phenomenon alone, but must proceed from



other causes.



    I can find nothing advanced by our author to prove, or even



to induce one to believe, that had the lives of those eight



thousands been yearly preserved from extraordinary dangers,



numbers would have augmented. England enjoyed in a manner 26



years peace after the treaty of Utrecht. For many years before



this treaty, a very destructive war had been carried on. Had the



bills of births been produced from 1701 to 1713, had they been



compared with those from this last period to 1739, when the



Spanish war began, had we seen a gradual augmentation from year



to year during those last 26 years, such as might be expected



from the preservation of a considerable number at least of the



8,250 able healthy men, just in the period of life fit for



propagation, one might be tempted to conclude, that the preceding



war had done hurt to population, by interrupting the propagation



of the species. But if, by comparing the bills of births for a



considerable number of years, in war and in peace, one can



discover no sensible difference, it is very natural to conclude,



either that those wars did not destroy many breeders, or that



others must have slipt in directly, and bred in the place of



those who had been killed. What otherwise can be the reason why



the number which our author supposes to have been destroyed



abroad, should so exactly compensate the annual augmentation, but



only that those nations are stocked to the full proportion of



their subsistence: and what is the reason why, after a



destructive war, which, by the suddenness of the revolution,



sweeps off numbers of the grown men, and diminishes the original



stock, numbers should in a few years get up to the former



standard, and then stop a-new?



    From our author's representation of the bills of births and



deaths, I should be apt to suspect, in consequence of my



principles, that upon a proper examination it will be found,



that, in those years of war, the proportion of births to deaths



had been higher than in years of peace, because more had died



abroad. And, had the slaughter of the inhabitants gone gradually



on, increasing every year beyond the 8,250, I am of opinion, that



the proportion of births might very possibly have kept pace with



it. On the contrary, during the years of peace, the proportion



would have diminished, and had nobody died out of the country at



all, the births and deaths would have become exactly equal.



    From what I have here said, the reader may perceive, that it



is not without reason that I have treated in the general, the



principles relating to my subject, and that I avoid as much as



possible to reason from facts alleged as to the state of



particular countries. Those our author builds upon may be true,



and may be false: the proportion of births and deaths in one



place is no rule for another we know nothing exactly about the



state of this question in the British isles; and it may even



daily vary, from a thousand circumstances. War may destroy



population as well as agriculture, and it may not, according to



circumstances. When the calamity falls upon the breeders, and



when these are supposed the only people in the country in a



capacity of bringing up their children, births will soon



diminish. When it destroys the indigent, who cannot bring up



their children, or who do not marry, births will remain the same.



The killing the wethers of a flock of sheep does not diminish the



brood of lambs next year; the killing of old pigeons makes a



pigeon-house thrive. When the calamity falls upon the farmers,



who make our lands produce, agriculture is hurt, no doubt: does



it fall upon the superfluities of cities, and other classes of



the free hands, it may diminish manufacturers, but agriculture



will go on, while there is a demand for its produce; and if a



diminution of consumption at home be a consequence of the war,



the augmentation upon exportation will more than compensate it. I



do not find that war diminishes the demand for subsistence.



    The long wars in Flanders in the beginning of this century



interrupted agriculture now and then, but did not destroy it.



That in the Palatinate in the end of the last ruined the country



so, that it has hardly as yet recovered it. War has different



effects, according to circumstances.



    OBJ. The population of the British isles is not stopt for



want of food, because one-sixth part of the crop is annually



exported. I answer, that it is still stopt for want of food, for



the exportation marks only that the home demand is satisfied; but



this does not prove that the inhabitants are full fed, although



they can buy no more at the exportation price. Those who cannot



buy, are exactly those who I say die for want of subsistence;



could they buy, they would live and multiply, and no grain



perhaps would be exported. This is a plain consequence of my



reasoning; and my principal point in view, throughout this whole



book, is to find out a method for enabling the indigent to buy up



this very quantity which is at present exported. By this



application of our principles, I have no occasion to call in



question our author's facts. It is no matter what be the state of



the case: if the principles I lay down be just, they must resolve



every phenomenon.











Chap. XVI







Why are some Countries found very populous in respect of others,



equally well calculated for Improvement?







    This question comes immediately under the influence of the



principles already laid down, and must be resolved in consequence



of them. It is with a view to make the application of these, that



I have proposed it; and, in the examination, we shall prove their



justness, or discover their defects.



    It may be answered in general, that every such difference



must proceed from what I call the spirit of the government and of



the people, which will not only decide as to numbers, but as to



many other things. I must however observe, that the question in



itself is of little importance, if nothing but numbers be



considered; for of what consequence is it to know how many people



are in a country, when the employment of them does not enter into



the inquiry? Besides, it is by examining the employment only of a



people, that I can form any judgment as to this particular. But



as the numbers of mankind have been thought a point worthy of



examination, I have chosen this title for a chapter, which might



perhaps have more properly stood under another.



    While slavery prevailed, I see no reason to conclude any



thing against the populousness of the world, as I have said



already: when slavery was abolished, and before industry took



place, if my principles be true, that period, I think, should



mark the time of the thinnest population in Europe; for I believe



it will be found, that there never was an example of a country,



however fertile by nature, where every one was absolutely free;



where there was little or no industry; and where, at the same



time, there were many inhabitants, not beggars, nor living upon



charity. I have mentioned this so often, that I am afraid of



tiring my reader with useless repetitions. I have brought it in



here, to give him only an opportunity of applying this principle



to the solution of the question before us.



    I shall begin my inquiry by asking what is understood by a



country's being populous; for this term presents different ideas,



if circumstances are not attended to. I have heard it said, that



France was a desert, and that there was nobody found in it but in



towns; while in England one cannot travel half a mile without



finding a farm, perhaps two together; and in looking round, one



sees the whole country divided into small possessions. The



difference here found, I apprehend, decides nothing in favour of,



or against the real populousness of the one or the other, but



proceeds entirely from circumstances relative to agriculture, and



to the distribution of free hands. These circumstances will be



better understood from the examination of facts, than from the



best theory in the world. Let one consider the state of



agriculture in Picardy and in Beauce, and then compare it with



the practice in many provinces in England, and the contrast will



appear striking. Were there more forest in England, to supply the



inhabitants with fuel, I imagine many inclosures, useful at first



for improving the grounds, would be taken away, and the country



laid more open; were wolves less common in France, there would be



found more scattered farms. Cattle there must be shut up in the



night, and cannot be left in the fields; this is a great



discouragement to inclosing. Where there are no inclosures, there



are few advantages to be found from establishing the farmhouse



exactly upon the spot of ground to be laboured; and then the



advantages which result to certain classes of inhabitants, from



being gathered together, the farmers with the tradesmen, are



found to preponderate. Thus the French farmers are gathered into



villages, and the English remain upon their fields. But farther;



in Picardy and Beauce agriculture has been long established, and,



I imagine, that, at the time when lands were first broken up, or



rather improved, their habitations must have been closer



together.



    This drawing together of inhabitants must leave many ruinous



possessions, and this, by-the-bye, is one reason why people cry



out upon the desolation of France, because ruinous houses (which



may oftentimes be a mark of improvement, not of desertion) are



found in different places in the country. Paris has grown



considerably in bulk, and from this it naturally happens, that



the country round is purged of idle mouths. If this makes labour



dear in the country, it is the city alone which suffers by it;



the country must certainly be the gainers. So much for the two



species of population in two of the best inhabited countries of



Europe. I now come to another in one of the worst.



    In some countries you find every farm-house surrounded with



small huts, possessed by numbers of people, supposed to be useful



to the farmer. These in Scotland are called cottars (cottagers),



because they live in cottages. If you consider them in a



political light, they will appear to be inhabitants appropriated



for agriculture. In one sense they are so, if by that you



understand the gathering in of the fruits; in another they are



not, if by agriculture you understand the turning up the surface.



I bring in this example, and shall enlarge a little upon it,



because I imagine it to be, less or more, the picture of Europe



400 years ago.



    The Scotch farmer must have hands to gather in a scanty



produce, spread over a large extent of ground. He has six



cottars, I shall suppose; but these cottars must have wives, and



these wives will have children, and all must be fed before the



master's rent can be paid. It never comes into the cottar's head



to suppose that his children can gain money by their industry,



the farmer never supposes that it is possible for him to pay his



rent without the assistance of his cottars to tend his cattle,



and gather in his crop; and the master cannot go against the



custom of the country, without laying his land waste. All these



children are ready at the farmer's disposal; he can, without any



expence, send what parcels of sheep he pleases, to different



distances of half a mile or more, to feed upon spots of ground



which, without the convenience of these children, would be



entirely lost. By this plan of farming, landlords who have a



great extent of country which they are not able to improve, can



let the whole in a very few farms, and at the same time all the



spontaneous produce of the earth is gathered in and consumed. If



you compare the rent of these lands with the extent, it appears



very small; if you compare it with the numbers fed upon the farm,



you will find that an estate in the highlands maintains, perhaps,



ten times as many people as another of the same value in a good



and fertile province. Thus it is in some estates as in some



convents of the begging order, the more mouths the better cheer.



    I shall now suppose our modern policy to inspire an ingenious



or public-spirited lady to set up a weaver or two at a



farm-house. The cottars begin to spin; they will be a long time



in attaining to a dexterity sufficient to appear at the weaver's



house, in competition with others who are accustomed to the



trade; consequently this manufacture will be long in a



languishing condition; but if the undertaking is supported with



patience, these obstacles will be got the better of. Those who



tended herds of cattle for a poor maintenance, will turn



themselves to a more profitable occupation; the farmer will find



more difficulty in getting hands, he will complain, perhaps give



way; the master will lose a year's rent, and nobody will take so



extensive a farm; it must be divided, then it must be improved,



and then it produces more grain upon one tenth, than perhaps



formerly was produced upon the whole. This grain is bought with



the price of spinning; the parents divide with the children, who



are fed, and spin in their turn. When this is accomplished, what



is the revolution? Why, formerly the earth fed all the



inhabitants with her spontaneous productions, as I may call them;



now more labour is exercised upon turning up her surface; this



she pays in grain, which belongs to the strong man for his labour



and toil; women and children have no direct share, because they



have not contributed thereto, as they did in feeding cattle. But



they spin, and have money to buy what they have not force to



produce: consequently they live; but as they become useless as



cottars, they remove from their mother earth, and gather into



villages. When this change is effected, the lands appear less



inhabited; ruinous huts (nay, villages I may call them) are



frequently found, and many would be apt to conclude, that the



country is depopulated; but this is by no means found to be the



case, when the whole is taken together.



    The spirit therefore of the principal people of a country



determines the employment of the lower classes; the employment of



these determines their usefulness to the state, and their



usefulness, their multiplication. The more they are useful, the



more they gain, according to our definition of the contract of



society; the more they gain, the more they can feed; and



consequently, the more they will marry and divide with their



children. This increases useful population, and encourages



agriculture. Compare the former with the present situation, as to



numbers, as to ease, as to happiness!



    Is it not plain, that when the earth is not improved, it



cannot produce so much nourishment for man as when it is? On the



other hand, if industry does not draw into the hands of the



indigent, wherewith to purchase this additional nourishment,



nobody will be at a considerable first expence to break up



grounds in order to produce it. The withdrawing therefore a



number of hands from a trifling agriculture forces, in a manner,



the husbandman to work the harder: and by hard labour upon a



small spot, the same effect is produced as with slight labour



upon a great extent.



    I have said, that I imagined the state of agriculture in the



Scotch farm, was a pretty just representation of the general



state of Europe about 400 years ago: if not in every province of



every country, at least in every country for the most part.



Several reasons induce me to think so: first, where there is no



industry, nothing but the earth directly can feed her children,



little alienation of her fruits can take place. Next, because I



find a wonderful analogy between the way of living in some



provinces of different countries with what I have been



describing. Pipers, blue bonnets, and oat meal, are known in



Swabia, Auvergne, Limousin, and Catalonia, as well as in



Lochaber: numbers of idle, poor, useless hands, multitudes of



children, whom I have found to be fed, nobody knows how, doing



almost nothing at the age of fourteen, keeping of cattle and



going to school, the only occupations supposed possible for them.



If you ask why they are not employed, their parents will tell you



because commerce is not in the country: they talk of commerce as



if it was a man, who comes to reside in some countries in order



to feed the inhabitants. The truth is, it is not the fault of



these poor people, but of those whose business it is to find out



employment for them.



    Another reason I derive from the nature of the old tenures,



where we find lands which now produce large quantities of grain,



granted for a mere trifle, when at the same time others in the



neighbourhood of cities and abbeys are found charged with



considerable rents. This I attribute to the bad cultivation of



lands at that time, from which I infer, a small population. In



those days of trouble and confusion, confiscations were very



frequent, large tracts of lands were granted to the great lords



upon different revolutions, and these, finding them often



deserted, as is mentioned in history, (the vassals of the former



being either destroyed or driven out to make place for the new



comers,) used to parcel them out for small returns in every thing



but personal service. Such sudden and violent revolutions must



dispeople a country; and nothing but tranquility, security,



order, and industry, for ages together, can render it populous.



    Besides these natural causes of population and depopulation



(which proceed, as we have observed, from a certain turn given to



the spirit of a people), there are others which operate with



irresistible force, by sudden and violent revolutions. The King



of Prussia, for example, attempted to people, a country all at



once, by profiting of the desertion of the Saltzburgers. America



is become very poorly peopled in some spots upon the coast, and



in some islands, at the expence of the exportation of millions



from Europe and from Africa; such methods never can succeed in



proportion to the attempt. Spain, on the other hand, was



depopulated by the expulsion of its antichristian inhabitants.



These causes work evident effects, which there is little occasion



to explain, although the more remote consequences of them may



deserve observation. I shall, in another place, have occasion to



examine the manner of our peopling America. In this place, I



shall make a few observations upon the depopulation of Spain, and



finish my chapter.



    That country is said to have been anciently very populous



under the government of the Moors. I am not sufficiently versed



in the politics, oeconomy, and manners of that people, to judge



how far these might be favourable to population: what seems,



however, to confirm what we are told, is, the large repositories



they used for preserving grain, which still remain entire, though



never once made use of. They watered the kingdoms of Valencia,



Murcia, and Granada. They gathered themselves into cities, of



which we still can discover the extent. The country which they



now possess (though drier than Spain) furnishes Europe with



considerable quantities of grain. The palace of the Moorish King



at Granada shews a taste for luxury. The mosque of Cordoua speaks



a large capital. All these are symptoms of population, but they



only help one to guess. The numbers which history mentions to



have been driven out, is a better way still of judging; if the



fidelity of historians could be depended upon, when there is any



question about numbers.



    Here was an example of a country depopulated in a very



extraordinary manner: yet I am of opinion, that the scarcity of



inhabitants complained of in that country, for a long time after



the expulsion, did not so much proceed from the effects of the



loss sustained, as from the contrast between the spirit of those



christians who remained after the expulsion, and their catholic



deliverers. The christians who lived among the Moors, were really



Moors as to manners, though not as to religion. Had they adopted



the spirit of the subjects of Castile, or had they been governed



according to their own, numbers would soon have risen to the



former standard. But as the christian lord governed his Murcian,



Andalousian, and Granada subjects, according to the principles of



christian policy, was it any wonder that in such an age of



ignorance, prejudice, and superstition, the country (one of the



finest in the world) should be long in recovering? Recover,



however, it did; and sooner perhaps than is commonly believed:



for I say it was recovered so soon as all the flat and watered



lands were brought into cultivation; because I have reason to



believe that the Moors never carried their agriculture farther in



these southern provinces.



    From this I still conclude, that no destruction of



inhabitants by expulsion, captivity, war, pestilence or famine,



is so permanently hurtful to population, as a revolution in that



spirit which is necessary for the increase and support of



numbers. Let that spirit be kept up, and let mankind be well



governed, numbers will quickly increase to their former standard,



after the greatest reduction possible: and while they are upon



the augmenting hand, the state will be found in more heart and



more vigour, than when arrived even at the former height; for so



soon as a state ceases to grow in prosperity, I apprehend it



begins to decay both in health and vigour.







Chap. XVII







In what Manner and according to what Proportion do Plenty and



Scarcity affect a People







    In a former chapter I have examined this question, relatively



to mankind fed by the hand of nature: I now come nearer home, and



shall keep close to modern times, considering circumstances and



effects which by daily experience we see and feel.



    I have often said, that numbers are in proportion to the



produce of the earth. I now say, that in most countries of



Europe, the food produced in the country is nearly consumed by



the inhabitants: and by nearly I understand, that the part



exported bears a small proportion to the home-consumption. I do



by no means establish this as an universal proposition; but I say



it is true for the most part: and the intention of this chapter



is to enable us to judge how far these limitations should extend.



I allow, for example, that Holland, not producing food for its



inhabitants, must draw it from some country which produces a



superfluity, regularly. but let it be observed that Poland,



Germany, Flanders, and England, with many other countries,



contribute their contingents to supply the demand of the Dutch;



and of several large trading towns which have small territories.



This being the case, the quota furnished by each country, must be



in a small proportion to the respective quantity growing in it.



But these are general conclusions upon vague suppositions, which



throw no light on the question. I shall therefore endeavour to



apply our reasoning to facts, and then examine consequences.



    There are few countries, I believe, in Europe more abounding



in grain than England: I shall therefore keep that kingdom in my



eye while I examine this matter. Nothing is more common than to



hear that an abundant crop furnishes more than three years'



subsistence: nay, I have found it advanced by an author of



consideration, (Advantages and Disadvantages of France and Great



Britain, &c. article Grain,) that a plentiful year produces five



years' nourishment for the inhabitants. If this be a mistake, it



may prove a very hurtful one in many respects. I am, on the



contrary, apt to believe, that no annual produce of grain ever



was so great in England as to supply its inhabitants fifteen



months, in that abundance with which they feed themselves in a



year of plenty. If this be the case, at what may we compute the



surplus in ordinary good years? I believe it will be thought a



very good year which produces full subsistence for fourteen



months; and crops which much exceed this are, I believe, very



rare. Here follow my reasons for differing so widely from the



gentleman whom I have cited. If I am in the wrong, I shall have



the most sensible pleasure in being set right; and nothing will



be so easy to any one who has access to be better informed as to



facts than I can pretend to be.



    I consider all the yearly crop of grain in England as



consumed at home, except what is exported; for I cannot admit



that any considerable quantity is lost: that it may be abused,



misapplied, drunk when it should be eat, I do not deny. These are



questions which do not regard the present inquiry. Whether



therefore it be consumed in bread, beer, spirits, or by animals,



I reckon it consumed; and in a year when the greatest consumption



is made at home, this I call the abundance with which the



inhabitants feed themselves in years of plenty. Now I find in the



performance above cited, a state of exportations for five years,



from 1746 to 1750 inclusive, where the quantity exported amounts



in all to 5,289,847 quarters of all sorts of grain. This is not



one year's provision, according to Sir William Petty's



calculation, of which we have made mention above. The bounties



upon corn (continues the author above mentioned) have amounted in



one year to 500,000l, sterling. He does not mention the year, and



I am little able to dispute that matter with him. I suppose it to



be true; and still farther, let it be understood that the whole



exportation was made out of the produce of one crop. I do not



find that this sum answers to the bounty upon 3,000,000 of



quarters, which, according to Sir William Petty, make six months'



provision. I calculate thus: The bounty upon wheat is 5s. a



quarter, that upon rye 3s. 6d. that upon barley 2s. 6d. these are



the species of grain commonly exported: cast the three premiums



together, and divide by three, the bounty will come to 3s. 8d. at



a medium; at which rate 500,000l. sterling will pay the bounty of



2,727,272 quarters of grain. An immense quantity to be exported!



but a very inconsiderable part of a crop supposed capable to



maintain England for five years. It may be answered, that the



great abundance of a plentiful year is considerably diminished



when a scanty crop happens to precede it, or to follow upon it.



In the first case, it is sooner begun upon; in the last, it



supplies the consumption in the year of scarcity, considerably.



This I allow to be just; but as it is not uncommon to see a



course of good years follow one another, the state of exportation



at such times must certainly be the best, nay, the only method of



judging of the real extent of superfluity.



    On the other hand, I am apt to believe, that there never was



a year of such scarcity as that the lands of England did not



produce greatly above six months, subsistence, such as the people



are used to take in years of scarcity. Were six months of the



most slender subsistence to fail, I imagine all Europe together



might perhaps be at a loss to supply a quantitY sufficient to



prevent the greatest desolation by famine.



    As I have no access to look into records, I content myself



with less authentic documents. I find then by the London



news-papers, that, from the 9th of April to the 13th of August



1757, while great scarcity was felt in England, there were



declared in the port of London no more than 71,728 quarters of



wheat, of which 15,529 were not then arrived. So that the whole



quantity there imported to relieve the scarcity, was 56,199



quarters. Not one month's provision for the inhabitants of that



city, reckoning them at 800,000 souls! One who has access to look



into the registers of the trade in grain, might in a moment



determine this question.(8*)



    Another reason which induces me to believe what the above



arguments seem to prove, I draw from what I see at present



passing in Germany; I mean the universal complaints of scarcity



in those armies which are now assembled (1757). When we compare



the numbers of an army, let it be of a hundred thousand men, and



forty thousand horses; suppose the suit of it to be as many more,



all strangers (for the others I reckon nothing extraordinary);



what an inconsiderable number does this appear, in proportion to



the inhabitants of this vast country of Germany! Yet let us



observe the quantity of provisions of all sorts constantly coming



down the Rhine, the Moselle, and many other rivers, collected



from foreign provinces on all hands; the numbers of cattle coming



from Hungary; the loads of corn from Poland; and all this in a



year which has produced what at any other time would have been



called an excellent crop. After these foreign supplies, must not



one be astonished to find scarcity complained of in the provinces



where the war is carried on, and high prices every where else.



From such circumstances I must conclude, that people are



generally very much deceived in their estimation of plenty and



scarcity, when they talk of two or three years' subsistence for a



country being found upon their lands at once. I may indeed be



mistaken in my conclusions; but the more I have reflected upon



this subject, the more I find myself confirmed in them, even from



the familiar examples of the sudden rise of markets from very



inconsiderable monopolies, and of their sudden fall by



inconsiderable quantities imported. I could cite many examples of



these vicissitudes, were it necessary, to prove what every one



must observe.



    I come now to resolve a difficulty which naturally results



from this doctrine, and with which I shall close the chapter.



    If it be true, that a crop in the most plentiful year is



nearly consumed by the inhabitants, what becomes of them in years



of scarcity? for nobody can deny, that there is a great



difference, between one crop and another. To this I answer,



first, That I believe there is also a very great deception, or



common mistake, as to the difference between crops: a good year



for one soil, is a bad one for another. But I shall not enlarge



on this; because I have no sufficient proof to support my



opinion. The principal reason upon which I found it, is, that it



is far from being true, that the same number of people consume



always the same quantity of food. In years of plenty every one is



well fed; the price of the lowest industry can procure



subsistence sufficient to bear a division; food is not so



frugally managed; a quantity of animals are fatted for use; all



sorts of cattle are kept in good heart; and people drink more



largely, because all is cheap. A year of scarcity comes, the



people are ill fed, and when the lower classes come to divide



with their children, the portions are brought to be very small;



there is great oeconomy upon consumption, few animals are fatted



for use, cattle look miserably, and a poor man cannot indulge



himself with a cup of generous ale. Add to all these



circumstances that in England the produce of pasture is very



considerable, and it commonly happens, that a bad year for grain,



which proceeds from rains, is for the same reason a good year for



pasture; and in the estimation of a crop, every circumstance must



be allowed to enter.



    From what has been said I must conclude in general, that the



best corn country in the world, provided slavery be not



established, does not produce wherewithal fully to maintain, as



in years of plenty, one third more than its own inhabitants; for



if this should be the case, all the policy of man would not be



able to prevent the multiplication of them, until they arose



nearly up to the mean proportion of the produce in ordinary



years, and it is only what exceeds this standard, and proceeds



from unusual plenty, which can be exported.(9*) Were plentiful



years more common, mankind would be more numerous; were scarcity



more frequent, numbers would be less. Numbers therefore must ever



be, in my humble opinion, in the ratio of food, and



multiplication will never stop until the balance comes to be



nearly even.







Chap. XVIII







Of the Causes and Consequences of a Country's being fully peopled







    In the titles of my chapters, I rather seek to communicate a



rough idea of the subject than a correct one. In truth and in



reason, there is no such thing as a country actually peopled to



the full, if by this term numbers only are meant, without



considering the proportion they bear to the consumption they make



of the productions of their country. I have in a former chapter



established a distinction between the physical and moral



impossibility of increasing numbers. As to the physical



impossibility, the case can hardly exist, because means of



procuring subsistence from other countries, when the soil refuses



to give more, seem, if not inexhaustible, at least very



extensive. A country therefore fully peopled, that is, in a



physical impossibility of increasing their numbers, is a



chimerical and useless supposition. The subject here under



consideration is, the situation of a people, who find it their



interest to seek for subsistence from abroad. This may happen,



and commonly does, long before the country itself is fully



improved: it decides nothing as to the intrinsic fertility of the



soil, and proves no more, than that the industry of the free



hands has made a quicker progress in multiplying mouths, than



that of the farmers in providing subsistence. To illustrate this



idea, let me propose the following question: Is multiplication



the efficient cause of agriculture, or is agriculture that of



multiplication?



    I answer, that multiplication is the efficient cause of



agriculture, though I allow, that, in the infancy of society, the



spontaneous fruits of the earth, which are free to all, are the



efficient cause of a multiplication, which may rise to the exact



proportion of them; as has been said above. This I am now to



explain.



    I have already distinguished the fruits of agriculture from



the earth's spontaneous productions: I must farther take notice,



that when I employ the term agriculture in treating of modern



policy, I always consider it to be exercised as a trade, and



producing a surplus, and not as the direct means of subsisting,



where all is consumed by the husbandman, as has been fully



explained above. We have said that it is the surplus produced



from it, which proves a fund for multiplying inhabitants. Mow



there must be a demand for this surplus. Every person who is



hungry will make a demand, but every such demand will not be



answered, and will consequently have no effect. The demander must



have an equivalent to give: it is this equivalent which is the



spring of the whole machine; for without this the farmer will not



produce any surplus, and consequently he will dwindle down to the



class of those who labour for actual subsistence. The poor, who



produce children, make an ineffectual demand, and when they



cannot increase the equivalent, they divide the food they have



with the newcomers, and prove no encouragement to agriculture. By



dividing, the whole become ill fed, miserable, and thus



extinguish. Now because it is the effectual demand, as I may call



it, which makes the husbandman labour for the sake of the



equivalent, and because this demand increases, by the



multiplication of those who have an equivalent to give, therefore



I say that multiplication is the cause, and agriculture the



effect. On the other hand, I think the spontaneous fruits of the



earth, as in the supposition, may be considered as the cause of a



certain limited multiplication; because in this case there is no



equivalent demanded. The earth produces, whether her fruits be



consumed or not: mankind are fed upon these gratuitously, and



without labour, and the existence of the fruits is anterior to



the production of those who are to consume them. Those who are



first fed, draw their vigour from their food, and their



multiplication from their vigour. Those who are produced, live



freely upon their parent earth, and multiply until all the



produce be consumed: then multiplication stops, as we have said;



but establish agriculture, and multiplication will go on a-new.



Consequently, my reader will say, agriculture is as much the



cause of this new multiplication, as the spontaneous fruits were



of the first. Here is a very natural conclusion, which seems



directly to contradict what we have been endeavouring to prove;



but the knot is easily untied. We have seen how the existence of



agriculture depends upon the industry of man; and how this



industry is the only means of establishing agriculture. Now, as



this industry is chiefly promoted by the motive of providing for



our children, the procreation of them must be considered as the



first, or at least the most palpable political cause of setting



mankind to work, and therefore may be considered as anterior to



agriculture; whereas, on the other hand, the earth's spontaneous



productions being in small quantity, and quite independent of



man, appear, as it were, to be furnished by nature, in the same



way as a small sum is given to a young man, in order to put him



in a way of industry, and of making his fortune. The small sum



sets him a-going, but it is his industry which makes the fortune.



From this illustration it appears, that if the demand for food



can be more readily supplied from abroad than from home, it will



be the foreign subsistence, which will preserve numbers, produced



from industry, not from domestic agriculture; and these numbers



will, in their turn, produce an advancement of it at home, by



inspiring a desire in the husbandman to acquire the equivalent



which their countrymen give to strangers.



    Such nations, whose statesmen have not the talent to engage



the husbandmen to wish for the equivalent, which the labour of



their fellow-citizens can produce, or, in other words, who cannot



create reciprocal wants and dependences among their subjects,



must stand in a moral incapacity of augmenting in numbers. Of



such states we have no occasion to treat in this chapter, any



more than of those who are supposed to be in the physical



incapacity of multiplying: our point of view is, to examine the



natural consequences resulting from a demand for subsistence



extending itself to foreign countries. This I take to be the



mother of industry at home, as well as of trade abroad; two



objects which come to be treated of in the second book.



    A country may be fully peopled (in the sense we understand



this term) in several different ways. It may be fully stocked at



one time with six millions, and at another may maintain perhaps



eight or even nine millions with ease, without the soil's being



better cultivated or improved. On the other hand, a country may



maintain twenty millions with ease, and by being improved as to



the soil, become over-stocked with fifteen millions. These two



assertions come next to be explained.



    The more frugal a people are, and the more they feed upon the



plentiful productions of the earth, the more they may increase in



numbers.



    Were the people of England to come more into the use of



living upon bread, and give over consuming so much animal food,



inhabitants would certainly increase, and many rich grass fields



would be thrown into tillage. Were the French to give over eating



so much bread, the Dutch so much the fish, the Flemish so much



garden stuff, and the Germans so much sourkraut, and all take to



the English diet of pork, beef, and mutton, their respective



numbers would soon decay, even although their lands were better



improved than at present. These are but reflections, by-the-bye,



which the reader may enlarge upon at pleasure. The point in hand



is, to know what are the consequences of a country's being so



peopled, no matter from what cause, that the soil, in its actual



state of fertility, refuses to supply a sufficient quantity of



such food as the inhabitants incline to live upon. These are



different according to the diversity of spirit in the people.



    If they be of an indolent disposition, directed in their



political oeconomy by established habits and old prejudices,



which prevent innovations, although a change of circumstances may



demand them, the effect will be to put a stop to population;



which cannot augment without an increase of food on one hand, and



of industry on the other, to make the first circulate. These must



go hand in hand: the precedence between them is a matter of mere



curiosity and speculation.



    If, on the contrary, a spirit of industry has brought the



country to a certain degree of population, this spirit will not



be stopped by the want of food; it will be brought from foreign



countries, and this new demand, by diminishing among them the



quantity usually produced for their own subsistence, will prompt



the industrious to improve their lands, in order to supply the



new demand without any hurt to themselves. Thus trade has an



evident tendency towards the improvement of the world in general,



by rendering the inhabitants of one country industrious, in order



to supply the wants of another, without any prejudice to



themselves. Farther:



    The country fully stocked can offer in exchange for this



food, nothing but the superfluity of the industry of the free



hands, for that of the farmers is supposed to be consumed by the



society; except indeed some species of nourishment or



productions, which, being esteemed at a higher value in other



countries than in those which produce them, bring a more



considerable return than the value of what is exported, as when



raw silk and delicate wines, &c. are given in exchange for grain



and other provisions.



    The superfluity of industry must, therefore, form the



principal part of exportation, and if the nation fully stocked be



surrounded by others which abound in grain and articles of



subsistence, where the inhabitants have a taste for elegance, and



are eager of acquiring the manufactures and improvements of their



industrious neighbours; it is certain, that a trade with such



nations will very considerably increase the inhabitants of the



other, though fully stocked relatively to the production of their



own soil; and the additional inhabitants will increase the number



of manufacturers only, not of husbandmen. This is the case with



Holland, and with many large trading cities which are free and



have but a small territory.



    If, on the contrary, the nation fully stocked be in the



neighbourhood of others who take the same spirit as itself, this



supply of food will become in time more difficult to be had, in



proportion as their neighbours come to supply their own wants.



They must therefore seek for it at a greater distance, and as



soon as the expence of procuring it comes to exceed the value of



the labour of the free hands employed in producing the



equivalent, their work will cease to be exported, and the number



of inhabitants will be diminished to the proportion of the



remaining food.



    I do not say that trade will cease on this account; by no



means. Trade may still go on, and even be more considerable than



before; but it will be a trade which never can increase



inhabitants, because for this purpose there must be subsistence.



It may have however numberless and great advantages: it may



greatly advance the wealth of the state, and this will purchase



even power and strength. A trading nation may live in profound



peace at home, and send war and confusion among her enemies,



without even employing her own subjects. Thus trade, without



increasing the inhabitants of a country, can greatly add to its



force, by arming those hands which she has not bred, and



employing them for her service.







Chap. XIX







In the Introduction of Machines into Manufactures prejudicial to



the Interest of a State, or hurtful to Population?







    This I find has been made a question in modern times. The



ancients held in great veneration the inventors of the saw, of



the lathe, of the wimble, of the potter's wheel; but some moderns



find an abuse in bringing mechanism to perfection (see Les



Interets de la France mal entendus, p. 272. 3 13.): the great



Montesquieu finds fault with watermills, though I do not find



that he has made any objection against the use of the plough.



    Did people understand one another, it would be impossible



that such points could suffer a dispute among men of sense; but



the circumstances referred to, or presupposed, which authors



always almost keep in their eye, though they seldom express them,



render the most evident truths susceptible of opposition.



    It is hardly possible suddenly to introduce the smallest



innovation into the political oeconomy of a state, let it be ever



so reasonable, nay ever so profitable, without incurring some



inconveniences. A room cannot be swept without raising dust, one



cannot walk abroad without dirtying one's shoes; neither can a



machine, which abridges the labour of men, be introduced all at



once into an extensive manufacture, without throwing many people



into idleness.



    In treating every question of political oeconomy, I



constantly suppose a statesman at the head of government,



systematically conducting every part of it, so as to prevent the



vicissitudes of manners, and innovations, by their natural and



immediate effects or consequences, from hurting any interest



within the commonwealth. When a house within a city becomes



crazy, it is taken down; this I call systematical ruin: were it



allowed to fall, the consequences might be fatal in many



respects. In like manner, if a number of machines are all at once



introduced into the manufactures of an industrious nation, (in



consequence of that freedom which must necessarily be indulged to



all sorts of improvement, and without which a state cannot



thrive,) it becomes the business of the statesman to interest



himself so far in the consequences, as to provide a remedy for



the inconveniences resulting from the sudden alteration. It is



farther his duty to make every exercise even of liberty and



refinement an object of government and administration; not so as



to discourage or to check them, but to prevent the revolution



from affecting the interests of the different classes of the



people, whose welfare he is particularly bound to take care of.



    The introduction of machines can, I think, in no other way



prove it: and I have hurtful by making people idle, than by the



suddenness of frequently observed, that all sudden revolutions,



let them be ever so advantageous, must be accompanied with



inconveniences. A safe, honourable, and lasting peace, after a



long, dangerous, and expensive war, forces a number of hands to



be idle, and deprives them of bread. Peace then may be considered



as a machine for defending a nation, at the political loss of



making an army idle; yet nobody, I believe, will allege that, in



order to give bread to soldiers, sutlers, and undertakers, the



war should be continued. But here I must observe, that it seems



to be a palpable defect in policy, if a statesman shall neglect



to find out a proper expedient (at whatever first expence it may



be procured) for giving bread to those who, at the risk of their



lives, have gone through so many fatigues for the service of



their country. This expence should be charged to the account of



the war, and a state ought to consider, that as their safety



required that numbers should be taken out of the way of securing



to themselves a lasting fund of subsistence, which would have



rendered them independent of every body, (supposing that to have



been the case,) she becomes bound by the contract of society



which ties all together, to find them employment. Let me seek for



another illustration concerning this matter.



    I want to make a rampart cross a river, in order to establish



a bridge, a mill, a sluice, &c. For this purpose, I must turn off



the water, that is, stop the river: would it be a good objection



against my improvement to say, that the water would overflow the



neighbouring lands? as if I could be supposed so improvident as



not to have prepared a new channel for it? Machines stop the



river; it is the business of the state to make the new channel,



as it is the public which is to reap the benefit of the sluice. I



imagine what I have said will naturally suggest an answer to all



possible objections against the introduction of machines; as for



the advantages of them, they are so palpable that I need not



insist upon them. There is, however, one case, in which I think



they may be disapproved of; but it seems a chimerical



supposition, and is brought in here for no other purpose than to



point out and illustrate the principle which influences this



branch of our subject.



    If you can imagine a country peopled to the utmost extent of



the fertility of the soil, and absolutely cut off from any



communication with other nations; all the inhabitants fully



employed in supplying the wants of one another, the circulation



of money going forward regularly, proportionally, and uniformly



through every vein, as I may call it, of the political body; no



sudden or extraordinary demand at any time for any branch of



industry; no redundancy of any employment; no possibility of



increasing either circulation, industry, or consumption. In such



a situation as this, I should disapprove of the introduction of



machines, as I disapprove of taking physic in an established



state of perfect health. I disapprove of a machine for no other



reason but because it is an innovation in a state absolutely



perfect in these branches of its political oeconomy: and where



there is perfection there can be no improvement. I farther



disapprove of it because it might force a man to be idle, who



would be found thereby in a physical impossibility of getting his



bread, in any other way than that in which he is supposed to be



actually employed.



    The present situation of every country in Europe is so widely



distant from this degree of perfection, that I must consider the



introduction of machines, and of every method of augmenting the



produce or assisting the labour and ingenuity of man, as of the



greatest utility. Why do people wish to augment population, but



in order to compass these ends? Wherein does the effect of a



machine differ from that of new inhabitants?



    As agriculture, exercised as a trade, purges the land of idle



mouths, and pushes them to a new industry which the state may



turn to her own advantage; so does a machine introduced into a



manufacture, purge off hands which then become superfluous in



that branch, and which may quickly be employed in another.



    If therefore the machine proves hurtful, it can only be



because it presents the state with an additional number of hands



bred to labour; consequently, if these are afterwards found



without bread, it must proceed from a want of attention in the



statesman: for an industrious man, made idle, may constantly be



employed to advantage, and with profit to him who employs him.



What could an act of naturalization do more, than to furnish



industrious hands, forced to be idle, and demanding employment?



Machines therefore I consider as a method of augmenting



(virtually) the number of the industrious, without the expence of



feeding an additional numbers: this by no means obstructs natural



and useful population, for the most obvious reasons.



    We have shewn how population must go on, in proportion to



subsistence, and in proportion to industry: now the machine eats



nothing, therefore does not diminish subsistence; and industry



(in our age at least) is in no danger of being over-stocked in



any well-governed state: for let all the world copy your



improvements, they still will be the scholars. And if, on the



contrary, in the introduction of machines you are found to be the



scholars of other nations, in that case you are brought to the



dilemma of accepting the invention with all its inconveniences,



or of renouncing every foreign communication.



    In speculations of this kind, one ought not, I think, to



conclude, that experience must of necessity prove what we imagine



our reasoning has pointed out.



    The consequences of innovations in political oeconomy, admit



of an finite variety, because of the infinite variety of



circumstances which attend them: no reasoning, therefore, however



refined, can point out a priori, what upon such occasions must



indispensibly follow. The experiment must be made, circumstances



must be allowed to operate; inconveniences must be prevented or



rectified as far as possible; and when these prove too many, or



too great to be removed, the most rational, the best concerted



scheme in theory must be laid aside, until preparatory steps be



taken for rendering it practicable.



    Upon the whole, daily experience shews the advantage and



improvement acquired by the introduction of machines. Let the



inconveniences complained of be ever so sensibly felt, let a



statesman be ever so careless in relieving those who are forced



to be idle, all these inconveniences are only temporary; the



advantage is permanent, and the necessity of introducing every



method of abridging labour and expence, in order to supply the



wants of luxurious mankind, is absolutely indispensable,



according to modern policy, according to experience, and



according to reason.







Chap. XX







Miscellaneous Observations upon Agriculture and Population







    I have hitherto considered the object of agriculture, as no



more than the raising of grain; the food of mankind has been



estimated by the quantity they consume of this production; and



husbandmen have been supposed to have their residence in the



country. As my subject has but an indirect connection with the



science of agriculture, I have simplified many things complex in



themselves, the better to adapt them to the principal object of



my inquiry, and the better to keep my attention fixed upon one



idea at a time. I am now going to return to some parts of my



subject, which I think I have treated too superficially; and to



examine, as I go along, some miscellaneous questions which will



naturally arise from what is to be said.



    QUEST. I. Every one almost who has written upon population,



and upon agriculture, considered as an essential concomitant of



it, has recommended the equal distribution of the property of



lands as useful to both.. a few reflections upon this question,



after what has been thrown out in the course of the foregoing



chapters, may not be improper; more in order to examine and apply



the principles laid down, than with a view to combat the opinion



of others.



    I have already, upon several occasions, taken notice of the



great difference between the political oeconomy of the ancients,



and that of modern times; for this reason, among others, that I



perceive that the sentiments of the ancients, which were founded



upon reason and common sense, relative to their situation, have



been adopted by some moderns, who have not perhaps sufficiently



attended to the change of our manners, and to the effects which



this change must operate upon every thing relative to our



oeconomy. The ancients recommended strongly an equal distribution



of lands as the best security for liberty, and the best method,



not only to preserve an equality among the citizens, but also to



increase their number.



    In those days, the citizens did not compose one half, perhaps



not one fourth, of the state relatively to numbers; and there was



no such thing almost as an established moneyed interest, which



can nowhere be founded but upon trade, and an extensive industry.



In those days there was no solid income, but in land: and this



being equally divided among the citizens, was favourable to their



multiplication and produced equality. But in our days, riches do



not consist in lands only; nay we sometimes find the most



considerable proprietors of these in very indifferent



circumstances; loaded with debts, and depending upon the



indulgence of men who have not an acre, and who are their



creditors. Let us therefore divide our lands as we please, we



shall never produce equality by it. This, with respect to one



point, is an essential difference between us and the ancients.



Now as to the other; to wit, population.



    The equal division of lands tends greatly, no doubt, to



increase the numbers of one class of inhabitants, to wit, the



landlords. In ancient times, as has been observed, the chief



attention was to increase the citizens, that is, the higher



classes of the state; and the equal division of property so



effectually produced this effect, that some Greek states were



obliged to allow the exposition of children; and Aristotle looked



upon it as a thing indispensably necessary, as M. de Montesquieu



has very judiciously observed. The multiplication of the lowest



classes, that is, of the slaves, never entered into the



consideration of the public, but remained purely a matter of



private concern; and we find it was a question with some, whether



or not it was worth while to breed from them at all. But in our



days the principal object is to support the lower classes from



their own multiplication; and for this purpose, an unequal



division of property seems to me the more favourable scheme;



because the wealth of the rich among us, falls naturally into the



pockets of our industrious poor; whereas the produce of a very



middling fortune does little more than feed the children of the



proprietor, who in course become very commonly and very naturally



an useless burthen upon the land. Let me apply this to an



example. Do we not familiarly observe, that the consolidation of



small estates, and the diminution of gentlemen's families of



middling fortune, do little harm to a modern state. There are



always abundance of this class of inhabitants to be found



whenever there is occasion for them. When a great man buys up the



lands of the neighbouring gentry, or small proprietors, all the



complaints which are heard, turn upon the distress which thence



results to the lower classes, from the loss of their masters and



protectors; but never one word is heard of that made by the



state, from the extinction of the former proprietor's family.



This abundantly shews that the object of modern attention is the



multiplication of the lower classes; consequently it must be an



inconsistency to adopt the practice of the ancients, when our



oeconomy is entirely opposite to theirs.



    QUEST. II. Let this suffice to point out how far the



difference of our manners should influence the division of our



lands. I shall now examine a question relative to the science of



agriculture, not considered as a method of improving the soil,



(this will come in more naturally afterwards,) but of making it



produce to the best advantage, supposing it to be already



improved.



    In treating of the productions of the earth, in consequence



of agriculture, I have all along distinguished them from those



which spontaneously proceed from the force of nature: these are



the immediate gift of God, those are the return of the labour of



his creatures. Every one knows that the labour of mankind is not



in proportion to their numbers, but to their industry. The



produce therefore of agriculture must be estimated, not according



to the quantity of fruits only, but also according to the labour



employed to produce them. These things premised, the question



here proposed to be examined arises, viz. Which species of



agriculture is the most advantageous to a modern society, that



which produces the greatest quantity of fruits absolutely taken,



or that which produces the greatest quantity relatively taken, I



mean to the labour employed?



    This question might easily be resolved, in general, by the



application of principles already deduced; although it cannot



admit of a direct answer, in the manner I have put it. One,



therefore, may say indeterminately, that species is the best



which produces a surplus the best proportioned to the industry,



and to the demands of all the free hands of the state. But as



this solution would not lead me to the object I have in view, I



have thrown in an alternative in order to gain attention to the



principles which I am going to examine, and which influence and



determine the establishment of the one or the other species of



agriculture.



    The principal difficulty I find in the examination of this



question, is to distinguish the effects of agriculture from those



of this spontaneous production of the earth. The returns from



pasture, for example, relatively taken, are, as we have observed,



both from reason and from experience, far greater than those of



corn fields, (vid. supra, chap. 8.) though I little doubt but



that, absolutely taken, the case is quite otherwise; that is to



say, that an acre of the finest corn-land will produce more



nourishment for man, than an equal portion of the finest pasture:



but here we are following the proportion of space and produce,



not of labour; for if the produce of both acres be considered



relatively to the labour necessary for the cultivation, as well



as to the extent, the produce of pasture will be found far



greater, this however I ascribe to the spontaneous operation of



nature, and not to the superior utility of this kind of



agriculture.



    Since therefore it is impossible rightly to separate the



effects of nature from those of art and industry, in this species



of improvement, let us confine our speculations to those only



which have for their object the turning up the surface, and the



sowing or cultivating annual vegetables. For the better conveying



our ideas, let us take an example, and reason from a supposition.



    Let me suppose an island of a small extent and fruitful soil,



suffIciently improved, and cultivated after the manner of the



best lands of England, in the ordinary method of farming.



    In this case we may infer, from what was laid down in the 8th



chapter, that the number of people employed about farming may be



nearly about one half of the whole society. Let the whole



inhabitants of the island be called 1000, that is 500 farmers,



and as many free hands. The 500 farmers must then feed 1000; the



500 free hands must provide for all the other wants of 1000. By



this supposition, and allowing that there is an equal degree of



industry in these two classes, the providing of food will appear



to be an occupation just equal to that of providing for all other



wants.



    One of the society proposes to augment the number of



inhabitants by introducing a more operose species of agriculture,



the produce of which may be absolutely greater, though relatively



less.



    The first question the statesman would naturally put to this



reformer would be: What is your view in increasing the number of



our inhabitants; is it to defend us against our enemies; is it to



supply the wants of strangers, and thereby to enrich ourselves;



is it to supply our own wants with more abundance; or is it to



provide us more abundantly with food? I can hardly find out any



other rational view in wishing for an additional number of people



in any country whatsoever. Let it be answered, that all these



ends may be thereby obtained: and now let us examine how far this



reformation upon agriculture will have the effect of increasing



inhabitants, how far such increase will procure the ends



proposed, and how far the execution of such a plan is a



practicable scheme to an industrious people.



    If the inhabitants be not sufficiently fed, which is the only



thing that can prevent their multiplication, it must proceed from



one of two causes. Either first, that those do procreate who



cannot produce an equivalent for the food of their children; or



secondly, that industry making a quicker progress than



agriculture, the industrious come too strongly in competition



with one another, for the surplus of food to be found; which has



the effect of raising the prices of it, and reducing the portions



too low to suffer a division; and thereby of preventing marriage



and multiplication in the lower classes of the free hands.



    In the first case, it is to no purpose to increase the



produce of agriculture, by rendering it more expensive; for those



who have no equivalent to give when food is cheap, will still be



in greater necessity when it rises in the price. In the second



case, it is hurtful to diminish the surplus of the farmers,



because the supposition proves that the balance is already too



heavy upon the side of the free hands, that is, that the surplus



of the farmers is already become insufficient fully to feed them.



    Two remedies may be proposed for this inconvenience, the one



tending to population, the other to depopulation; and as the end



to be compassed is to set the balance even between husbandmen and



freehands, I shall explain both, and point out how far from



principles it appears, that in either way the end may be



attained.



    The first tending to increase population is the remedy



proposed, and, no doubt, were it possible to introduce a new



system of agriculture of a larger absolute production, although



the relative production should be less, the inhabitants of the



state, becoming thereby better fed, though at a greater cost,



would infallibly multiply. Let me therefore examine this first



part before I say any thing of the other; and for the greater



distinctness I shall return to my example, and examine both the



consequences and the possibility of putting such a plan in



execution.



    Let me suppose, that by using the spade and rake, instead of



the plough and harrow, the lands of our island might be brought



to produce with more abundance; this is a method of increasing



the expence of agriculture, which would require an additional



number of husbandmen.



    Now, by the supposition, 500 farmers fed, though scantily,



the whole of the inhabitants, that is 1000 persons. If therefore



100 of the free hands can be engaged to become farmers, the end



may be attained: more nourishment will be produced; the people



will be better fed; they will multiply. that is, their number



will rise above 1000. Let us next endeavour to form a judgment of



this increase, and of the consequence of the revolution.



    The society will now be composed of 600 farmers and 400 free



hands. The 600 will certainly produce more fruits than formerly;



but as their labour is relatively less productive by the



supposition, it will be impossible for them to furnish a surplus



equal to their own consumption; consequently, the free hands



never will be able to rise to a number equal to theirs; that is,



the society will never get up to 1200. But we supposed, that the



other wants of the society required the industry of one half of



the inhabitants to supply them; that is, of all the 500 free



hands; and, as the number of these has been already reduced, and



can never more rise to the former proportion, as has been said,



must not either the people voluntarily adopt a more simple way of



living; or must not the demand for work rise very considerably?



Let me consider the consequences in both cases. In the first, you



perceive, that if the inhabitants themselves are obliged to



simplify their way of living, for want of hands to supply what



they formerly consumed, three of the four objects proposed by the



reformation become impossible to be attained; to wit, the



defending themselves against their enemies, the supplying the



wants of strangers, and the supplying their own with more



abundance. And with regard to the fourth, the being better fed,



this must cease to be the case, the moment the end is obtained;



that is, the moment the inhabitants are multiplied up to the



proportion of additional food. Consequently, by simplifying their



way of life, and allowing farming to stand upon the new footing,



they compass not any one of the ends they proposed.



    Next, if we suppose, that the inhabitants do not incline to



simplify their way of life, but that the wealthy among them



insist upon purchasing all the instruments of luxury which they



formerly were used to enjoy, must not demand for work greatly



rise, and must not, of consequence, an additional encouragement



be given to that species of labour which had been diminished, in



taking 100 persons from industry, to throw them into the class of



farmers? Will not this make them quickly desert their spade, and



the rather, as they have taken to an employment less lucrative



than that of farming, according to the former system?



    So much for the consequences which would follow, in case the



plan proposed was found practicable; that is, supposing it to be



a thing possible to transport into agriculture a part of an



industrious society, already otherwise employed, and to change



all at once the relative proportion between those who supply



food, and those who purchase it with their industry. We have



begun, by taking this first step for granted; and now I am to



shew what obstacles will be found in the execution.



    We have said, that it is the multiplicity and complexity of



wants which give an encouragement to agriculture, and not



agriculture, or an abundance of food, which inspires mankind with



a disposition to labour. Now, if this principle be true, the



supposition we have proceeded upon is absurd. I am afraid, both



reason and experience will abundantly prove that it is so.



    The natural and necessary effect of industry, in trades and



manufactures, is to promote the increase of relative husbandry;



which by augmenting the surplus, tends of course to increase the



proportion of the free hands relatively to the farmers. A river



may as easily ascend to its source, as a people voluntarily adopt



a more operose agriculture than that already established,



supposing the lands to be fully improved, the spirit of industry



to prevail on one hand, and the farmers to have profit only in



view on the other.



    What farmer could sell the surplus of an expensive



agriculture in competition with another who exercised a species



relatively more productive?



    When lands are improved, the simplification of agriculture is



a necessary concomitant of industry, because diminishing expence



is the only method of gaining a preference at market.



    QUEST. III. When industry is set on foot, it gives



encouragement to agriculture exercised as a trade: and by the



allurements of ease, which a large surplus procures to the



farmers, it does hurt to that species which is exercised as a



method of subsistence. Lands become more generally, and less



thoroughly laboured. In some countries, tillage is set on foot



and encouraged; this is an operose agriculture. While industry



goes forward, and while a people can remain satisfied with a



nourishment consisting chiefly of bread, this system of



agriculture will subsist, and will carry numbers very high. If



wealth increases, and if those who have it begin to demand a much



greater proportion of work than formerly, while they consume no



more food, then I believe numbers may diminish from the



principles I am now going in quest of.



    I return to the council of the island where the proposition



laid down upon the carpet is, The scanty subsistence of the



inhabitants requires redress.



    A Machiavelian stands up (of such there are some in every



country) and proposes, instead of multiplying the inhabitants, by



rendering agriculture more operose, to diminish their number, by



throwing a quantity of corn-fields into grass. What is the



intention of agriculture, says he, but to nourish a state? By our



operose method of plowing and sowing, one half of the whole



produce is consumed by those who raise it; whereas by having a



great part of our island in pasture, one half of the husbandmen



may be saved. Pray what do you propose to do with those whom you



intend to make idle? replies a citizen. Let them betake



themselves to industry. But industry is sufficiently, nay more



than sufficiently, stocked already. If, says Machiavel, the



supernumerary husbandmen be thrown out of a way of living, they



may go where they please; we have no occasion for them, nor for



any one who lives to feed himself alone. But you diminish the



number of your people, replies the citizen, and consequently your



strength; and if afterwards you come to be attacked by your



enemies, you will wish to have those back again for your defence,



whom in your security you despised. To this the other makes



answer: there you trust to the Egyptian reed. If they be



necessary for feeding us at present, how shall we be able to live



while we employ them as soldiers? We may live without many



things, but not without the labour of our husbandmen. Whether we



have our grounds in tillage or in pasture, if this class be



rightly proportioned to the labour required, we never can take



any from it. In those countries where we see princes have



recourse to the land to recruit their armies, we may safely



conclude, that there the land is overstocked; and that industry



has not as yet been able to purge off all the superfluous mouths:



but with us the case is different, where agriculture is justly



proportioned to the number of husbandmen. If I propose a reform,



it is to augment only the surplus, upon which all the state,



except the husbandmen, are fed; if the surplus, after the reform,



is greater than at present, the plan is good, although 250 of our



farmers should thereby be forced to starve for hunger.



    Though no man is, I believe, capable to reason in so inhuman



a style, and though the revolution here proposed be an impossible



supposition, if meant to be executed all at once, the same



effects however must be produced, in every country where we see



corn-fields by degrees turned into pasture: the change is gradual



only, industry is not overstocked anywhere, and subsistence may



be drawn from other countries, where the operose species of



agriculture can be carried on with profit.



    I must now touch again upon another part of my subject, which



I think has been treated too superficially.



    In a former chapter I have shewn how industry has the natural



effect of collecting into towns and cities the free hands of a



state, leaving the farmers in their farms and villages. This



distribution served the purpose of explaining certain principles;



but when examined relatively to other circumstances which at that



time I had not in my eye, it will be found by far too general.



Let me therefore add some farther observations upon this matter.



    The extensive agriculture of plowing and sowing, is the



proper employment of the country, and is the foundation of



population in every nation fed upon its own produce. Cities are



commonly surrounded by kitchen-gardens, and rich grass-fields;



these are the proper objects of agriculture for those who live in



suburbs, or who are shut up within the walls of small towns. The



gardens produce various kinds of nourishment, which cannot easily



be brought from a distance, in that fresh and luxuriant state



which pleases the eye, and conduces to health. They offer a



continual occupation to man, and very little for cattle;



therefore are properly situated in the proximity of towns and



cities. The grass fields again are commonly either grazed by



cows, for the production of milk, butter, cream, &c. which suffer



by long carriage; or kept in pasture for preserving fatted



animals in good order until the markets demand them; or they are



cut in grass for the cattle of the city. They may also be turned



into hay with profit; because the carriage of a bulky commodity



from a great distance is sometimes too expensive. Thus we



commonly find agriculture disposed in the following manner. In



the center stands the city, surrounded by kitchen-gardens; beyond



these lies a belt of fine luxuriant pasture or hay-fields;



stretch beyond this, and you find the beginning of what I call



operose farming, plowing and sowing; beyond this lie grazing



farms for the fattening of cattle; and last of all come the



mountainous and large extents of unimproved or ill improved



grounds, where animals are bred. This seems the natural



distribution, and such I have found it almost every where



established, when particular circumstances do not invert the



order.



    The poorness of the soil near Paris, for example, presents



you with fields of rye-corn at the very gates, and with the most



extensive kitchen-gardens and orchards, even for cherries and



peaches, at a considerable distance from town. Other cities I



have found, and I can cite the example of this which I at present



inhabit (Padoua), where no kitchen-garden is to be found near it,



but every spot is covered with the richest grain; two thirds with



wheat, and the remaining third with Indian corn. The reason of



this is palpable. The town is of a vast extent, in proportion to



the inhabitants; the gardens are all within the walls, and the



dung of the city enables the corn-fields to produce constantly.



Hay is brought from a greater distance, because the expence of



distributing the dung over a distant field, would be greater than



that of transporting the hay by water-carriage. The farm-houses



here appear no larger than huts, as they really are, built by the



farmers, because the space to be laboured is very small, in



proportion to the produce; hence it is, that a farmer here pays



the value of the full half of the crop to the landlord, and out



of the remaining half, not only sows the ground and buys the



dung, but furnishes the cattle and labouring instruments, nay



even rebuilds his house, when occasion requires.



    When first I examined these fertile plains, I began to lament



the prodigal consumption of such valuable lands, in a multitude



of very broad highways, issuing to all quarters; many of which I



thought might be saved, in consideration of the vast advantage



accruing upon such oeconomy. but upon farther rejection I



perceived, that the loss was inconsiderable; for the fertility of



the soil proceeding chiefly from the manure laid upon it, the



loss sustained from the roads ought to be computed at no more



than the value of the land when uncultivated. The case would be



very different, were roads now to be changed, or new ones carried



through the corn-fields; the loss then would be considerable,



though even this would be temporary, and affect particular



persons only; for the same dung, which now supports these lands



in their fertility, would quickly fertilize others in their



place, and in a few years matters would stand as at present.



    These last reflections naturally lead me to examine a



question which has been treated by a very polite French writer,



the author of l'Ami de l'Homme, and which comes in here naturally



enough, before I put an end to this first book. Here it is.



    QUEST. IV. Does an unnecessary consumption of the earth's



productions, either in food, clothing, or other wants; and a



prodigal employment of fine rich fields, in gardens, avenues,



great roads, and other uses which give small returns, hurt



population, by rendering food and necessaries less abundant, in a



kingdom such as France, in its present situation?



    My answer is, That, were France fully cultivated and peopled,



the introduction of superfluous consumption would be an abuse,



and would diminish the number of inhabitants; as the contrary is



the case, it proves an advantage. I shall now give my reasons for



differing in opinion from the gentleman whose performance I have



cited.



    As the question is put, you perceive the end to be compassed



is, to render food and necessaries abundant; because the abuse is



considered in no other light, than relatively to the particular



effect of diminishing the proper quantity of subsistence, which



the king would incline to preserve, for the nourishment and uses



of his people. I shall confine myself therefore chiefly to this



object, and if I shew, that these superfluous employments of the



surface of the earth, and prodigal consumptions of her fruits,



are really no harm, but an encouragement to the improvement of



the lands of France in her present state, I shall consider the



question as sufficiently resolved: because if the abuse, as it is



called, prove favourable to agriculture, it can never prove



hurtful to population; however, from the inattention of



government, it may affect foreign trade: This is an object



entirely foreign to the present question. But before I enter upon



the subject, it is proper to observe, that I am of opinion, that



any system of oeconomy which necessarily tends to corrupt the



manners of a people, ought by every possible means to be



discouraged, although no particular prejudice should result from



it, either to population, or to plentiful subsistence.



    Now in the question before us, the only abuse I can find in



these habits of extraordinary consumption, appears to be relative



to the character of the consumers, and seems in no way to proceed



from the effects of the consumption. The vices of men may no



doubt prove the cause of their making a superfluous consumption;



but the consumption they make can hardly ever be the cause of



this vice. The most virtuous man in France may have the most



splendid table, the richest clothes, the most magnificent



equipages, the greatest number of useless horses, the most



pompous palace, and most extensive gardens. The most enormous



luxury to be conceived, in our acceptation of this term, so long



as it is directed to no other object than the consumption of the



labour and ingenuity of man, is compatible with virtue as well as



with vice. This being premised, I come to the point in hand.



    France, at present, is in her infancy as to improvement,



although the advances she has made within a century excite the



admiration of the world. I shall not go far in search of the



proof of this assertion. Great tracts of her lands are still



uncultivated, millions of her inhabitants are idle. When all



comes to be cultivated, and all are employed, then she will be in



a state of perfection, relatively to the moral possibility of



being improved. The people are free, slavery is unknown, and



every man is charged with feeding himself, and bringing up his



children. The ports of the country are open to receive



subsistence, and this nation, as much as any other, may be



considered as an individual in the great society of the world;



that is, may increase in power, wealth, and ease, relatively to



others, in proportion to the industry of her inhabitants. This



being the case, all the principles of political oeconomy, which



we have been inquiring after, may freely operate in this kingdom.



    France has arrived at her present pitch of luxury, relatively



to consumption, by slow degrees. As she has grown in wealth, her



desire of employing it has grown also. In proportion as her



demands have increased, more hands have been employed to supply



them; for no article of expence can be increased, without



increasing the work of those who supply it. If the same number of



inhabitants in the city of Paris consume four times as much of



any necessary article as formerly, I hope it will be allowed,



that the production of such necessaries must be four times as



abundant, and consequently, that many more people must be



employed in providing them.



    What is it that encourages agriculture, but a great demand



for its productions? What encourages multiplication, but a great



demand for people; that is, for their work? Would any one



complain of the extravagant people in Paris, if, instead of



consuming those vast superfluities, they were to send them over



to Dover, for a return in English gold? Where is the difference



between the prodigal consumption and the sale? The one brings in



money, the other brings in none: but as to food and necessaries,



for providing the poor and frugal, their contingent, in either



case, stands exactly the same.



    But, says one, were it not for this extraordinary



consumption, every thing would be cheaper. This I readily allow;



but will any body say, that reducing the price of the earth's



productions is a method to encourage agriculture; especially in a



country where grounds are not improved, and where they cannot be



improved; chiefly, because the expence surpasses all the profits



which possibly can be drawn from the returns? High prices



therefore, the effect of great consumption, are certainly



advantageous to the extension of agriculture. If I throw my rich



corn fields into gravel-walks and gardens, they will no more, I



suppose, come into competition with those of my neighbour, the



laborious husbandman. Who will then lose by my extravagance? Not



the husbandman. It will perhaps be said, the nation in general



will lose; because you deprive them of their food. This might be



true, were the laying waste the cornfields a sudden revolution,



and extensive enough to affect the whole society and were the



sea-ports and barriers of the kingdom shut: but that not being



the case, the nation, upon the smallest deficiency, goes to



market with her money, and loses none of her inhabitants.



    Obj. But if living is made dear, manufacturers must starve,



for want of employment.



    Answ. Not those who supply home consumption, but those only



who supply foreigners living more cheaply; and of such I know but



few. The interest of this class shall be fully examined in



another place. At present I shall only observe, that the laying



waste corn-fields in an industrious country, where refinement has



set on foot a plan of useful husbandry, will have no other



effect, than that of rendering grain for a while proportionally



dearer: consequently, agriculture will be thereby encouraged; and



in a few years the loss will be repaired, by a farther extension



of improvement. This will make food plentiful and cheap: then



numbers will increase, until it become scarce again. It is by



such alternative vicissitudes, that improvement and population



are carried to their height. While the improvement of lands goes



forward, I must conclude, that demand for subsistence is



increasing; and if this be not a proof of population, I am much



mistaken.



    I can very easily suppose, that a demand for work may



increase considerably, in consequence of an augmentation of



riches only because there are no bounds to the consumption of



work; but as for articles of nourishment, the case is quite



different. The most delicate liver in Paris will not put more of



the earth's productions into his belly, than another: he may pick



and choose, but he will always find, that what he leaves will go



to feed another: victuals are not thrown away in any country I



have ever been in. It is not in the most expensive kitchens where



there is found the most prodigal dissipation of the abundant



fruits of the earth; and it is with such that a people is fed,



not with ortolans, truffles, and oysters, sent from Marenne.



    From what has been said, I must conclude, that while the



consumption of the earth's produce, and of the work of man tends



to excite industry, in providing for extraordinary demands; when



the interest of foreign trade does not enter into the question;



and while there are lands enough remaining unimproved, to furnish



the first matter, namely, subsistence, flax, wool, silk, timber,



etc. there can be no political abuse from the misapplication or



unnecessary destruction of either fruits or labour. The



misapplier, or dissipator, is punished by the loss of his money;



the industrious man is rewarded by the acquisition of it. We have



said, that vice is not more essentially connected with



superfluity, than virtue with industry and frugality. But such



questions are foreign to my subject. I would however recommend it



to moralists, to study circumstances well, before they carry a



pretended reformation so far, as to interrupt an established



system in the political oeconomy of their country.







NOTES:







1. Although in common language we call mimsters of state, and



even such as are eminent for their knowledge in state affairs, by



the name of statesmen, the reader is here advertised to attend



carefully to the definition of this word in the text, because the



term statesman is uniformly taken in the same acceptation through



this whole work.







2. By Roderigo, the last king of the Gothic line.







3. Given by an Austrian officer to a Genoese, which occasioned



the revolt in 1747 by which the Germans were expelled the city.







4. As my subject is different from the doctrine of morals, I have



no occasion to consider the term luxury in any other than a



political sense, to wit, as a principle which produces



employment, and gives bread to those who supply the demands of



the rich. For this reason I have chosen the above definition of



it, which conveys no idea, either of abuse, sensuality, or



excess; nor do I, at present, even consider the hurtful



consequences of it as to foreign trade. Principles here are



treated of with regard to mankind in general, and the effects of



luxury are only considered relatively to multiplication and



agriculture. Our reasoning will take a different turn, when we



come to examine the separate interest of nations, and the



principles of trade.







5. I  beg, therefore, that at present my reasoning may be carried



no farther (from inductions and suppositions) than my intention



is that it should be. I am no patron, either of vice, profusion,



or the dissipation of private fortunes; althogh I may now and



then reason very coolly upon the political consequences of such



diseases in a state, when I consider only the influence they have



as to feeding and multiplying a people. My subject is too



extensive of itself to admit of being confouded with the doctrine



either of morals, or of government, however closely these may



appear connected with it; and did I not begin by simplifying



ideas as nuc as possible, and by banishing combinations of them,



I should quickly lose my way, and involve myself in perplexities



inextricable.







6. Every transition of money from hand to hand, for a valuable



consideration, implies some service done, something wrought by



man, or performed by his ingenity, or some consumption of



something produced by his labour. The quicker therefore the



circulation of money is in any country, the nore strongly it may



be inferred, that the inhabitats are laborious; and vice versa:



but of this more hereafter.







7. Hence we may conclude, that in those countries where the



people live upon the spontaneous fruits, the whole society



(considered in a political light) is found composed of free



hands. Nature there supplies the place of the whole class of



farmers.



    We have said that industry and manufactures are the



occupation of the free hands of a state; consequently, where the



proportion of them is the largest, industry should flourish to



the greatest advantage; that is to say, in countries where the



inhabitants live upon the spontaneous fruits: but this is not the



case. Why? Because there is another circumstance of equal weight



which prevents it. These people are unacquainted with want, and



want is the spur to industry. Let this suffice, in general, as to



the distribution of inhabitants in countries unacquainted with



labour.







8. This question is now with the greatest precision resolved by



the publisher of a pamphlet intitled, Three Tracts on the Corn



Trade and Corn Laws, with a Supplement; Lond. 1766. Second Edit.



(C. Smith).



     We have there, authentic accounts of all the grain exported



from England, or imported into it from abroad, from 1697 to 1765,



from which it appears (p. III.) that the greatest quantity of all



sorts of grain ever exported, viz. of wheat, barley, oats,



oatmeal, and rye, was in the year 1750, and amounted to 1,606,688



English quarters; and (p. 144.) we have an ingenious computation



of the growth, consumption, export, and import of these grains,



upon averages taken from the 68 years above mentioned; where the



ordinary or mean consumption of England is rated at 13,555,850



quarters. So the greatest exportation ever known in one year very



little exceeds 1/8 of the ordinary consumption, and is equivalent



to about 46 days' provision only.



    On the other hand, the greatest importation ever known, was



in the year 1757, when the total quantity inmported, was 151,743



quarters of all sorts of grain as above, which does not amount to



1/89 of the ordinary consumption of the people of England, and is



equivalent to their subsistence for 4 days 2 hours and 24 minutes



(p. 124).



    These facts were unknown to me when I wrote this chapter. I



had at that time been long abroad, and had very little



communication with my own country: and though I very strongly



felt the consequences of my own reasoning, I was so far overawed



by the force of the popular opinion, that I durst not venture to



rate either the surplus or the deficiency otherwise than it is



found in the text.







9. The truth of this, also, is made evident from the tracts cited



in the last note: but to a far greater extent, than I could take



upon me to affirm from theory alone.



    It is there said (p. 144.) that the mean export in England,



is barely 1/33 (1/32) part of the growth exclusive of the seed;



and that the mean import is equal to 1/571 part of the



consumption, and 1/18 part of the export.



    It would be amazing indeed, were a people, so circumstanced



with respect to subsistence, ever found in a real want of foreign



supply. But it is nowise amazing, that those who have no interest



in agriculture, should complain, and cry out for importation,



when a bad policy in the corn trade, and the want of a small



granary, equal to the national consumption during five days only,



make prices occasionally rise, and when the smallest quantity



imported from abroad is found to make them immediately fall,



though at a considerable loss both to the agriculture and the



trade of the nation.



    If it be asked, how so small a deficiency as 1/571 part of



the ordinary consumption, should make so sensible a difference to



a nation, as to raise prices to an exorbitant height? And how an



overplus so small as 1/33 should be considered as great plenty,



and make prices fall universally? I answer, that if in a good



year, after every nman, and every animal has been fully fed,



there shall still remain on hand a quantity equal to 1/33 of what



has been consumed, this overplus, considered by itself, is a very



great quantity, though small if considered relatively to the



total consumption of the kingdom; and were it not exported, it



would sink prices too much and ruin the farmer. That in a bad



year, again, the deficiency of 1/571 part of the ordinary



consumption, though very inconsiderable relatively to the whole,



is still very great when we consider, that before prices can rise



so high as to nmake government think of opening the ports to



importation, the lowest classes of the industrious inhabitants,



whose gains are small, must have been already reduced to the



minimum of their consumption; and when people are brought to the



minimum, a very small diminution upon their food may bring on the



greatest distress.



    In good years, we are therefore to consider the quantity



exported, as that part of the crop which is over and above the



full nourishment for men and cattle: And in bad years, we are to



consider what is imported, to be what is wanting of the scrimply



necessary, for subsisting the lowest classes of our people, at



the price they can afford to pay for it.



    But among all the ingenious inquiries which the English have



made into this subject, I have never seen (till of late in a new



publication intitled the Farmer's Letters) any attempt made, to



compare the prices of subsistence with the rate of the lowest



gains of the industrious who must go to market. From the



exposition of this matter by this ingenious author, it appears



very plain to me, that prices have never risen so high in



England, as to make importation necessary. The very lowest



manufacturer and day-labourer there, may live better at the



highest price of subsistence in any year since the beginning of



this century, than the generality of such of their order actually



do, in any country in Europe which I have seen. From which I



conclude that as long as matters stand in this situation, all



importation of subsistence from foreign nations, not under the



dominion of Great Britain should be intirely suspended.








