






BOOK VII







I



B.C. 369. In the following year[1] plenipotentiary ambassadors[2] from

the Lacedaemonians and their allies arrived at Athens to consider and

take counsel in what way the alliance between Athens and Lacedaemon

might be best cemented. It was urged by many speakers, foreigners and

Athenians also, that the alliance ought to be based on the principle

of absolute equality,[3] "share and share alike," when Procles of

Phlius put forward the following argument:



[1] I.e. the official year from spring to spring. See Peter, "Chron.

    Table" 95, note 215; see Grote, "H. G." x. 346, note 1.



[2] See Hicks, 89.



[3] For the phrase {epi toi isois kai omoiois}, implying "share and

    share alike," see Thuc. i. 145, etc.



"Since you have already decided, men of Athens, that it is good to

secure the friendship of Lacedaemon, the point, as it appears to me,

which you ought now to consider is, by what means this friendship may

be made to last as long as possible. The probability is, that we shall

hold together best by making a treaty which shall suit the best

interests of both parties. On most points we have, I believe, a

tolerable unanimity, but there remains the question of leadership. The

preliminary decree of your senate anticipates a division of the

hegemony, crediting you with the chief maritime power, Lacedaemon with

the chief power on land; and to me, personally, I confess, that seems

a division not more established by human invention than preordained by

some divine naturalness or happy fortune. For, in the first place, you

have a geographical position pre-eminently adapted for naval

supremacy; most of the states to whom the sea is important are massed

round your own, and all of these are inferior to you in strength.

Besides, you have harbours and roadsteads, without which it is not

possible to turn a naval power to account. Again, you have many ships

of war. To extend your naval empire is a traditional policy; all the

arts and sciences connected with these matters you possess as home

products, and, what is more, in skill and experience of nautical

affairs you are far ahead of the rest of the world. The majority of

you derive your livelihood from the sea, or things connected with it;

so that in the very act of minding your own affairs you are training

yourselves to enter the lists of naval combat.[4] Again, no other

power in the world can send out a larger collective fleet, and that is

no insignificant point in reference to the question of leadership. The

nucleus of strength first gained becomes a rallying-point, round which

the rest of the world will gladly congregate. Furthermore, your good

fortune in this department must be looked upon as a definite gift of

God: for, consider among the numberless great sea-fights which you

have fought how few you have lost, how many you have won. It is only

rational, then, that your allies should much prefer to share this

particular risk with you. Indeed, to show you how natural and vital to

you is this maritime study, the following reflection may serve. For

several years the Lacedaemonians, when at war with you in old days,

dominated your territory, but they made no progress towards destroying

you. At last God granted them one day to push forward their dominion

on the sea, and then in an instant you completely succumbed to

them.[5] Is it not self-evident that your safety altogether depends

upon the sea? The sea is your natural element--your birthright; it

would be base indeed to entrust the hegemony of it to the

Lacedaemonians, and the more so, since, as they themselves admit, they

are far less acquained with this business than yourselves; and,

secondly, your risk in naval battles would not be for equal stakes--

theirs involving only the loss of the men on board their ships, but

yours, that of your children and your wives and the entire state.



[4] See "Pol. Ath." i. 19 foll.



[5] See "Hell." II. i.



"And if this is a fair statement of your position, turn, now, and

consider that of the Lacedaemonians. The first point to notice is,

that they are an inland power; as long as they are dominant on land it

does not matter how much they are cut off from the sea--they can carry

on existence happily enough. This they so fully recognise, that from

boyhood they devote themselves to training for a soldier's life. The

keystone of this training is obedience to command,[6] and in this they

hold the same pre-eminence on land which you hold on the sea. Just as

you with your fleets, so they on land can, at a moment's notice, put

the largest army in the field; and with the like consequence, that

their allies, as is only rational, attach themselves to them with

undying courage.[7] Further, God has granted them to enjoy on land a

like good fortune to that vouchsafed to you on sea. Among all the many

contests they have entered into, it is surprising in how few they have

failed, in how many they have been successful. The same unflagging

attention which you pay to maritime affairs is required from them on

land, and, as the facts of history reveal, it is no less indispensable

to them. Thus, although you were at war with them for several years

and gained many a naval victory over them, you never advanced a step

nearer to reducing them. But once worsted on land, in an instant they

were confronted with a danger affecting the very lives of child and

wife, and vital to the interests of the entire state. We may very well

understand, then, the strangeness, not to say monstrosity, in their

eyes, of surrendering to others the military leadership on land, in

matters which they have made their special study for so long and with

such eminent success. I end where I began. I agree absolutely with the

preliminary decrees of your own senate, which I consider the solution

most advantageous to both parties. My prayer[8] is that you may be

guided in your deliberations to that conclusion which is best for each

and all of us."



[6] Or, "the spirit of discipline." See "Mem." III. v. 16; IV. iv. 15;

    Thuc. ii. 39; "Pol. Lac." viii.



[7] Or, "with unlimited confidence."



[8] See above, "Hell." VI. i. 13, {kai su prattois ta kratista}, "and

    so may the best fortune attend you!"--if that reading and

    rendering be adopted.



Such were the words of the orator, and the sentiments of his speech

were vehemently applauded by the Athenians no less than by the

Lacedaemonians who were present. Then Cephisodotus[9] stepped forward

and addressed the assembly. He said, "Men of Athens, do you not see

how you are being deluded? Lend me your ears, and I will prove it to

you in a moment. There is no doubt about your leadership by sea: it is

already secured. But suppose the Lacedaemonians in alliance with you:

it is plain they will send you admirals and captains, and possibly

marines, of Laconian breed; but who will the sailors be? Helots

obviously, or mercenaries of some sort. These are the folk over whom

you will exercise your leadership. Reverse the case. The

Lacedaemonians have issued a general order summoning you to join them

in the field; it is plain again, you will be sending your heavy

infantry and your cavalry. You see what follows. You have invented a

pretty machine, by which they become leders of your very selves, and

you become the leaders either of their slaves or of the dregs of their

state. I should like to put a question to the Lacedaemonian Timocrates

seated yonder. Did you not say just now, Sir, that you came to make an

alliance on terms of absolute equality, 'share and share alike'?

Answer me." "I did say so." "Well, then, here is a plan by which you

get the perfection of equality. I cannot conceive of anything more

fair and impartial than that 'turn and turn about' each of us should

command the navy, each the army; whereby whatever advantage there may

be in maritime or military command we may each of us share."



[9] See above, "Hell." VI. iii. 2; Hicks, 87.



These arguments were successful. The Athenians were converted, and

passed a decree vesting the command in either state[10] for periods of

five days alternately.



[10] See "Revenues," v. 7.



B.C. 369.[11] The campaign was commenced by both Athenians and

Lacedaemonians with their allies, marching upon Corinth, where it was

resolved to keep watch and ward over Oneion jointly. On the advance of

the Thebans and their allies the troops were drawn out to defend the

pass. They were posted in detachments at different points, the most

assailable of which was assigned to the Lacedaemonians and the men of

Pellene.[12]



[11] See Grote, "H. G." x. 349 foll.; al. B.C. 368.



[12] "During the wars of Epameinondas Pellene adhered firmly to her

    Spartan policy, at a time when other cities were, to say the

    least, less strenuous in the Spartan cause."--Freeman, "Hist. Fed.

    Gov." p. 241. Afterwards Pellene is found temporarily on the

    Theban side ("Hell." VII. ii. 11).



The Thebans and their allies, finding themselves within three or four

miles[13] of the troops guarding the pass, encamped in the flat ground

below; but presently, after a careful calculation of the time it would

take to start and reach the goal in the gloaming, they advanced

against the Lacedaemonian outposts. In spite of the difficulty they

timed their movements to a nicety, and fell upon the Lacedaemonians

and Pellenians just at the interval when the night pickets were

turning in and the men were leaving their shakedowns and retiring for

necessary purposes.[14] This was the instant for the Thebans to fling

themselves upon them; they plied their weapons with good effect, blow

upon blow. Order was pitted against disorder, preparation against

disarray. When, however, those who escaped from the thick of the

business had retired to the nearest rising ground, the Lacedaemonian

polemarch, who might have taken as many heavy, or light, infantry of

the allies as he wanted, and thus have held the position (no bad one,

since it enabled him to get his supplies safely enough from

Cenchreae), failed to do so. On the contrary, and in spite of the

great perplexity of the Thebans as to how they were to get down from

the high level facing Sicyon or else retire the way they came, the

Spartan general made a truce, which in the opinion of the majority,

seemed more in favour of the Thebans than himself, and so he withdrew

his division and fell back.



[13] Lit. "thirty stades."



[14] Or, "intent on their personal concerns." See "Hell." II. iv. 6;

    "Hipparch." vii. 12.



The Thebans were now free to descend without hindrance, which they

did; and, effecting a junction with their allies the Arcadians,

Argives, and Eleians, at once attacked[15] Sicyon and Pellene, and,

marching on Epidaurus, laid waste the whole territory of that people.

Returning from that exploit with a consummate disdain for all their

opponents, when they found themselves near the city of Corinth they

advanced at the double against the gate facing towards Phlius;

intending if they found it open to rush in. However, a body of light

troops sallied out of the city to the rescue, and met the advance of

the Theban picked corps[16] not one hundred and fifty yards[17] from

the walls. Mounting on the monuments and commanding eminences, with

volleys of sling stones and arrows they laid low a pretty large number

in the van of the attack, and routing them, gave chase for three or

four furlongs'[18] distance. After this incident the Corinthians

dragged the corpses of the slain to the wall, and finally gave them up

under a flag of truce, erecting a trophy to record the victory. As a

result of this occurrence the allies of the Lacedaemonians took fresh

heart.



[15] And took (apparently); see below; Diod. xv. 69.



[16] See "Anab." III. iv. 43; and above, "Hell." V. iii. 23.



[17] Lit. "four plethra."



[18] LIt. "three or four stades."



At the date of the above transactions the Lacedeamonians were cheered

by the arrival of a naval reinforcement from Dionysius, consisting of

more than twenty warships, which conveyed a body of Celts and Iberians

and about fifty cavalry. The day following, the Thebans and the rest

of the allies, posted, at intervals, in battle order, and completely

filling the flat land down to the sea on one side, and up to the

knolls on the other which form the buttresses of the city, proceeded

to destroy everything precious they could lay their hands on in the

plain. The Athenian and Corinthian cavalry, eyeing the strength,

physical and numerical, of their antagonists, kept at a safe distance

from their armament. But the little body of cavalry lately arrived

from Dionysius spread out in a long thin line, and one at one point

and one at another galloped along the front, discharging their

missiles as they dashed forward, and when the enemy rushed against

them, retired, and again wheeling about, showered another volley. Even

while so engaged they would dismount from their horses and take

breath; and if their foemen galloped up while they were so dismounted,

in an instant they had leapt on their horses' backs and were in full

retreat. Or if, again, a party pursued them some distance from the

main body, as soon as they turned to retire, they would press upon

them, and discharging volleys of missiles, made terrible work, forcing

the whole army to advance and retire, merely to keep pace with the

movements of fifty horsemen.



B.C. 369-368. After this the Thebans remained only a few more days and

then turned back homewards; and the rest likewise to their several

homes. Thereupon the troops sent by Dionysius attacked Sicyon.

Engaging the Sicyonians in the flat country, they defeated them,

killing about seventy men and capturing by assault the fortres of

Derae.[19] After these achievements this first reinforcement from

Dionysius re-embarked and set sail for Syracuse.



[19] "East of Sicyon was Epieiceia (see above, "Hell." IV. ii. 14, iv.

    13) on the river Nemea. In the same direction was the fortress

    Derae." ("Dict. Anct. Geog." "Topography of Sicyonia"), al. Gerae.

    So Leake ("Morea," iii. 376), who conjectures that this fortress

    was in the maritime plain.



Up to this time the Thebans and all the states which had revolted from

Lacedaemon had acted together in perfect harmony, and were content to

campaign under the leadership of Thebes; but now a certain

Lycomedes,[20] a Mantinean, broke the spell. Inferior in birth and

position to none, while in wealth superior, he was for the rest a man

of high ambition. This man was able to inspire the Arcadians with high

thoughts by reminding them that to Arcadians alone the Peloponnese was

in a literal sense a fatherland; since they and they alone were the

indigenous inhabitants of its sacred soil, and the Arcadian stock the

largest among the Hellenic tribes--a good stock, moreover, and of

incomparable physique. And then he set himself to panegyrise them as

the bravest of the brave, adducing as evidence, if evidence were

needed, the patent fact, that every one in need of help invariably

turned to the Arcadians.[21] Never in old days had the Lacedaemonians

yet invaded Athens without the Arcadians. "If then," he added, "you

are wise, you will be somewhat chary of following at the beck and call

of anybody, or it will be the old story again. As when you marched in

the train of Sparta you only enhanced her power, so to-day, if you

follow Theban guidance without thought or purpose instead of claiming

a division of the headship, you will speedily find, perhaps, in her

only a second edition of Lacedaemon."[22]



[20] For the plan of an Arcadian Federation and the part played by

    Lycomedes, its true author, "who certainly merits thereby a high

    place among the statesmen of Greece," see Freeman, "Hist. Fed.

    Gov." ch. iv. p. 199 foll.



[21] For this claim on the part of the Arcadians, see "Anab." VI. ii.

    10 foll.



[22] Or, "Lacedaemonians under another name."



These words uttered in the ears of the Arcadians were sufficient to

puff them up with pride. They were lavish in their love of Lycomedes,

and thought there was no one his equal. He became their hero; he had

only to give his orders, and they appointed their magistrates[23] at

his bidding. But, indeed, a series of brilliant exploits entitled the

Arcadians to magnify themselves. The first of these arose out of an

invasion of Epidaurus by the Argives, which seemed likely to end in

their finding their escape barred by Chabrias and his foreign brigade

with the Athenians and Corinthians. Only, at the critical moment the

Arcadians came to the rescue and extricated the Argives, who were

closely besieged, and this in spite not only of the enemy, but of the

savage nature of the ground itself. Again they marched on Asine[24] in

Laconian territory, and defeated the Lacedaemonian garrison, putting

the polemarch Geranor, who was a Spartan, to the sword, and sacking

the suburbs of the town. Indeed, whenever or wherever they had a mind

to send an invading force, neither night nor wintry weather, nor

length of road nor mountain barrier could stay their march. So that at

this date they regarded their prowess as invincible.[25] The Thebans,

it will be understood, could not but feel a touch of jealousy at these

pretensions, and their former friendship to the Arcadians lost its

ardour. With the Eleians, indeed, matters were worse. The revelation

came to them when they demanded back from the Arcadians certain

cities[26] of which the Lacedaemonians had deprived them. They

discovered that their views were held of no account, but that the

Triphylians and the rest who had revolted from them were to be made

much of, because they claimed to be Arcadians.[27] Hence, as

contrasted with the Thebans, the Eleians cherished feelings towards

their late friends which were positively hostile.



[23] {arkhontas}, see below, "Hell." VII. iv. 33. The formal title of

    these Federal magistrates may or may not have been {arkhontes};

    Freeman, "H. F. G." 203, note 6.



[24] See Grote, "H. G." x. 356.



[25] Or, "regarded themselves as the very perfection of soldiery."



[26] In reference to "Hell." III. ii. 25 foll., see Freeman, op. cit.

    p. 201, and below, "Hell." VII. iv. 12 (B.C. 365); Busolt, op.

    cit. p. 186 foll., in reference to Lasion.



[27] Busolt, p. 150.



B.C. 368. Self-esteem amounting to arrogance--such was the spirit

which animated each section of the allies, when a new phase was

introduced by the arrival of Philiscus[28] of Abydos on an embassy

from Ariobarzanes[29] with large sums of money. This agent's first

step was to assemble a congress of Thebans, allies, and Lacedaemonians

at Delphi to treat of peace. On their arrival, without attempting to

communicate or take counsel with the god as to how peace might be re-

established, they fell to deliberating unassisted; and when the

Thebans refused to acquiesce in the dependency of Messene[30] upon

Lacedaemon, Philiscus set about collecting a large foreign brigade to

side with Lacedaemon and to prosecute the war.



[28] See Hicks, 84, p. 152; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. 51; Grote, "H. G."

    x. 357; Curtius, "H. G." (Eng. tr.) iv. 458; Diod. xv. 90.



[29] See above, V. i. 28; "Ages." ii. 26.



[30] See Hicks, 86.



Whilst these matters were still pending, the second reinforcements

from Dionysius[31] arrived. There was a difference of opinion as to

where the troops should be employed, the Athenians insisting that they

ought to march into Thessaly to oppose the Thebans, the Lacedaemonians

being in favour of Laconia; and among the allies this latter opinion

carried the day. The reinforcement from Dionysius accordingly sailed

round to Laconia, where Archidamus incorporated them with the state

troops and opened the campaign. Caryae he took by storm, and put every

one captured to the sword, and from this point marching straight upon

the Parrhasians of Arcadia, he set about ravaging the country along

with his Syracusan supporters.



[31] See above, SS. 20, 22, p. 191 foll. The date is B.C. 368

    according to Grote, "H. G." x. 362 foll.; al. B.C. 367.



Presently when the Arcadians and Argives arrived with succours, he

retreated and encamped on the knolls above Medea.[32] While he was

there, Cissidas, the officer in charge of the reinforcement from

Dionysius, made the announcement that the period for his stay abroad

had elapsed; and the words were no sooner out of his lips than off he

set on the road to Sparta. The march itself, however, was not effected

without delays, for he was met and cut off by a body of Messenians at

a narrow pass, and was forced in these straits to send to Archidamus

and beg for assistance, which the latter tendered. When they had got

as far as the bend[33] on the road to Eutresia, there were the

Arcadians and Argives advancing upon Laconia and apparently intending,

like the Messenians, to shut the Spartan off from the homeward road.



[32] Or, "Melea," or "Malea." E. Curtius conjectures {Meleas} for

    {Medeas} of the MSS., and probably the place referred to is the

    township of Malea in the Aegytis (Pausan. VIII. xxvii. 4); see

    above, "Hell." VI. v. 24, "the Maleatid." See Dind. "Hist. Gr.,"

    Ox. MDCCCLIII., note ad loc.; Curtius, "H. G." iv. 459; Grote, "H.

    G." x. 362.



[33] Or, "the resting-place"; cf. mod. "Khan." L. and S. cf. Arist.

    "Frogs," 113. "Medea," below, is probably "Malea," (see last

    note).



Archidamus, debouching upon a flat space of ground where the roads to

Eutresia and Medea converge, drew up his troops and offered battle.

When happened then is thus told:--He passed in front of the regiments

and addressed them in terms of encouragement thus: "Fellow-citizens,

the day has come which calls upon us to prove ourselves brave men and

look the world in the face with level eyes.[34] Now are we to deliver

to those who come after us our fatherland intact as we received it

from our fathers; now will we cease hanging our heads in shame before

our children and wives, our old men and our foreign friends, in sight

of whom in days of old we shone forth conspicuous beyond all other

Hellenes."



[34] See Plut. "Ages." 53 (Clough, vol. iv. p. 41).



The words were scarcely uttered (so runs the tale), when out of the

clear sky came lightnings and thunderings,[35] with propitious

manifestation to him; and it so happened that on his right wing there

stood a sacred enclosure and a statue of Heracles, his great ancestor.

As the result of all these things, so deep a strength and courage came

into the hearts of his soldiers, as they tell, that the generals had

hard work to restrain their men as they pushed forward to the front.

Presently, when Archidamus led the advance, a few only of the enemy

cared to await them at the spear's point, and were slain; the mass of

them fled, and fleeing fell. Many were cut down by the cavalry, many

by the Celts. When the battle ceased and a trophy had been erected,

the Spartan at once despatched home Demoteles, the herald, with the

news. He had to announce not only the greatness of the victory, but

the startling fact that, while the enemy's dead were numerous, not one

single Lacedaemonian had been slain.[36] Those in Sparta to whom the

news was brought, as says the story, when they heard it, one and all,

beginning with Agesilaus, and, after him, the elders and the ephors,

wept for joy--so close akin are tears to joy and pain alike. There

were others hardly less pleased than the Lacedaemonians themselves at

the misfortune which had overtaken the Arcadians: these were the

Thebans and Eleians--so offensive to them had the boastful behaviour

of these men become.



[35] See Xen. "Apolog." 12; Homer, "Il." ii. 353; "Od." xx. 113 foll.



[36] According to Diod. xv. 72, ten thousand of the enemy fell.



The problem perpetually working in the minds of the Thebans was how

they were to compass the headship of Hellas; and they persuaded

themselves that, if they sent an embassy to the King of Persia, they

could not but gain some advantage by his help. Accordingly they did

not delay, but called together the allies, on the plea that Euthycles

the Lacedaemonian was already at the Persian court. The commissioners

sent up were, on the part of the Thebans, Pelopidas;[37] on the part

of the Arcadians, Antiochus, the pancratiast; and on that of the

Eleians, Archidamus. There was also an Argive in attendance. The

Athenians on their side, getting wind of the matter, sent up two

commissioners, Timagoras and Leon.



[37] See Plut. "Pelop." 30 (Clough, vol. ii. p. 230). For the date see

    Grote, "H. G." x. 365, 379; Curtius, "H. G." iv. 460.



When they arrived at the Persian court the influence of Pelopidas was

preponderant with the Persian. He could point out that, besides the

fact that the Thebans alone among all the Hellenes had fought on the

king's side at Plataeae,[38] they had never subsequently engaged in

military service against the Persians; nay, the very ground of

Lacedaemonian hostility to them was that they had refused to march

against the Persian king with Agesilaus,[39] and would not even suffer

him to sacrifice to Artemis at Aulis (where Agamemnon sacrificed

before he set sail for Asia and captured Troy). In addition, there

were two things which contributed to raise the prestige of Thebes, and

redounded to the honour of Pelopidas. These were the victory of the

Thebans at Leuctra, and the indisputable fact that they had invaded

and laid waste the territory of Laconia. Pelopidas went on to point

out that the Argives and Arcadians had lately been defeated in battle

by the Lacedaemonians, when his own countrymen were not there to

assist. The Athenian Timagoras supported all these statements of the

Theban by independent testimony, and stood second in honour after

Pelopidas.



[38] See Thuc. iii. 58, 59, 60.



[39] See above, "Hell." III. iv. 3; Lincke, "Zur. Xen. Krit." p. 315.



At this point of the proceedings Pelopidas was asked by the king, what

special clause he desired inserted in the royal rescript. He replied

as follows: "Messene to be independent of Lacedaemon, and the

Athenians to lay up their ships of war. Should either power refuse

compliance in these respects, such refusal to be a casus belli; and

any state refusing to take part in the military proceedings

consequent, to be herself the first object of attack." These clauses

were drawn up and read to the ambassadors, when Leon, in the hearing

of the king, exclaimed: "Upon my word! Athenians, it strikes me it is

high time you looked for some other friend than the great king." The

secretary reported the comment of the Athenian envoy, and produced

presently an altered copy of the document, with a clause inserted: "If

the Athenians have any better and juster views to propound, let them

come to the Persian court and explain them."[40]



[40] See Grote, "H. G." x. 402; and "Ages." viii. 3.



Thus the ambassadors returned each to his own home and were variously

received. Timagoras, on the indictment of Leon, who proved that his

fellow-commissioner not only refused to lodge with him at the king's

court, but in every way played into the hands of Pelopidas, was put to

death. Of the other joint commissioners, the Eleian, Archidamus, was

loud in his praises of the king and his policy, because he had shown a

preference to Elis over the Arcadians; while for a converse reason,

because the Arcadian league was slighted, Antiochus not only refused

to accept any gift, but brought back as his report to the general

assembly of the Ten Thousand,[41] that the king appeared to have a

large army of confectioners and pastry-cooks, butlers and doorkeepers;

but as for men capable of doing battle with Hellenes, he had looked

carefully, and could not discover any. Besides all which, even the

report of his wealth seemed to him, he said, bombastic nonsense. "Why,

the golden plane-tree that is so belauded is not big enough to furnish

shade to a single grasshopper."[42]



[41] See above, VI. v. 6; Freeman, "Hist. Fed. Gov." 202; Demosth. "F.

    L." 220, etc.



[42] Or, "the golden plane-tree they romance about would not suffice

    to," etc.



At Thebes a conference of the states had been convened to listen to

the great king's letter. The Persian who bore the missive merely

pointed to the royal seal, and read the document; whereupon the

Thebans invited all, who wished to be their friends, to take an oath

to what they had just heard, as binding on the king and on themselves.

To which the ambassadors from the states replied that they had been

sent to listen to a report, not to take oaths; if oaths were wanted,

they recommended the Thebans to send ambassadors to the several

states. The Arcadian Lycomedes, moreover, added that the congress

ought not to be held at Thebes at all, but at the seat of war,

wherever that might be. This remark brought down the wrath of the

Thebans on the speaker; they exclaimed that he was bent on breaking up

the alliance. Whereupon the Arcadian refused to take a seat in the

congress at all, and got up and betook himself off there and then,

accompanied by all the Arcadian envoys. Since, therefore, the

assembled representatives refused to take the oaths at Thebes, the

Thebans sent to the different states, one by one in turn, urging each

to undertake solemnly to act in accordance with the great king's

rescript. They were persuaded that no individual state would venture

to quarrel with themselves and the Persian monarch at once. As a

matter of fact, however, when they arrived at Corinth--which was the

first stated visted--the Corinthians stood out and gave as their

answer, that they had no desire for any common oath or undertaking

with the king. The rest of the states followed suit, giving answers of

a similar tenor, so that this striving after empire on the part of

Pelopidas and the Thebans melted like a cloud-castle into air.



B.C. 367.[43] But Epaminondas was bent on one more effort. With a view

to forcing the Arcadians and the rest of the allies to pay better heed

to Thebes, he desired first to secure the adhesion of the Achaeans,

and decided to march an army into Achaea. Accordingly, he persuaded

the Argive Peisias, who was at the head of military affairs in Argos,

to seize and occupy Oneion in advance. Persias, having ascertained

that only a sorry guard was maintained over Oneion by Naucles, the

general commanding the Lacedaemonian foreign brigade, and by

Timomachus the Athenian, under cover of night seized and occupied with

two thousand heavy infantry the rising ground above Cenchreae, taking

with him provisions for seven days. Within the interval the Thebans

arrived and surmounted the pass of Oneion; whereupon the allied troops

with Epaminondas at their head, advanced into Achaea. The result of

the campaign was that the better classes of Achaea gave in their

adhesion to him; and on his personal authority Epaminondas insisted

that there should be no driving of the aristocrats into exile, nor any

modification of the constitution. He was content to take a pledge of

fealty from the Achaeans to this effect: "Verily and indeed we will be

your allies, and follow whithersoever the Thebans lead."[44]



[43] B.C. 367, according to Grote, "H. G." x. 365, note 1; al. B.C.

    366.



[44] See Freeman, "Hist. Fed. Gov." p. 241: "We read of local

    oligarchies (in the several cities of Achaia) which Epameinondas

    found and left in possession, but which the home government of

    Thebes thought good to expel, and to substitute democracies under

    the protection of Theban harmosts. This policy did not answer, as

    the large bodies of exiles thus formed contrived to recover the

    cities, and to bring them to a far more decided Spartan

    partisanship than before."



So he departed home. The Arcadians, however, and the partisans of the

opposite faction in Thebes were ready with an indictment against him:

"Epaminondas," they said, "had merely swept and garnished Achaea for

the Lacedaemonians, and then gone off." The Thebans accordingly

resolved to send governors[45] into the states of Achaea; and those

officers on arrival joined with the commonalty and drove out the

better folk, and set up democracies throughout Achaea. On their side,

these exiles coalesced, and, marching upon each separate state in

turn, for they were pretty numerous, speedily won their restoration

and dominated the states. As the party thus reinstated no longer

steered a middle course, but went heart and soul into an alliance with

Lacedaemon, the Arcadians found themselves between the upper and the

nether millstone--that is to say, the Lacedaemonians and the Achaeans.



[45] Lit. "harmosts."



At Sicyon, hitherto,[46] the constitution was based on the ancient

laws; but at this date Euphron (who during the Lacedaemonian days had

been the greatest man in Sicyon, and whose ambition it was to hold a

like pre-eminence under their opponents) addressed himself to the

Argives and Arcadians as follows: "If the wealthiest classes should

ever come into power in Sicyon, without a doubt the city would take

the first opportunity of readopting a Laconian policy; whereas, if a

democracy be set up," he added, "you may rest assured Sicyon will hold

fast by you. All I ask you is to stand by me; I will do the rest. It

is I who will call a meeting of the people; and by that selfsame act I

shall give you a pledge of my good faith and present you with a state

firm in its alliance. All this, be assured," he added, "I do because,

like yourselves, I have long ill brooked the pride of Lacedaemon, and

shall be glad to escape the yoke of bondage."



[46] See Grote, "H. G." x. 379.



These proposals found favour with the Arcadians and the Argives, who

gladly gave the assistance demanded. Euphron straightway, in the

market-place, in the presence of the two powers concerned,[47]

proceeded to convene the Demos, as if there were to be a new

constitution, based on the principle of equality.[48] When the

convention met, he bade them appoint generals: they might choose whom

they liked. Whereupon they elected Euphron himself, Hippodamus,

Cleander, Acrisius, and Lysander. When these matters were arranged he

appointed Adeas, his own son, over the foreign brigade, in place of

the former commander, Lysimenes, whom he removed. His next step was

promptly to secure the fidelity of the foreign mercenaries by various

acts of kindness, and to attach others; and he spared neither the

public nor the sacred moneys for this object. He had, to aid him,

further, the property of all the citizens whom he exiled on the ground

of Laconism, and of this without scruple he in every case availed

himself. As for his colleagues in office, some he treacherously put to

death, others he exiled, by which means he got everything under his

own power, and was now a tyrant without disguise. The method by which

he got the allies to connive at his doings was twofold. Partly he

worked on them by pecuniary aid, partly by the readiness with which he

lent the support of his foreign troops on any campaign to which they

might invite him.



[47] Lit. "the Argives and the Arcadians."



[48] Lit. "on fair and equal terms." See Thuc. v. 79.







II



B.C. 366. Matters had so far progressed that the Argives had already

fortified the Trikaranon above the Heraion as an outpost to threaten

Phlius, while the Sicyonians were engaged in fortifying Thyamia[1] on

their frontier; and between the two the Phliasians were severely

pinched. They began to suffer from dearth of necessaries; but, in

spite of all, remained unshaken in their alliance. It is the habit of

historians, I know, to record with admiration each noble achievement

of the larger powers, but to me it seems a still more worthy task to

bring to light the great exploits of even a little state found

faithful in the performance of fair deeds.



[1] "Thyamia is placed by Ross on the lofty hill of Spiria, the

    northern prolongation of Tricaranum, between the villages Stimanga

    and Skrapani."--"Dict. Anct. Geog." "Phlius."



B.C. 370-369. Now these Phliasians were friends of Lacedaemon while at

the zenith of her power. After her disaster on the field of Leuctra,

when many of the Perioeci, and the helots to a man, revolted; when,

more than that, the allies, save only quite a few, forsook her;[2] and

when united Hellas, so to speak, was marching on her--these Phliasians

remained stanch in their allegiance; and, in spite of the hostility of

the most powerful states of the Peloponnese, to wit the Arcardians and

the Argives, they insisted on coming to her aid. It fell to their lot

to cross into Prasiae as the rearguard of the reinforcements, which

consisted of the men of Corinth, of Epidaurus and of Troezen, of

Hermione, Halieis, and Sicyon and Pellene, in the days before any of

these had revolted.[3] Not even when the commander of the foreign

brigade, picking up the divisions already across, left them behind and

was gone--not even so did they flinch or turn back, but hired a guide

from Prasiae, and though the enemy was massed round Amyclae, slipped

through his ranks, as best they could, and so reached Sparta. It was

then that the Lacedaemonians, besides other honours conferred upon

them, sent them an ox as a gift of hospitality.



[2] See above, "VI." v. 29.



[3] See "Hell." VII. i. 18.



B.C. 369. Later on, when the enemy had retired from Laconia, the

Argives, ill brooking so much zeal for Lacedaemon on the part of

Phlius, marched in full force against the little state, and fell to

ravaging their territory. Even then they remained undaunted; and when

the enemy turned to retire, destroying all that he could lay hands

upon, out dashed the cavalry of the Phliasians and dogged his retreat.

And notwithstanding that the Argive's rear consisted of the whole of

his cavalry, with some companies of infantry to support them, they

attacked him, sixty in number, and routed his whole rearguard. They

slew, indeed, but a few of them; but, having so slain that handful,

they paused and erected a trophy in full sight of the Argive army with

as little concern as if they had cut down their enemies to a man.



Once again the Lacedaemonians and their allies were guarding

Oneion,[4] and the Thebans were threatening to scale the pass. The

Arcadians and Eleians[5] were moving forwards through Nemea to effect

a junction with the Thebans, when a hint was conveyed to them by some

Phliasian exiles, "Only show yourselves before Phlius and the town is

yours." An agreement was made, and in the dead of night a party

consisting of the exiles themselves and others with them, about six

hundred in number, planted themselves close under the walls with

scaling-ladders. Presently the scouts from the Trikaranon signalled to

the city that the enemy was advancing. The citizens were all

attention; their eyes fixed upon their scouts. Meanwhile the traitors

within were likewise signalling to those seated under lee of the walls

"to scale"; and these, scaling up, seized the arms of the guards,

which they found abandoned, and fell to pursuing the day sentinels,

ten in number (one out of each squad of five being always left on day

duty).[6] One of these was put to the sword as he lay asleep, and a

second as he was escaping to the Heraion; but the other eight day-

pickets leapt down the wall on the side towards the city, one after

another. The scaling party now found themselves in undisputed

possession of the citadel. But the shouting had reached the city

below: the citizens rallied to the rescue; and the enemy began by

sallying forth from the citadel, and did battle in the forefront of

the gate leading down to the city. By and by, being strongly

beleaguered by the ever-increasing reinforcements of the citizens,

they retired, falling back upon the citadel; and the citizens along

with the enemy forced their way in. The centre of the citadel was

speedily deserted; for the enemy scaled the walls and towers, and

showered blows and missiles upon the citizens below. These defended

themselves from the ground, or pressed the encounter home by climbing

the ladders which led to the walls. Once masters of certain towers on

this side and the other of the invaders, the citizens came to close

quarters with them with reckless desperation. The invaders, pushed and

pommelled by dint of such audacity and hard hitting, were cooped up

like sheep into narrower and narrower space. But at that critical

moment the Arcadians and the Argives were circling round the city, and

had begun to dig through the walls of the citadel from its upper

side.[7] Of the citizens inside some were beating down their

assailants on the wall;[8] others, those of them who were climbing up

from outside and were still on the scaling-ladders, whilst a third set

were delivering battle against those who had mounted the towers. These

last had found fire in the men's quarters, and were engaged in setting

the towers and all ablaze, bringing up sheaves of corn and grass--an

ample harvesting, as luck would have it, garnered off the citadel

itself. Thereupon the occupants of the towers, in terror of the

flames, leapt down one by one, while those on the walls, under the

blows of the defenders, tumbled off with similar expedition; and as

soon as they had once begun to yield, the whole citadel, in almost

less time than it takes to tell, was cleared of the enemy. In an

instant out dashed the cavalry, and the enemy, seeing them, beat a

hasty retreat, leaving behind scaling-ladders and dead, besides some

comrades hopelessly maimed. In fact, the enemy, what between those who

were slain inside and those who leapt from the walls, lost not less

than eighty men. And now it was a goodly sight to see the brave men

grasp one another by the hand and pledge each other on their

preservation, whilst the women brought them drink and cried for joy.

Not one there present but in very sooth was overcome by laughter mixed

with tears.[9]



[4] B.C. 369? al. B.C. 368. See above, "Hell." VII. i. 15; Grote, "H.

    G." x. 346.



[5] See above, "Hell." VII. i. 18, and below, S. 8.



[6] Or, "one member of both the squads of five was left behind"--i.e.

    two out of the ten could not keep up with the rest in their

    flight, and were taken and killed; one indeed had not started, but

    was killed in sleep.



[7] Or, "downwards" (L. and S.); or, "in front," "von vorn" (Buchs).



[8] Reading, {tous eti toi teikhous}. See Otto Keller for various

    emendations of the passage.



[9] In true Homeric fashion, as Pollux (ii. 64) observes. See Homer,

    "Il." vi. 484. See above, VII. i. 32; "Cyrop." VII. v. 32;

    "Hiero," iii. 5; "Sym." ii. 24; "Antony and Cleopatra," III. ii.

    43.



Next year also[10] Phlius was invaded by the Argives and all the

Arcadians. The reason of this perpetually-renewed attack on Phlius is

not far to seek: partly it was the result of spleen, partly the little

township stood midway between them, and they cherished the hope that

through want of the necessaries of life they would bring it over.

During this invasion the cavalry and the picked troop of the

Phliasians, assisted by some Athenian knights, made another famous

charge at the crossing of the river.[11] They made it so hot for the

enemy that for the rest of that day he was forced to retire under the

mountain ridges, and to hold aloof as if afraid to trample down the

corn-crops of a friendly people on the flat below.



[10] B.C. 368 (or 367).



[11] The Asopus.



Again another time[12] the Theban commander in Sicyon marched out

against Phlius, taking with him the garrison under his personal

command, with the Sicyonians and Pellenians (for at the date of the

incident these states followed in the wake of Thebes). Euphron was

there also with his mercenaries, about two thousand in number, to

share the fortunes of the field. The mass of the troops began their

descent on the Heraion by the Trikaranon, intending to ravage the flat

bottom below. At the gate leading to Corinth the Theban general left

his Sicyonians and Pellenians on the height, to prevent the Phliasians

getting behind him at this point and so over the heads of his troops

as they lay at the Heraion beneath.[13] As soon as the citizens of

Phlius found that hostile troops were advancing on their corn-land,

out dashed the cavalry with the chosen band of the Phliasians and gave

battle, not suffering the enemy to penetrate into the plain. The best

part of the day was spent in taking long shots at one another on that

field; Euphron pushing his attack down to the point where cavalry

could operate, the citizens retaliating as far as the Heraion.

Presently the time to withdraw had come, and the enemy began to

retire, following the circle of the Trikaranon; the short cut to reach

the Pellenians being barred by the ravine which runs in front of the

walls. The Phliasians escorted their retreating foes a little way up

the steep, and then turning off dashed along the road beside the

walls, making for the Pellenians and those with them; whereupon the

Theban, perceiving the haste of the Phliasians, began racing with his

infantry to outspeed them and bring succour to the Pellenians. The

cavalry, however, arrived first and fell to attacking the Pellenians,

who received and withstood the shock, and the cavalry drew back. A

second time they charged, and were supported by some infantry

detachments, which had now come up. It ended in a hand-to-hand fight;

and eventually the enemy gave way. On the field lay dead some

Sicyonians, and of the Pellenians many a good man. In record of the

feat the Phliasians began to raise a trophy, as well they might; and

loud and clear the paean rang. As to the Theban and Euphron, they and

all their men stood by and stared at the proceedings, like men who had

raced to see a sight. After all was over the one party retired to

Sicyon and the other withdrew into their city.



[12] B.C. 367 (or 366).



[13] Lit. "above the Heraion" (where his main body lay).



That too was another noble exploit of the Phliasians, when they took

the Pellenian Proxenus prisoner and, although suffering from scarcity

at the time, sent him back without a ransom. "As generous as brave,"

such is their well-earned title who were capable of such performance.



The heroic resolution with which these men maintained their loyalty to

their friends is manifest. When excluded from the fruits of their own

soil, they contrived to live, partly by helping themselves from the

enemy's territory, partly by purchasing from Corinth, though to reach

that market they must run the gauntlet of a thousand risks; and having

reached it their troubles began afresh. There were difficulties in

providing the requisite sum, difficulties in arranging with the

purveyors, and it was barely possible to find sureties for the very

beasts which should carry home their marketing. They had reached the

depth of despair, and were absolutely at a loss what to do, when they

arranged with Chares to escort their convoy. Once safe inside Phlius,

they begged him to help them to convey their useless and sick folk to

Pellene.[14] These they left at that place; and after making purchases

and packing as many beasts of burthen as they could, they set off to

return in the night, not in ignorance that they would be laid in wait

for by the enemy, but persuaded that the want of provisions was a

worse evil than mere fighting.



[14] What is the date of this incident? See above, "Hell." VII. ii. 3;

    below VII. iv. 17.



The men of Phlius pushed forward with Chares; presently they stumbled

on the enemy and at once grappled to their work. Pressing hard on the

foe, they called cheerily to one another, and shouted at the same time

to Chares to bring up his aid. In short, the victory was theirs; and

the enemy was driven off the road; and so they got themselves and

their supplies safely home. The long night-watching superinduced sleep

which lasted well into the next day. But Chares was no sooner out of

bed then he was accosted by the cavalry and the pick of the heavy

infantry with the following appeal: "Chares, to-day you have it in

your power to perform the noblest deed of arms. The Sicyonians are

fortifying an outpost on our borders, they have plenty of stone-masons

but a mere handful of hoplites. We the knights of Phlius and we the

flower of our infantry force will lead the way; and you shall follow

after with your mercenaries. Perhaps when you appear on the scene you

will find the whole thing finished, or perhaps your coming will send

the enemy flying, as happened at Pellene. If you do not like the sound

of these proposals, sacrifice and take counsel of the gods. Our belief

is that the gods will bid you yet more emphatically than we to take

this step. Only this, Chares, you must well consider, that if you do

take it you will have established an outpost on the enemy's frontier;

you will have saved from perdition a friendly city; you will win

eternal glory in your own fatherland; and among friends and foes alike

no name will be heralded with louder praise than that of Chares."



Chares was persuaded, and proceeded to offer sacrifice. Meanwhile the

Phliasian cavalry were donning their breastplates and bridling their

horses, and the heavy infantry made every preparation for the march.

Then they took their arms, fell into line, and tramped off to the

place of sacrifice. Chares with the soothsayer stepped forward to meet

them, announcing that the victims were favourable. "Only wait for us,"

they exclaimed; "we will sally forth with you at once." The heralds'

cry "To arms!" was sounded, and with a zeal which was almost

miraculous the mercenaries themselves rushed out. As soon as Chares

began the march, the Phliasian cavalry and infantry got in front of

him. At first they led off at a smart pace; presently they began to

bowl[15] along more quickly, and finally the cavalry were tearing over

the ground might and main, whilst the infantry, at the greatest pace

compatible with keeping their ranks, tore after them; and behind them,

again, came Chares zealously following up in their rear. There only

remained a brief interval of daylight before the sun went down, and

they came upon the enemy in the fortress, some washing, some cooking a

savoury meal, others kneading their bread, others making their beds.

These, when they saw the vehemence of the attack, at once, in utter

panic, took to flight, leaving behind all their provisions for the

brave fellows who took their place. They, as their reward, made a fine

supper off these stores and others which had come from home, pouring

out libations for their good fortune and chanting the battle-hymn;

after which they posted pickets for the night and slumbered well. The

messenger with the news of their success at Thyamia arrived at Corinth

in the night. The citizens of that state with hearty friendship at

once ordered out by herald all the oxen and beasts of burthen, which

they loaded with food and brought to Phlius; and all the while the

fortress was building day by day these convoys of food were duly

despatched.



[15] See "Anab." VII. iii. 46.







III



But on this topic enough, perhaps, has been said to demonstrate the

loyalty of the men of Phlius to their friends, their bravery in war,

and, lastly, their steadfastness in maintaining their alliance in

spite of famine.



B.C. 367-366. It seems to have been somewhere about this date that

Aeneas the Stymphalian,[1] who had become general of the Arcadians,

finding that the state of affairs in Sicyon was intolerable, marched

up with his army into the acropolis. Here he summoned a meeting of the

Sicyonian aristocrats already within the walls, and sent to fetch

those others who had been banished without a decree of the people.[2]

Euphron, taking fright at these proceedings, fled for safety to the

harbour-town of Sicyon. Hither he summoned Pasimelus from Corinth, and

by his instrumentality handed over the harbour to the Lacedaemonians.

Once more reappearing in his old character, he began to pose as an

ally of Sparta. He asserted that his fidelity to Lacedaemon had never

been interrupted; for when the votes were given in the city whether

Sicyon should give up her allegiance to Lacedaemon, "I, with one or

two others," said he, "voted against the measure; but afterwards these

people betrayed me, and in my desire to avenge myself on them I set up

a democracy. At present all traitors to yourselves are banished--I

have seen to that. If only I could get the power into my own hands, I

would go over to you, city and all, at once. All that I can do at

present, I have done; I have surrendered to you this harbour." That

was what Euphron said to his audience there, but of the many who heard

his words, how many really believed his words is by no means evident.

However, since I have begun the story of Euphron, I desire to bring it

to its close.



[1] Is this man the famous writer {o taktikos}, a portion of whose

    works, the "Treatise on Siege Operations," has been preserved

    [recently re-edited by Arnold Hug--"Commentarius Poliorceticus,"

    Lips. Trubner, 1884]? So Casaubon supposed. Cf. "Com. Pol." 27,

    where the writer mentions {paneia} as the Arcadian term for

    "panics." Readers of the "Anabasis" will recollect the tragic end

    of another Aeneas, also of Stymphalus, an Arcadian officer. On the

    official title {strategos} (general), Freeman ("Hist. Fed. Gov."

    204) notes that "at the head of the whole League there seems to

    have been, as in so many other cases, a single Federal general."

    Cf. Diod. xv. 62.



[2] See above, VII. i. 46.



Faction and party strife ran high in Sicyon between the better classes

and the people, when Euphron, getting a body of foreign troops from

Athens, once more obtained his restoration. The city, with the help of

the commons, he was master of, but the Theban governor held the

citadel. Euphron, perceiving that he would never be able to dominate

the state whilst the Thebans held the acropolis, collected money and

set off to Thebes, intending to persuade the Thebans to expel the

aristocrats and once again to hand over the city to himself. But the

former exiles, having got wind of this journey of his, and of the

whole intrigue, set off themselves to Thebes in front of him.[3] When,

however, they saw the terms of intimacy on which he associated with

the Theban authorities, in terror of his succeeding in his mission

some of them staked their lives on the attempt and stabbed Euphron in

the Cadmeia, where the magistrates and senate were seated. The

magistrates, indeed, could not but indict the perpetrators of the deed

before the senate, and spoke as follows:



[3] Or, "on an opposition journey."



"Fellow-citizens, it is our duty to arraign these murderers of

Euphron, the men before you, on the capital charge. Mankind may be

said to fall into two classes: there are the wise and temperate,[4]

who are incapable of any wrong and unhallowed deed; and there are the

base, the bad, who do indeed such things, but try to escape the notice

of their fellows. The men before you are exceptional. They have so far

exceeded all the rest of men in audacity and foul villiany that, in

the very presence of the magistrates and of yourselves, who alone have

the power of life and death, they have taken the law into their own

hands,[5] and have slain this man. But they stand now before the bar

of justice, and they must needs pay the extreme penalty; for, if you

spare them, what visitor will have courage to approach the city? Nay,

what will become of the city itself, if license is to be given to any

one who chooses to murder those who come here, before they have even

explained the object of their visit? It is our part, then, to

prosecute these men as arch-villains and miscreants, whose contempt

for law and justice is only matched by the supreme indifference with

which they treat this city. It is your part, now that you have heard

the charges, to impose upon them that penalty which seems to be the

measure of their guilt."



[4] Lit. "the sound of soul."



[5] Or, "they have been judge and jury both, and executioners to

    boot."



Such were the words of the magistrates. Among the men thus accused,

all save one denied immediate participation in the act. It was not

their hands that had dealt the blow. This one not only confessed the

deed, but made a defence in words somewhat as follows:



"As to treating you with indifference, men of Thebes, that is not

possible for a man who knows that with you lies the power to deal with

him as you list. Ask rather on what I based my confidence when I slew

the man; and be well assured that, in the first place, I based it on

the conviction that I was doing right; next, that your verdict will

also be right and just. I knew assuredly how you dealt with Archias[6]

and Hypates and that company whom you detected in conduct similar to

that of Euphron: you did not stay for formal voting, but at the first

opportunity within your reach you guided the sword of vengeance,

believing that by the verdict of mankind a sentence of death had

already been passed against the conspicuously profane person, the

manifest traitor, and him who lays to his hand to become a tyrant.

See, then, what follows. Euphron was liable on each of these several

counts: he was a conspicuously profane person, who took into his

keeping temples rich in votive offerings of gold and silver, and swept

them bare of their sacred treasures; he was an arrant traitor--for

what treason could be more manifest than Euphron's? First he was the

bosom friend of Lacedaemon, but presently chose you in their stead;

and, after exchange of solemn pledges between yourselves and him, once

more turned round and played the traitor to you, and delivered up the

harbour to your enemies. Lastly, he was most undisguisedly a tyrant,

who made not free men only, but free fellow-citizens his slaves; who

put to death, or drove into exile, or robbed of their wealth and

property, not malefactors, note you, but the mere victims of his whim

and fancy; and these were ever the better folk. Once again restored by

the help of your sworn foes and antagonists, the Athenians, to his

native town of Sicyon, the first thing he did was to take up arms

against the governor from Thebes; but, finding himself powerless to

drive him from the acropolis, he collected money and betook himself

hither. Now, if it were proved that he had mustered armed bands to

attack you, I venture to say, you would have thanked me that I slew

him. What then, when he came furnished with vile moneys, to corrupt

you therewith, to bribe you to make him once more lord and master of

the state? How shall I, who dealt justice upon him, justly suffer

death at your hands? For to be worsted in arms implies injury

certainly, but of the body only: the defeated man is not proved to be

dishonest by his loss of victory. But he who is corrupted by filthy

lucre, contrary to the standard of what is best,[7] is at once injured

and involved in shame.



[6] See above, V. iv. 2.



[7] Or, as we should say, "in violation of conscience."



"Now if he had been your friend, however much he was my national foe,

I do confess it had been scarce honourable of me to have stabbed him

to death in your presence: but why, I should like to ask, should the

man who betrayed you be less your enemy than mine? 'Ah, but,' I hear

some one retort, 'he came of his own accord.' I presume, sir, you mean

that had he chanced to be slain by somebody at a distance from your

state, that somebody would have won your praise; but now, on the

ground that he came back here to work mischief on the top of mischief,

'he had the right to live'![8] In what part of Hellas, tell me, sir,

do Hellenes keep a truce with traitors, double-dyed deserters, and

tyrants? Moreover, I must remind you that you passed a resolution--if

I mistake not, it stands recorded in your parliamentary minutes--that

'renegades are liable to be apprehended[9] in any of the allied

cities.' Now, here is a renegade restoring himself without any common

decree of the allied states: will any one tell me on what ground this

person did not deserve to die? What I maintain, sirs, is that if you

put me to death, by so doing you will be aiding and abetting your

bitterest foe; while, by a verdict sanctioning the justice of my

conduct, you will prove your willingness to protect the interests not

of yourselves only, but of the whole body of your allies."



[8] Or, "he was wrongfully slain."



[9] For this right of extradition see Plut. "Lys." xxvii.



The Thebans on hearing these pleadings decided that Euphron had only

suffered the fate which he deserved. His own countrymen, however,

conveyed away the body with the honours due to a brave and good man,

and buried him in the market-place, where they still pay pious

reverence to his memory as "a founder of the state." So strictly, it

would seem, do the mass of mankind confine the term brave and good to

those who are the benefactors of themselves.







IV



B.C. 366. And so ends the history of Euphron. I return to the point

reached at the commencement of this digression.[1] The Phliasians were

still fortifying Thyamia, and Chares was still with them, when

Oropus[2] was seized by the banished citizens of that place. The

Athenians in consequence despatched an expedition in full force to the

point of danger, and recalled Chares from Thyamia; whereupon the

Sicyonians and the Arcadians seized the opportunity to recapture the

harbour of Sicyon. Meanwhile the Athenians, forced to act single-

handed, with none of their allies to assist them, retired from Oropus,

leaving that town in the hands of the Thebans as a deposit till the

case at issue could be formally adjudicated.



[1] See above, VII. ii. 23; iii. 3; Diod. xv. 76.



[2] See Thuc. viii. 60.



Now Lycomedes[3] had discovered that the Athenians were harbouring a

grievance against her allies, as follows:--They felt it hard that,

while Athens was put to vast trouble on their account, yet in her need

not a man among them stepped forward to render help. Accordingly he

persuaded the assembly of Ten Thousand to open negotiations with

Athens for the purpose of forming an alliance.[4] At first some of the

Athenians were vexed that they, being friends of Lacedaemon, should

become allied to her opponents; but on further reflection they

discovered it was no less desirable for the Lacedaemonians than for

themselves that the Arcadians should become independent of Thebes.

That being so, they were quite ready to accept an Arcadian alliance.

Lycomedes himself was still engaged on this transaction when, taking

his departure from Athens, he died, in a manner which looked like

divine intervention.



[3] See above, VII. i. 23.



[4] This proves that "the Ten Thousand made war and peace in the name

    of all Arkadia"; cf. "Hell." VII. i. 38; Diod. xv. 59. "They

    received and listened to the ambassadors of other Greek states";

    Demosth. "F. L." 220. "They regulated and paid the standing army

    of the Federation"; "Hell." VII. iv. 22, 23; Diod. xv. 62. "They

    sat in judgment on political offenders against the collective

    majority of the Arkadian League"; "Hell." VII. iv. 33; Freeman,

    "Hist. Fed. Gov." 203, note 1.



Out of the many vessels at his service he had chosen the one he liked

best, and by the terms of contract was entitled to land at any point

he might desire; but for some reason, selected the exact spot where a

body of Mantinean exiles lay. Thus he died; but the alliance on which

he had set his heart was already consummated.



Now an argument was advanced by Demotion[5] in the Assembly of Athens,

approving highly of the friendship with the Arcadians, which to his

mind was an excellent thing, but arguing that the generals should be

instructed to see that Corinth was kept safe for the Athenian people.

The Corinthians, hearing this, lost no time in despatching garrisons

of their own large enough to take the place of the Athenian garrisons

at any point where they might have them, with orders to these latter

to retire: "We have no further need of foreign garrisons," they said.

The garrisons did as they were bid.



[5] Of Demotion nothing more, I think, is known. Grote ("H. G." x.

    397) says: "The public debates of the Athenian assembly were not

    favourable to the success of a scheme like that proposed by

    Demotion, to which secrecy was indispensable. Compare another

    scheme" (the attempted surprise of Mitylene, B.C. 428), "divulged

    in like manner, in Thuc. iii. 3."



As soon as the Athenian garrison troops were met together in the city

of Corinth, the Corinthian authorities caused proclamation to be made

inviting all Athenians who felt themselves wronged to enter their

names and cases upon a list, and they would recover their dues. While

things were in this state, Chares arrived at Cenchreae with a fleet.

Learning what had been done, he told them that he had heard there were

designs against the state of Corinth, and had come to render

assistance. The authorities, while thanking him politely for his zeal,

were not any the more ready to admit the vessels into the harbour, but

bade him sail away; and after rendering justice to the infantry

troops, they sent them away likewise. Thus the Athenians were quit of

Corinth. To the Arcadians, to be sure, they were forced by the terms

of their alliance to send an auxiliary force of cavalry, "in case of

any foreign attack upon Arcadia." At the same time they were careful

not to set foot on Laconian soil for the purposes of war.



The Corinthians had begun to realise on how slender a thread their

political existence hung. They were overmastered by land still as

ever, with the further difficulty of Athenian hostility, or quasi-

hostility, now added. They resolved to collect bodies of mercenary

troops, both infantry and horse. At the head of these they were able

at once to guard their state and to inflict much injury on their

neighbouring foes. To Thebes, indeed, they sent ambassadors to

ascertain whether they would have any prospect of peace if they came

to seek it. The Thebans bade them come: "Peace they should have."

Whereupon the Corinthians asked that they might be allowed to visit

their allies; in making peace they would like to share it with those

who cared for it, and would leave those who preferred war to war. This

course also the Thebans sanctioned; and so the Corinthians came to

Lacedaemon and said:



"Men of Lacedaemon, we, your friends, are here to present a petition,

and on this wise. If you can discover any safety for us whilst we

persist in warlike courses, we beg that you will show it us; but if

you recognise the hopelessness of our affairs, we would, in that case,

proffer this alternative: if peace is alike conducive to your

interests, we beg that you would join us in making peace, since there

is no one with whom we would more gladly share our safety than with

you; if, on the other hand, you are persuaded that war is more to your

interest, permit us at any rate to make peace for ourselves. So saved

to-day, perhaps we may live to help you in days to come; whereas, if

to-day we be destroyed, plainly we shall never at any time be

serviceable again."



The Lacedaemonians, on hearing these proposals, counselled the

Corinthians to arrange a peace on their own account; and as for the

rest of their allies, they permitted any who did not care to continue

the war along with them to take a respite and recruit themselves. "As

for ourselves," they said, "we will go on fighting and accept whatever

Heaven has in store for us,"--adding, "never will we submit to be

deprived of our territory of Messene, which we received as an heirloom

from our fathers."[6]



[6] See Isocr. "Or." vi. "Archidamos," S. 70; Jebb, "Att. Or." ii.

    193.



Satisfied with this answer, the Corinthians set off to Thebes in quest

of peace. The Thebans, indeed, asked them to agree on oath, not to

peace only but an alliance; to which they answered: "An alliance

meant, not peace, but merely an exchange of war. If they liked, they

were ready there and then," they repeated, "to establish a just and

equitable peace." And the Thebans, admiring the manner in which,

albeit in danger, they refused to undertake war against their

benefactors, conceded to them and the Phliasians and the rest who came

with them to Thebes, peace on the principle that each should hold

their own territory. On these terms the oaths were taken.



Thereupon the Phliasians, in obedience to the compact, at once retired

from Thyamia; but the Argives, who had taken the oath of peace on

precisely the same terms, finding that they were unable to procure the

continuance of the Phliasian exiles in the Trikaranon as a point held

within the limits of Argos,[7] took over and garrisoned the place,

asserting now that this land was theirs--land which only a little

while before they were ravaging as hostile territory. Further, they

refused to submit the case to arbitration in answer to the challenge

of the Phliasians.



[7] Or, "as a post held by them within the territory of the state."

    The passage is perhaps corrupt.



It was nearly at the same date that the son of Dionysius[8] (his

father, Dionysius the first, being already dead) sent a reinforcement

to Lacedaemon of twelve triremes under Timocrates, who on his arrival

helped the Lacedaemonians to recover Sellasia, and after that exploit

sailed away home.



[8] Concerning Dionysius the first, see above, VII. i. 20 foll. 28.



B.C. 366-365. Not long after this the Eleians seized Lasion,[9] a

place which in old days was theirs, but at present was attached to the

Arcadian league. The Arcadians did not make light of the matter, but

immediately summoned their troops and rallied to the rescue. Counter-

reliefs came also on the side of Elis--their Three Hundred, and again

their Four Hundred.[10] The Eleians lay encamped during the day face

to face with the invader, but on a somewhat more level position. The

Arcadians were thereby induced under cover of night to mount on to the

summit of the hill overhanging the Eleians, and at day-dawn they began

their descent upon the enemy. The Eleians soon caught sight of the

enemy advancing from the vantage ground above them, many times their

number; but a sense of shame forbade retreat at such a distance.

Presently they came to close quarters; there was a hand-to-hand

encounter; the Eleians turned and fled; and in retiring down the

difficult ground lost many men and many arms.



[9] See above, VII. i. 26; Freeman, "Hist. Fed. Gov." p. 201.



[10] From the sequel it would appear that the former were a picked

    corps of infantry and the latter of cavalry. See Thuc. ii. 25;

    Busolt, op. cit. p. 175 foll.



Flushed with this achievement the Arcadians began marching on the

cities of the Acroreia,[11] which, with the exception of Thraustus,

they captured, and so reached Olympia. There they made an entrenched

camp on the hill of Kronos, established a garrison, and held control

over the Olympian hill-country. Margana also, by help of a party

inside who gave it up, next fell into their hands.



[11] The mountainous district of Elis on the borders of Arcadia,  in

    which the rivers Peneius and Ladon take their rise; see "Dict. of

    Anct. Geog." s.v.; above, III. ii. 30, IV. ii. 16. Thraustus was

    one of the four chief townships of the district. For Margana, see

    above, III. ii. 25, 30, IV. ii. 16, VI. v. 2.



These successive advantages gained by their opponents reacted on the

Eleians, and threw them altogether into despair. Meanwhile the

Arcadians were steadily advancing upon their capital.[12] At length

they arrived, and penetrated into the market-place. Here, however, the

cavalry and the rest of the Eleians made a stand, drove the enemy out

with some loss, and set up a trophy.



[12] I.e. Elis.



It should be mentioned that the city of Elis had previously been in a

state of disruption. The party of Charopus, Thrasonidas and Argeius

were for converting the state into a democracy; the party of Eualcas,

Hippias, and Stratolas[13] were for oligarchy. When the Arcadians,

backed by a large force, appeared as allies of those who favoured a

democratic constitution, the party of Charopus were at once

emboldened; and, having obtained the promise of assistance from the

Arcadians, they seized the acropolis. The Knights and the Three

Hundred did not hesitate, but at once marched up and dislodged them;

with the result that about four hundred citizens, with Argeius and

Charopus, were banished. Not long afterwards these exiles, with the

help of some Arcadians, seized and occupied Pylus;[14] where many of

the commons withdrew from the capital to join them, attracted not only

by the beauty of the position, but by the great power of the

Arcadians, in alliance with them.



[13] See below, VII. iv. 31; Busolt, op. cit. p. 175.



[14] Pylus, a town in "hollow" Elis, upon the mountain road from Elis

    to Olympia, at the place where the Ladon flows into the Peneius

    (Paus. VI. xxii. 5), near the modern village of Agrapidokhori.--

    Baedeker, "Greece," p. 320. See Busolt, p. 179.



There was subsequently another invasion of the territory of the

Eleians on the part of the Arcadians, who were influenced by the

representations of the exiles that the city would come over to them.

But the attempt proved abortive. The Achaeans, who had now become

friends with the Eleians, kept firm guard on the capital, so that the

Arcadians had to retire without further exploit than that of ravaging

the country. Immediately, however, on marching out of Eleian territory

they were informed that the men of Pellene were in Elis; whereupon

they executed a marvellously long night march and seized the Pellenian

township of Olurus[15] (the Pellenians at the date in question having

already reverted to their old alliance with Lacedaemon). And now the

men of Pellene, in their turn getting wind of what had happened at

Olurus, made their way round as best they could, and got into their

own city of Pellene; after which there was nothing for it but to carry

on war with the Arcadians in Olurus and the whole body of their own

commons; and in spite of their small numbers they did not cease till

they had reduced Olurus by siege.



[15] This fortress (placed by Leake at modern Xylokastro) lay at the

    entrance of the gorge of the Sys, leading from the Aigialos or

    coast-land into the territory of Pellene, which itself lay about

    sixty stades from the sea at modern Zougra. For the part played by

    Pellene as one of the twelve Achaean states at this period, see

    above.



B.C. 365.[16] The Arcadians were presently engaged on another campaign

against Elis. While they were encamped between Cyllene[17] and the

capital the Eleians attacked them, but the Arcadians made a stand and

won the battle. Andromachus, the Eleian cavalry general, who was

regarded as responsible for the engagement, made an end of himself;

and the rest withdrew into the city. This battle cost the life also of

another there present--the Spartan Socleides; since, it will be

understood, the Lacedaemonians had by this time become allies of the

Eleians. Consequently the Eleians, being sore pressed on their own

territory, sent an embassy and begged the Lacedaemonians to organise

an expedition against the Arcadians. They were persuaded that in this

way they would best arrest the progress of the Arcadians, who would

thus be placed between the two foes. In accordance with this

suggestion Archidamus marched out with a body of the city troops and

seized Cromnus.[18] Here he left a garrison--three out of the twelve

regiments[19]--and so withdrew homewards. The Arcadians had just ended

their Eleian campaign, and, without disbanding their levies, hastened

to the rescue, surrounded Cromnus with a double line of trenches, and

having so secured their position, proceeded to lay seige to those

inside the place. The city of Lacedaemon, annoyed at the siege of

their citizens, sent out an army, again under Archidamus, who, when he

had come, set about ravaging Arcadia to the best of his power, as also

the Sciritid, and did all he could to draw off, if possible, the

besieging army. The Arcadians, for all that, were not one whit the

more to be stirred: they seemed callous to all his proceedings.



[16] See Grote, "H. G." x. 429 foll.; al. B.C. 364.



[17] The port town of Elis.



[18] Cromnus, a township near Megalopolis. See Callisthenes, ap.

    Athen. 10, p. 452 A. See Schneider's note ad loc.



[19] Lit. "lochi." See Arnold's note to Thuc. v. 68; below, VII. v.

    10.



Presently espying a certain rising ground, across which the Arcadians

had drawn their outer line of circumvallation, Archidamus proposed to

himself to take it. If he were once in command of that knoll, the

besiegers at its foot would be forced to retire. Accordingly he set

about leading a body of troops round to the point in question, and

during this movement the light infantry in advance of Archidamus,

advancing at the double, caught sight of the Arcadian Eparitoi[20]

outside the stockade and attacked them, while the cavalry made an

attempt to enforce their attack simultaneously. The Arcadians did not

swerve: in compact order they waited impassively. The Lacedaemonians

charged a second time: a second time they swerved not, but on the

contrary began advancing. Then, as the hoarse roar and shouting

deepened, Archidamus himself advanced in support of his troops. To do

so he turned aside along the carriage-road leading to Cromnus, and

moved onward in column two abreast,[21] which was his natural order.

When they came into close proximity to one another--Archidamus's

troops in column, seeing they were marching along a road; the

Arcadians in compact order with shields interlinked--at this

conjuncture the Lacedaemonians were not able to hold out for any

length of time against the numbers of the Arcadians. Before long

Archidamus had received a wound which pierced through his thigh,

whilst death was busy with those who fought in front of him,

Polyaenidas and Chilon, who was wedded to the sister of Archidamus,

included. The whole of these, numbering no less than thirty, perished

in this action. Presently, falling back along the road, they emerged

into the open ground, and now with a sense of relief the

Lacedaemonians got themselves into battle order, facing the foe. The

Arcadians, without altering their position, stood in compact line, and

though falling short in actual numbers, were in far better heart--the

moral result of an attack on a retreating enemy and the severe loss

inflicted on him. The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, were sorely

down-hearted: Archidamus lay wounded before their eyes; in their ears

rang the names of those who had died, the fallen being not only brave

men, but, one may say, the flower of Spartan chivalry. The two armies

were now close together, when one of the older men lifted up his voice

and cried: "Why need we fight, sirs? Why not rather make truce and

part friends?" Joyously the words fell on the ears of either host, and

they made a truce. The Lacedaemonians picked up their dead and

retired; the Arcadians withdrew to the point where their advance

originally began, and set up a trophy of victory.



[20] So the troops of the Arcadian Federation were named. Diodorus

    (xv. 62) calls them "the select troops," {tous kaloumenous

    epilektous}.



[21] See above, III. i. 22.



Now, as the Arcadians lay at Cromnus, the Eleians from the capital,

advancing in the first instance upon Pylus, fell in with the men of

that place, who had been beaten back from Thalamae.[22] Galloping

along the road, the cavalry of the Eleians, when they caught sight of

them, did not hesitate, but dashed at them at once, and put some to

the sword, while others of them fled for safety to a rising knoll. Ere

long the Eleian infantry arrived, and succeeded in dislodging this

remnant on the hillock also; some they slew, and others, nearly two

hundred in number, they took alive, all of whom where either sold, if

foreigners, or, if Eleian exiles, put to death. After this the Eleians

captured the men of Pylus and the place itself, as no one came to

their rescue, and recovered the Marganians.



[22] A strong fortress in an unfrequented situation, defended by

    narrow passes (Leake, "Morea," ii. 204); it lay probably in the

    rocky recesses of Mount Scollis (modern Santameri), on the

    frontier of Achaea, near the modern village of Santameri. See

    Polyb. iv. 75. See Busolt, op. cit. p. 179.



The Lacedaemonians presently made a second attempt on Cromnus by a

night attack, got possession of the part of the palisading facing the

Argives, and at once began summoning their besieged fellow-citizens to

come out. Out accordingly came all who happened to be within easy

distance, and who took time by the forelock. The rest were not quick

enough; a strong Arcadian reinforcement cut them off, and they

remained shut up inside, and were eventually taken prisoners and

distributed. One portion of them fell to the lot of the Argives, one

to the Thebans,[23] one to the Arcadians, and one to the Messenians.

The whole number taken, whether true-born Spartans or Perioeci,

amounted to more than one hundred.



[23] "The Thebans must have been soldiers in garrison at Tegea,

    Megalopolis, or Messene."--Grote, "H. G." x. 433.



B.C. 364. And now that the Arcadians had leisure on the side of

Cromnus, they were again able to occupy themselves with the Eleians,

and to keep Olympia still more strongly garrisoned. In anticipation of

the approaching Olympic year,[24] they began preparations to celebrate

the Olympian games in conjunction with the men of Pisa, who claim to

be the original presidents of the Temple.[25] Now, when the month of

the Olympic Festival--and not the month only, but the very days,

during which the solemn assembly is wont to meet, were come, the

Eleians, in pursuance of preparations and invitations to the Achaeans,

of which they made no secret, at length proceeded to march along the

road to Olympia. The Arcadians had never imagined that they would

really attack them; and they were themselves just now engaged with the

men of Pisa in carrying out the details of the solemn assembly. They

had already completed the chariot-race, and the foot-race of the

pentathlon.[26] The competitors entitled to enter for the wrestling

match had left the racecourse, and were getting through their bouts in

the space between the racecourse and the great altar.



[24] I.e. "Ol. 104. 1" (July B.C. 364).



[25] For this claim on the part of the Pisatans (as the old

    inhabitants), see above, III. ii. 31; Paus. VI. xxii. 2; Diod. xv.

    78; Busolt, op. cit. p. 154.



[26] As to the pentathlon, see above, IV. vii. 5. Whether the

    preceding {ippodromia} was, at this date, a horse or chariot race,

    or both, I am unable to say.



It must be understood that the Eleians under arms were already close

at hand within the sacred enclosure.[27] The Arcadians, without

advancing farther to meet them, drew up their troops on the river

Cladaus, which flows past the Altis and discharges itself into the

Alpheus. Their allies, consisting of two hundred Argive hoplites and

about four hundred Athenian cavalry, were there to support them.

Presently the Eleians formed into line on the opposite side of the

stream, and, having sacrificed, at once began advancing. Though

heretofore in matters of war despised by Arcadians and Argives, by

Achaeans and Athenians alike, still on this day they led the van of

the allied force like the bravest of the brave. Coming into collision

with the Arcadians first, they at once put them to flight, and next

receiving the attack of the Argive supports, mastered these also. Then

having pursued them into the space between the senate-house, the

temple of Hestia, and the theatre thereto adjoining, they still kept

up the fighting as fiercely as ever, pushing the retreating foe

towards the great altar. But now being exposed to missiles from the

porticoes and the senate-house and the great temple,[28] while

battling with their opponents on the level, some of the Eleians were

slain, and amongst others the commander of the Three Hundred himself,

Stratolas. At this state of the proceedings they retired to their

camp.



[27] "The {temenos} must here be distinguished from the Altis, as

    meaning the entire breadth of consecrated ground at Olympia, of

    which the Altis formed a smaller interior portion enclosed with a

    wall. The Eleians entered into a {temenos} before they crossed the

    river Kladeus, which flowed through the {temenos}, but alongside

    the Altis. The tomb of Oenomaus, which was doubtless included in

    the {temenos}, was on the right bank of the Kladeus (Paus. VI.

    xxi. 3); while the Altis was on the left bank of the river."--

    Grote, "H. G." x. 438, note 1. For the position of the Altis

    (Paus. V. x. 1) and several of the buildings here mentioned, and

    the topography of Olympia in general, see Baedeker's "Greece," p.

    322 foll.; and Dorpfeld's Plan ("Olympia und Umgegend," Berlin,

    1882), there reproduced.



[28] Or, "from the porticoes of the senate-house and the great

    temple."



The Arcadians and those with them were so terrified at the thought of

the coming day that they gave themselves neither respite nor repose

that night, but fell to chopping up the carefully-compacted booths and

constructing them into palisades; so that when the Eleians did again

advance the next day and saw the strength of the barriers and the

number mounted on the temples, they withdrew to their city. They had

proved themselves to be warriors of such mettle as a god indeed by the

breath of his spirit may raise up and bring to perfection in a single

day, but into which it were impossible for mortal men to convert a

coward even in a lifetime.



B.C. 363. The employment of the sacred treasures of the temple by the

Arcadian magistrates[29] as a means of maintaining the Eparitoi[30]

aroused protest. The Mantineans were the first to pass a resolution

forbidding such use of the sacred property. They set the example

themselves of providing the necessary quota for the Troop in question

from their state exchequer, and this sum they sent to the federal

government. The latter, affirming that the Mantineans were undermining

the Arcadian league, retaliated by citing their leading statesmen to

appear before the assembly of Ten Thousand; and on their refusal to

obey the summons, passed sentence upon them, and sent the Eparitoi to

apprehend them as convicted persons. The Mantineans, however, closed

their gates, and would not admit the Troop within their walls. Their

example was speedily followed: others among the Ten Thousand began to

protest against the enormity of so applying the sacred treasures; it

was doubly wrong to leave as a perpetual heirloom to their children

the imputation of a crime so heinous against the gods. But no sooner

was a resolution passed in the general assembly[31] forbidding the use

of the sacred moneys for profane purposes than those (members of the

league) who could not have afforded to serve as Eparitoi without pay

began speedily to melt away; while those of more independent means,

with mutual encouragement, began to enrol themselves in the ranks of

the Eparitoi--the feeling being that they ought not to be a mere tool

in the hands of the corps, but rather that the corps itself should be

their instrument. Those members of the government who had manipulated

the sacred money soon saw that when they came to render an account of

their stewardship, in all likelihood they would lose their heads. They

therefore sent an embassy to Thebes, with instructions to the Theban

authorities warning them that, if they did not open a campaign, the

Arcadians would in all probability again veer round to Lacedaemon.



[29] See above, VII. i. 24. "Were these magistrates, or merely popular

    leaders?"--Freeman, "Hist. Fed. Gov." p. 203, note 3.



[30] Or, "Select Troop." See above.



[31] "The common formula for a Greek confederation, {to koinon ton

    'Arkadon}, is used as an equivalent of {oi mupioi}" (here and

    below, SS. 35, 38)--Freeman, op. cit. 202, note 4.



The Thebans, therefore, began making preparations for opening a

campaign, but the party who consulted the best interests of

Peloponnese[32] persuaded the general assembly of the Arcadians to

send an embassy and tell the Thebans not to advance with an army into

Arcadia, unless they sent for them; and whilst this was the language

they addressed to Thebes, they reasoned among themselves that they

could dispense with war altogether. The presidency over the temple of

Zeus, they were persuaded, they might easily dispense with; indeed, it

would at once be a more upright and a holier proceeding on their parts

to give it back, and with such conduct the god, they thought, might be

better pleased. As these were also the views and wishes of the

Eleians, both parties agreed to make peace, and a truce was

established.



[32] See below, VII. v. 1, {oi kedouenoi tes Peloponnesou}. I regard

    these phrases as self-laudatory political catchwords.



B.C. 362. The oaths were ratified; and amongst those who swore to them

were included not only the parties immediately concerned, but the men

of Tegea, and the Theban general himself, who was inside Tegea with

three hundred heavy infantry of the Boeotians. Under these

circumstances the Arcadians in Tegea remained behind feasting and

keeping holy day, with outpouring of libations and songs of victory,

to celebrate the establishment of peace. Here was an opportunity for

the Theban and those of the government who regarded the forthcoming

inquiry with apprehension. Aided by the Boeotians and those of the

Eparitoi who shared their sentiments, they first closed the gates of

the fortress of Tegea, and then set about sending to the various

quarters to apprehend those of the better class. But, inasmuch as

there were Arcadians present from all the cities, and there was a

general desire for peace, those apprehended must needs be many. So

much so, that the prison-house was eventually full to overflowing, and

the town-hall was full also. Besides the number lodged in prison, a

number had escaped by leaping down the walls, and there were others

who were suffered to pass through the gates (a laxity easily

explained, since no one, excepting those who were anticipating their

own downfall, cherished any wrathful feeling against anybody). But

what was a source of still graver perplexity to the Theban commander

and those acting with him--of the Mantineans, the very people whom

they had set their hearts on catching, they had got but very few.

Nearly all of them, owing to the proximity of their city, had, in

fact, betaken themselves home. Now, when day came and the Mantineans

learned what had happened, they immediately sent and forewarned the

other Arcadian states to be ready in arms, and to guard the passes;

and they set the example themselves by so doing. They sent at the same

time to Tegea and demanded the release of all Mantineans there

detained. With regard to the rest of the Arcadians they further

claimed that no one should be imprisoned or put to death without

trial. If any one had any accusation to bring against any, than by the

mouth of their messengers there present they gave notice that the

state of Mantinea was ready to offer bail, "Verily and indeed to

produce before the general assembly of the Arcadians all who might be

summoned into court." The Theban accordingly, on hearing this, was at

a loss what to make of the affair, and released his prisoners. Next

day, summoning a congress of all the Arcadians who chose to come, he

explained, with some show of apology, that he had been altogether

deceived; he had heard, he said, that "the Lacedaemonians were under

arms on the frontier, and that some of the Arcadians were about to

betray Tegea into their hands." His auditors acquitted him for the

moment, albeit they knew that as touching themselves he was lying.

They sent, however, an embassy to Thebes and there accused him as

deserving of death. Epaminondas (who was at that time the general at

the head of the war department) is reported to have maintained that

the Theban commander had acted far more rightly when he seized than

when he let go the prisoners. "Thanks to you," he argued, "we have

been brought into a state of war, and then you, without our advice or

opinion asked, make peace on your own account; would it not be

reasonable to retort upon you the charge of treason in such conduct?

Anyhow, be assured," he added, "we shall bring an army into Arcadia,

and along with those who share our views carry on the war which we

have undertaken."







V



B.C. 362. This answer was duly reported to the general assembly of the

Arcadians, and throughout the several states of the league.

Consequently the Mantineans, along with those of the Arcadians who had

the interests of Peloponnesus at heart, as also the Eleians and the

Achaeans, came to the conclusion that the policy of the Thebans was

plain. They wished Peloponnesus to be reduced to such an extremity of

weakness that it might fall an easy prey into their hands who were

minded to enslave it. "Why else," they asked, "should they wish us to

fight, except that we may tear each other to pieces, and both sides be

driven to look to them for support? or why, when we tell them that we

have no need of them at present, do they insist on preparing for a

foreign campaign? Is it not plain that these preparations are for an

expedition which will do us some mischief?"



In this mood they sent to Athens,[1] calling on the Athenians for

military aid. Ambassadors also went to Lacedaemon on behalf of the

Eparitoi, summoning the Lacedaemonians, if they wished to give a

helping hand, to put a stop to the proceedings of any power

approaching to enslave Peloponnesus. As regards the headship, they

came to an arrangement at once, on the principle that each of the

allied states should exercise the generalship within its own

territory.



[1] For a treaty of alliance between Athens, the Arkadians, Achaeans,

    Eleians, and Phliasians, immediately before Mantinea, B.C. 362,

    {epi Molonos arkhontos}, see Hicks, 94; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. p.

    405. It is preserved on a stele ("broken at bottom; but the top is

    surmounted by a relief representing Zeus enthroned, with a

    thunderbolt; a female figure [= the {Summakhia}?] approaches

    lifting her veil, while Athena stands by") now standing among the

    sculptures from the Asklepieion on the Acropolis at Athens. See

    Milchhofer, p. 47, no. 7, "Die Museum," Athens, 1881. For the

    date, see Demosth. "c. Polycl." 1207.



While these matters were in progress, Epaminondas was prosecuting his

march at the head of all the Boeotians, with the Euboeans, and a large

body of Thessalians, furnished both by Alexander[2] and by his

opponents. The Phocians were not represented. Their special agreement

only required them to render assistance in case of an attack on

Thebes; to assist in a hostile expedition against others was not in

the bond. Epaminondas, however, reflected that inside Peloponnesus

itself they might count upon the Argives and the Messenians, with that

section of the Arcadians which shared their views. These latter were

the men of Tegea and Megalopolis, of Asea and Pallantium, with any

townships which owing to their small size or their position in the

midst of these larger cities were forced to follow their lead.



[2] For Alexander of Pherae, see above, VI. iv. 34. In B.C. 363 the

    Thebans had sent an army under Pelopidas into Thessaly to assist

    their allies among the Thessalians with the Phthiot Achaeans and

    the Magnetes against Alexander. At Kynos Kephelae Alexander was

    defeated, but Pelopidas was slain (see Grote, "H. G." x. 420

    foll.). "His death, as it brought grief, so likewise it produced

    advantage to the allies; for the Thebans, as soon as they heard of

    his fall, delayed not their revenge, but presently sent seven

    thousand foot and seven hundred horse, under the command of

    Malcitas and Diogiton. And they, finding Alexander weak and

    without forces, compelled him to restore the cities he had taken,

    to withdraw his garrisons from the Magnesians and Achaeans of

    Phthiotos and swear to assist the Thebans against whatsoever

    enemies they should require."--Plut. "Pelop." 35 (Clough, ii.

    236).



Epaminondas advanced with rapid strides; but on reaching Nemea he

slackened speed, hoping to catch the Athenians as they passed, and

reflecting on the magnitude of such an achievement, whether in

stimulating the courage of his own allies, or in plunging his foes

into despondency; since, to state the matter concisely, any blow to

Athens would be a gain to Thebes. But during his pause at Nemea those

who shared the opposite policy had time to converge on Mantinea.

Presently the news reached Epaminondas that the Athenians had

abandoned the idea of marching by land, and were preparing to bring

their supports to Arcadia by sea through Lacedaemon. This being so, he

abandoned his base of Nemea and pushed on to Tegea.



That the strategy of the Theban general was fortunate I will not

pretend to assert, but in the particular combination of prudence and

daring which stamps these exploits, I look upon him as consummate. In

the first place, I cannot but admire the sagacity which led him to

form his camp within the walls of Tegea, where he was in greater

security that he would have been if entrenched outside, and where his

future movements were more completely concealed from the enemy. Again,

the means to collect material and furnish himself with other

necessaries were readier to his hand inside the city; while, thirdly,

he was able to keep an eye on the movements of his opponents marching

outside, and to watch their successful dispositions as well as their

mistakes. More than this: in spite of his sense of superiority to his

antagonists, over and over again, when he saw them gaining some

advantage in position, he refused to be drawn out to attack them. It

was only when he saw plainly that no city was going to give him its

adhesion, and that time was slipping by, that he made up his mind that

a blow must be struck, failing which, he had nothing to expect save a

vast ingloriousness, in place of his former fame.[3] He had

ascertained that his antagonists held a strong position round

Mantinea, and that they had sent to fetch Agesilaus and the whole

Lacedaemonian army. He was further aware that Agesilaus had commenced

his advance and was already at Pellene.[4] Accordingly he passed the

word of command[5] to his troops to take their evening meal, put

himself at their head and advanced straight upon Sparta. Had it not

been for the arrival (by some providential chance) of a Cretan, who

brought the news to Agesilaus of the enemy's advance, he would have

captured the city of Sparta like a nest of young birds absolutely

bereft of its natural defenders. As it was, Agesilaus, being

forewarned, had time to return to the city before the Thebans came,

and here the Spartans made distribution of their scanty force and

maintained watch and ward, albeit few enough in numbers, since the

whole of their cavalry were away in Arcadia, and so was their foreign

brigade, and so were three out of their twelve regiments.[6]



[3] Or, "dull obscurity in place of renown."



[4] Pellene (or Pellana), a town of Laconia on the Eurotas, and on the

    road from Sparta to Arcadia; in fact the frontier fortress on the

    Eurotas, as Sellasia on the Oenus; "Dict. of Anct. Geog." s.v.;

    see Paus. iii. 20, S. 2; Strab. viii. 386; Polyb. iv. 81, xvi. 37;

    Plut. "Agis," 8; Leake, "Morea," iii. 14 foll.



[5] Cf. "Hipparch." iv. 9.



[6] Lit. "lochi." See above, VII. iv. 20; "Pol. Lac." xi. 4.



Arrived within the city of Sparta,[7] Epaminondas abstained from

gaining an entry at a point where his troops would have to fight on

level ground and under attack from the houses above; where also their

large numbers would give them no superiority over the small numbers of

the foemen. But, singling out a position which he conceived would give

him the advantage, he occupied it and began his advance against the

city upon a downward instead of an upward incline.



[7] Grote ("H. G." x. 455) says: "Though he crossed the Eurotas and

    actually entered into the city of Sparta," as the words {epei de

    egeneto en te polei ton Spartiaton} certainly seem to me to imply.

    Others interpret "in the close neighbourhood of."



With regard to what subsequently took place, two possible explanations

suggest themselves: either it was miraculous, or it may be maintained

that there is no resisting the fury of desperation. Archidamus,

advancing at the head of but a hundred men, and crossing the one thing

which might have been expected to form an obstacle to the enemy,[8]

began marching uphill against his antagonists. At this crisis these

fire-breathing warriors, these victorious heroes of Leuctra,[9] with

their superiority at every point, aided, moreover, by the advantage of

their position, did not withstand the attack of Archidamus and those

with him, but swerved in flight.



[8] Or, "to serve as his defence"; or, "the one obstacle to his

    progress," i.e. Archidamus's. It was a miraculous thing that the

    Thebans did not stop him.



[9] See Mahaffy, "Hist. Gk. Lit." vol. ii. p. 268, 1st ed. See above,

    "Hell." VI. iv. 24; Diod. xv. 39, 56.



The vanguard of Epaminondas's troops were cut down; when, however,

flushed with the glory of their victory, the citizens followed up

their pursuit beyond the right point, they in turn were cut down--so

plainly was the demarking line of victory drawn by the finger of God.

So then Archidamus set up a trophy to note the limit of his success,

and gave back those who had there fallen of the enemy under a truce.

Epaminondas, on his side, reflecting that the Arcadians must already

be hastening to the relief of Lacedaemon, and being unwilling to

engage them in conjunction with the whole of the Lacedaemonian force,

especially now that the star of Sparta's fortune shone, whilst theirs

had suffered some eclipse, turned and marched back the way he came

with all speed possible into Tegea. There he gave his heavy infantry

pause and refreshment, but his cavalry he sent on to Mantinea; he

begged them to "have courage and hold on," instructing them that in

all likelihood they would find the flocks and herds of the Mantineans

and the entire population itself outside their walls, especially as it

was the moment for carrying the corn. So they set off.



The Athenian cavalry, started from Eleusis, had made their evening

meal at the Isthmus, and passing through Cleonae, as chance befell,

had arrived at Mantinea and had encamped within the walls in the

houses. As soon as the enemy were seen galloping up with evidently

hostile intent, the Mantineans fell to praying the Athenian knights to

lend them all the succour they could, and they showed them all their

cattle outside, and all their labourers, and among them were many

children and graybeards who were free-born citizens. The Athenians

were touched by this appeal, and, though they had not yet broken fast,

neither the men themselves nor their horses, went out eagerly to the

rescue. And here we must needs pause to admire the valour of these men

also. The enemy whom they had to cope with far outnumbered them, as

was plain to see, and the former misadventure of the cavalry in

Corinth was not forgotten.[10] But none of these things entered into

their calculations now--nor yet the fact that they were on the point

of engaging Thebans and Thessalians, the finest cavalry in the world

by all repute. The only thing they thought of was the shame and the

dishonour, if, being there, they did not lend a helping hand to their

allies. In this mood, so soon as they caught sight of the enemy, they

fell with a crash upon him in passionate longing to recover the old

ancestral glory. Nor did they fight in vain--the blows they struck

enabled the Mantineans to recover all their property outside, but

among those who dealt them died some brave heroes;[11] brave heroes

also, it is evident, were those whom they slew, since on either side

the weapons wielded were not so short but that they could lunge at one

another with effect. The dead bodies of their own men they refused to

abandon; and there were some of the enemy's slain whom they restored

to him under a flag of truce.



[10] Or, "and in Corinth an untoward incident had been experienced by

    the cavalry." See Grote, "H. G." x. 458, note 2. Possibly in

    reference to "Hell." VI. v. 51, 52.



[11] Probably Xenophon's own son Gryllus was among them.



The thoughts now working in the mind of Epaminondas were such as

these: that within a few days he would be forced to retire, as the

period of the campaign was drawing to a close; if it ended in his

leaving in the lurch those allies whom he came out to assist, they

would be besieged by their antagonists. What a blow would that be to

his own fair fame, already somewhat tarnished! Had he not been

defeated in Lacedaemon, with a large body of heavy infantry, by a

handful of men? defeated again at Mantinea, in the cavalry engagement,

and himself the main cause finally of a coalition between five great

powers--that is to say, the Lacedaemonians, the Arcadians, the

Achaeans, the Eleians, and the Athenians? On all grounds it seemed to

him impossible to steal past without a battle. And the more so as he

computed the alternatives of victory or death. If the former were his

fortune, it would resolve all his perplexities; if death, his end

would be noble. How glorious a thing to die in the endeavour to leave

behind him, as his last legacy to his fatherland, the empire of

Peloponnesus! That such thoughts should pass through his brain strikes

me as by no means wonderful, as these are thoughts distinctive to all

men of high ambition. Far more wonderful to my mind was the pitch of

perfection to which he had brought his army. There was no labour which

his troops would shrink from, either by night or by day; there was no

danger they would flinch from; and, with the scantiest provisions,

their discipline never failed them.



And so, when he gave his last orders to them to prepare for impending

battle, they obeyed with alacrity. He gave the word; the cavalry fell

to whitening their helmets, the heavy infantry of the Arcadians began

inscribing their clubs as the crest on their shields,[12] as though

they were Thebans, and all were engaged in sharpening their lances and

swords and polishing their heavy shields. When the preparations were

complete and he had led them out, his next movement is worthy of

attention. First, as was natural, he paid heed to their formation, and

in so doing seemed to give clear evidence that he intended battle; but

no sooner was the army drawn up in the formation which he preferred,

than he advanced, not by the shortest route to meet the enemy, but

towards the westward-lying mountains which face Tegea, and by this

movement created in the enemy an expectation that he would not do

battle on that day. In keeping with this expectation, as soon as he

arrived at the mountain-region, he extended his phalanx in long line

and piled arms under the high cliffs; and to all appearance he was

there encamping. The effect of this manouvre on the enemy in general

was to relax the prepared bent of their souls for battle, and to

weaken their tactical arrangements. Presently, however, wheeling his

regiments (which were marching in column) to the front, with the

effect of strengthening the beak-like[13] attack which he proposed to

lead himself, at the same instant he gave the order, "Shoulder arms,

forward," and led the way, the troops following.



[12] Grote ("H. G." x. 463) has another interpretation.



[13] Or, "the wedge-like attack of his own division"; see Grote, "H.

    G." x. 469 foll. I do not, however, think that the attacking

    column was actually wedge-shaped like the "acies cuneata" of the

    Romans. It was the unusual depth of the column which gave it the

    force of an ironclad's ram. Cf. "Cyrop." II. iv. for {eis

    metopon}.



When the enemy saw them so unexpectedly approaching, not one of them

was able to maintain tranquility: some began running to their

divisions, some fell into line, some might be seen bitting and

bridling their horses, some donning their cuirasses, and one and all

were like men about to receive rather than to inflict a blow. He, the

while, with steady impetus pushed forward his armament, like a ship-

of-war prow forward. Wherever he brought his solid wedge to bear, he

meant to cleave through the opposing mass, and crumble his adversary's

host to pieces. With this design he prepared to throw the brunt of the

fighting on the strongest half of his army, while he kept the weaker

portion of it in the background, knowing certainly that if worsted it

would only cause discouragement to his own division and add force to

the foe. The cavalry on the side of his opponents were disposed like

an ordinary phalanx of heavy infantry, regular in depth and

unsupported by foot-soldiers interspersed among the horses.[14]

Epaminondas again differed in strengthening the attacking point of his

cavalry, besides which he interspersed footmen between their lines in

the belief that, when he had once cut through the cavalry, he would

have wrested victory from the antagonist along his whole line; so hard

is it to find troops who will care to keep their own ground when once

they see any of their own side flying. Lastly, to prevent any attempt

on the part of the Athenians, who were on the enemy's left wing, to

bring up their reliefs in support of the portion next them, he posted

bodies of cavalry and heavy infantry on certain hillocks in front of

them, intending to create in their minds an apprehension that, in case

they offered such assistance, they would be attacked on their own rear

by these detachments. Such was the plan of encounter which he formed

and executed; nor was he cheated in his hopes. He had so much the

mastery at his point of attack that he caused the whole of the enemy's

troops to take flight.



[14] See Rustow and Kochly, p. 176; and for the {amippoi}

    Harpocration, s.v.; Pollus, i. 131; "Hipparch." v. 13; Thuc. v.

    58; Herod. vii. 158; Caes. "B. G." i. 48; "B. Civ." iii. 84.



But after he himself had fallen, the rest of the Thebans were not able

any longer to turn their victory rightly to account. Though the main

battle line of their opponents had given way, not a single man

afterwards did the victorious hoplites slay, not an inch forward did

they advance from the ground on which the collision took place. Though

the cavalry had fled before them, there was no pursuit; not a man,

horseman or hoplite, did the conquering cavalry cut down; but, like

men who have suffered a defeat, as if panic-stricken[15] they slipped

back through the ranks of the fleeing foemen. Only the footmen

fighting amongst the cavalry and the light infantry, who had together

shared in the victory of the cavalry, found their way round to the

left wing as masters of the field, but it cost them dear; here they

encountered the Athenians, and most of them were cut down.



[15] Or, "they timorously slipped back."



The effective result of these achievements was the very opposite of

that which the world at large anticipated. Here, where well-nigh the

whole of Hellas was met together in one field, and the combatants

stood rank against rank confronted, there was no one doubted that, in

the event of battle, the conquerors would this day rule; and that

those who lost would be their subjects. But God so ordered it that

both belligerents alike set up trophies as claiming victory, and

neither interfered with the other in the act. Both parties alike gave

back their enemy's dead under a truce, and in right of victory; both

alike, in symbol of defeat, under a truce took back their dead. And

though both claimed to have won the day, neither could show that he

had thereby gained any accession of territory, or state, or empire, or

was better situated than before the battle. Uncertainty and confusion,

indeed, had gained ground, being tenfold greater throughout the length

and breadth of Hellas after the battle than before.



At this point I lay aside my pen: the sequel of the story may haply

commend itself[16] to another.



[16] Or, "win the attention of some other writer."











End 