


Natural Value

	by Friedrich Wieser

	translated by Christian A. Malloch

English Edition, 1893. German Edition, 1889.




Author's Preface


    It has been said that one finds in Adam Smith nearly all the
explanations of value which have ever been attempted. What is
certain is that, in his explanation, Adam Smith has put together
two views that contradict each other. To put it shortly: he gives
two theories, one philosophical, the other empirical. In the
first he tries to make clear what should be thought of as the
characteristic attribute of value; what it is we ascribe to some
things and deny to others that, to all appearance, are entirely
the same; what it is of which we ascribe a great deal to certain
things and very little to other things which, measured by outside
standards, seem infinitely superior. In this view value is an
attribute per se, coinciding with no other that we know, and,
least of all, with the usefulness of things. In carrying out this
attempt Adam Smith first of all abstracts from the complicated
circumstances of ordinary economic life, and confines himself to
the simple, primitive, natural state. In this state he finds that
it is labour in which value originates. Goods are worth to us
what they cost in labour, and what, therefore, their possession
saves us in labour. The idea of value thus arrived at Adam Smith
goes on to apply to the empirical instances of the phenomenon of
value. Thereafter when he comes across value he sees nothing
mysterious in it; he has a means of distinguishing it from the
other attributes of things; he knows how to get to the heart of
it; indeed, through its relation to the labour from which it
receives its content, he can even measure it. 
    But, independently of this, Adam Smith describes -- and here
we come to his empirical theory -- the causes of value and of the
more or less of value, as he finds them in actual life. He sees
clearly that labour which he has recognised as, philosophically,
the sole cause of value, is not also, practically, its sole
cause. As a rule three factors together, he thinks, make up the
exchange value of products; besides the labour of production
there is also interest on the capital required and rent of the
land required. This is not to say that the "value" of observed
experience is of another nature from the "value" of philosophy.
That value which is created by land and capital is of the same
nature as that created by labour. As regards it also, it is
labour to which we must refer, if we are to grasp its content and
measure it. The only sign of his being aware that there is any
contradiction between his philosophical and his empirical
explanation is where he passes from describing the primitive
natural condition of economic life to describing a society based
on private property in land and capital. Here he cannot resist a
gibe at those who "love to reap where they never sowed,"
although, once within the kingdom of reality, he takes interest
and rent into his system as self-intelligible facts. 
    Nearly half a century passed, and then Ricardo tried to clear
his master's doctrines of their imperfections. Ricardo deeply
felt the contradiction which Adam Smith had scarcely noticed. How
did he seek to remove it? In a way that, more than Adam Smith's
mistake, betrayed how young a science political economy was.
To-day when, in virtue of the labours of these great pioneers of
the science, we stand face to face with the problems which are to
be solved, it is scarcely possible to put ourselves back into
those conceptions in which they first gave shape to their
observations and thoughts. In their effort to escape from
absolute perplexity they took frank delight in explanations
which, to us now, are more of a riddle than the phenomenon they
were meant to explain. What, then, did Ricardo attempt? His whole
endeavour exhausted itself in tying to show that the
philosophical and the empirical theory of Adam Smith, -- both of
which, indeed, in taking up this position he had to clear and
carry further, -- did not contradict each other so much as at
first sight would appear. If we limit ourselves to the general
rule and the average, value as it is and value as we get it from
labour, agree in their amounts -- not altogether, indeed, but
almost so -- with one exception, which is so trifling that it may
be quite properly neglected. Of the two empirical factors in the
formation of value which Adam Smith named besides labour, the
rent of land -- and this was the ultimate gain of Ricardo's
famous theory -- is entirely eliminated. Rent does not determine
the value of products but is determined by that value. Interest,
of course, remains, but Ricardo thinks he has shown that it
increases with the value of products in, approximately, the same
ratio as the quantities of labour required for production, so
that the quantities of labour do, in the long run, give a fairly
true measure of the value relations of all products. Interest, as
treated in this way, forms no hindrance to his system, and
Ricardo consequently does not really try to explain it. He takes
it as he finds it -- a fact that needs no explanation. This
treatment, which has excited the astonishment of so many later
writers, is perfectly intelligible if we remember the impulse
which set Ricardo's mind to work. He had no intention of
explaining the whole of economics. He wished to show only that
the value which is, is very much the same as the value which can
-- although only from a certain point of view -- be understood.
Ricardo was the last man in the world to think of reforming
economic life. He never opposed, to the value which is, the value
which ought to be. It never came into his mind to condemn
interest, and his system, understood in the sense of its author,
does not in the least involve the condemnation of interest. In
this there is nothing illogical, and when the socialists base
their crusade against interest on his system, they do not
complete it, as they imagine they are doing, but destroy it. Only
if interest is undoubtedly a good thing can over pass over it as
Ricardo does. 
    Since Ricardo's book appeared another half-century has fled,
and, since the Wealth of Nations, more than a century. In that
time the demands on the social sciences have grown apace. In Adam
Smith's day people explained the existing condition of things by
the "original" nature of man and the "original" state of things,
and were content. We, on the other hand, like to explain reality
by reality. Philosophy itself has become empirical. It allows no
argument which is not drawn from well-founded experience. The
historical state, positive law, the economy of every-day life,
are the objects of research, and, at the same time, the ultimate
sources of the instruments of research. If Adam Smith and Ricardo
were writing to-day, they would be full of the spirit of to-day,
and even if they had not command of the abundance of observation
and knowledge which the genius of the one and the acuteness of
the other have put at our service, their books would be ever so
much more perfect than they could have been in their time.
Certainly they would avoid the mistakes which the human spirit
since their day has outgrown. 
    Their school, however, still pursues the path they trod,
hesitating between uncomprehended empiricism and the purest
speculation. And it is a great school. It is strange indeed to
find that while, as regards questions of politics and of method,
whole sides have renounced the English parent school, -- from the
socialists to the adherents of the historical school in Germany,
-- as regards the old economic problem of value many of the newer
economists have remained true to its dogmas. As a man's judgment
about value, so, in the last resort, must be his judgment about
economics. Value is the essence of things in economics. Its laws
are to political economy what the law of gravity is to mechanics.
Every great system of political economy up till now has
formulated its own peculiar view on value as the ultimate
foundation in theory of its applications to practical life, and
no new effort at reform can have laid an adequate foundation for
these applications if it cannot support them on a new and more
perfect theory of value. 
    Of course the ruling theories of value have, in many
respects, put themselves in antagonism to the theory of Adam
Smith and Ricardo, particularly in Germany -- although, indeed,
in that country there as of late years been a widening acceptance
of the labour theory. The advances which theory has made
therefrom can scarcely be overestimated. More particularly may it
be noted that Use Value has now been put by the side of Exchange
Value, and that, besides the economic life of the individual, we
now take cognisance of national and other more general economies.
Here, again, the connection between the theory of value and
practical politics is strikingly shown. Hostility to the
individualist reading of the conception of value took sides with
the struggle against the individualist tendency in economics. It
seems, however, as if this branch of the ruling doctrine also has
exhausted its force, and that this movement also hangs on the
"dead centres." As economic research stands to-day, people, on
the whole, are investigating, not the phenomenon of value, but
the popular conception or conceptions of value. I have said in
another place that, for the sciences which deal with human action
in any of its departments, the peculiar danger is that of missing
their mark. Passing by the act and its motive, they are too ready
to investigate the meanings which men take out of their own
actions. Thus we get "popular theories," particularly those which
can be read out of the ordinary meaning of the terms in which
phenomena they deal with are expressed. This remark seems to me
peculiarly applicable to the value theories just spoken of. 
    That the theory of value needs reforming from the very
foundation no one will, I think, deny. The imperfection of the
prevailing views is confessed even by their own adherents. But
while the great majority of economists are still at a loss where
to turn, a new theory has come to the front. At first unnoticed,
and then for long but little thought of, worked out by men who,
for the most part, did not know of each other but yet agreed
where so many had doubted and disagreed, came a new theory based
on a new foundation -- an empirical theory on an empirical
foundation. 
    The new theory starts from the old proposition, that the
value of goods comes from the Utility of goods, or -- what is the
same thing -- from the satisfactions of want which goods assure.
To find the laws of value, then, one must first know the laws of
want. Now, in this pursuit, we come upon the fact that the want
for the same things -- even in the same person, and in given
economic conditions -- is of quite different strengths, varying
according to the degree in which the want has already been
satisfied through the employment of goods. But since the
employment of goods depends upon the amount of goods which one
possesses, the quantity of goods obtains a decisive influence on
the valuation of wants and so on the source of value itself. This
observation is the starting-point of the wider investigation. In
itself it is of great importance because it ultimately gives the
solution of the paradoxical phenomenon that value falls as goods
increase. But it is as important through its effects on economic
method, because it guides the economist, from the false objects
to which speculative methods and ordinary language point, to the
empirical heart of the phenomenon of value. 
    As forerunners of the theory we may name generally all those
who have derived value from utility; specially those who were
persistent in basing even exchange value altogether on utility,
particularly when they did not shrink from their principle in
spite of the obvious influence of costs of production. Usually on
this point the statement of the theory is either inconsequent or
obscure, or retains its logic and its clearness, at the expense
of renouncing completeness, by leaving out the question of costs.
As forerunners of the new theory in the stricter sense of the
term we may name those who take up the question of quantities of
goods as well as their utility. Usually, of course, this goes
only to the extent of showing the changes in the amount of value
which follow from changes in supply and demand. But, in the case
of a few writers, it has taken a much more exact form, where
"scarcity," "limitation of supply" is recognised as condition
under which utility creates value -- and that not only, as
Ricardo says, as regards certain rare goods, but as regards goods
generally. Among writers answering to this description, who may
be held the immediate precursors of our theory, are Auguste
Walras (De la Nature de la Richesse et de l'Origine de la Valeur,
Evreux, 1831), and also Condillac, Genovesi, and Senior.(1*)
    Passing by those numerous pioneer works, we meet with no less
than four authors who had worked out the same theory
independently of each other, Gossen,(2*) Jevons,(3*) Menger,(4*)
and Leon Walras.(5*) Gossen's statement, in spite of many quite
classical points of superiority, is, on the whole, the most
imperfect. That of Walras, though admirable of its kind, suffers,
to my mind, from the preponderance of the mathematical element.
The laws which govern amounts of value undoubtedly allow of a
mathematical expression; nay, the more complicated of these can
be expressed exactly only by means of mathematics; and here
certainly mathematics has a great task to fulfil. But in the
value theory we have to do with something more than the
expression of the laws of amounts. The obscure conception of
value is to be made clear; all its manifold forms are to be
described; the service of value in economic life is to be
analysed; the connection of value with so many other economic
phenomena is to be shown; in short, we have to give a philosophy
of value which needs words, not numbers. And, besides all this,
the empirical existence of the alleged facts is to be
established. 
    Finally, Jevons's statement, in spite of its amazing wealth
of observation and reflection, in spite of its finished
expression, in spite of the catholic spirit which speaks from it,
must be placed second to that of Menger. Menger goes more deeply
into the subject, inasmuch as he starts from a more general
conception of value. For this Menger is indebted to the German
school of national economists with its patient untiring labour in
formulating the general economic conceptions, and pressing
forward from concrete phenomena to that height of abstraction
from which the phenomena are to be logically arranged. It may be
said that, in great part, the German school long ago formulated
the conceptions, leaving for us only the task of filling them out
by adequate observation. In this it has laid up a treasure from
which all succeeding economic effort may draw indefinitely. 
    Of Jevons's system one part, the "theory of utility," as he
calls it, has passed into English literature. Among the works of
Continental economists who adopted the new theory, may be
mentioned the fine statements of Pierson,(6*) and Charles
Gide;(7*) and in Germany a work of Launhardt(8*) on the lines of
Jevons and Walras. But it is in Austria, in the lineal succession
to Menger, that the development of the new value theory is to be
sought. I may be allowed to refer to my own Ursrpung und
Hauptgesetze des wirthschaftlichen Werthes, Vienna, 1884, in
which I applied Menger's theory to the phenomena of costs. On
this followed a work by Bohm-Bawerk,(9*) which, independently of
its extremely clear presentation and its careful and fruitful
revision of many matters of detail, is particularly valuable from
its treatment of the theory of objective value. Finally came a
comprehensive work of E. Sax,(10*) extending the theory of value
over entirely new material to which no previous writer had
applied it -- to public imposts, and thus giving the theory one
of its richest applications. 
    The ground-plan of the new theory is drawn, but much remains
to be done; not only to widen its reach generally, but to
complete it in itself. The following pages are an attempt to
supplement what has already been done. In distinction from my
earlier work I have not paused to discuss the assumptions of the
value theory, but limited myself severely to the subject of value
and its direct content. On the other hand I have attempted to
exhaust the entire sphere of the phenomena of value without any
exception, and, besides that, so far as my ability goes, to think
out more exactly the subjects I had already treated of. The
present work is on that account in no way a repetition of my
former one, but an entirely new book, treating for the most part
of entirely new matter, and having nothing more in common with it
than the general fundamental propositions. I hope this time to
have met the objection urged against the Ursprung des Werthes
that I had omitted the connections -- the "bridges," as one
critic called them -- between the principles laid down and the
concrete phenomena of value with which we are familiar. Whatever
may be thought of its truth or correctness, I think I may venture
to say that no value theory has ever yet been put forward more
complete and exhaustive in external form and treatment. 
    The very multitude of single matters which I had to touch on
has compelled me to pass over almost every critical analysis that
differed from mine, and indeed to leave out almost every appeal
to economic authorities outside of those authors who belong to
the same school, and from whom I directly took the propositions I
had put forward. Similarly I have refrained from discussing any
of the economic conceptions I had to employ outside of that of
value. I shall very willingly put up with the reproach of being
incomplete by reason of this if it should succeed in making any
clearer the inner connection of the book. At the same time I
should not like to be suspected of having done so from any
undervaluing of the theoretical work of other economists -- least
of all, of those of Germany. 
    I have just said how deeply indebted, in my opinion, every
theoretical attempt of to-day is to the labours of German theory.
And to it the new value theory stands most nearly related -- it
is in truth the fulfilment of what German theory had long
demanded. 

NOTES:

1. Rau, too, with his "concrete Gebrauchswerth" may be included.
There is a notable treatise of the mathematician Daniel
Bernoulli: Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis (Commentarii
Academiae Scientiarum imperialis Petropolitanae, tomus V. Ad
annos 1730 et 1731. Petropoli, 1738). Bernoulli maintains that it
is valde probabile, lucrulum quodvis semper emolumentum afferre
summae bonorum reciproce proportionale. He is fully acquainted
with the subjective character of value, as well as with the most
important law of the change of value. His work is referred to by
Jevons in an extract from another of his books. By the kindness
of Professor Menger I have seen the original. Dupuit's De
l'influence des Peages, 1849, mentioned by Jevons, I have not
been able to consult. 

2. Entwicklung der Gesetze des menschlichen Verkehrs und der
daraus fliessenden Regein fur das menschliche Handeln.
Braunschweig, 1854. 

3. First in a paper before the British Association, 1862, then
fully in the Theory of Political Economy, London, 1871; 2nd edit.
1879. 

4. Grundsatze der Voikswirthschaftslehre, Vienna, 1871.

5. Elements d'economie politique pure ou Theorie de la richesse
sociale. Lausanne, 1874-77. -- Theorie mathematique de la
richesse sociale. Lausanne, 1883. -- Theorie de la Monnaie.
Lausanne, 1886. 

6. Leerboek der staathuishoudkunde. Haarlem, 1884.

7. Principes d'economie poiitique. Paris, 1884. 

8. Mathematische Begrundung der Volkswirthschaftsiehre. Leipzig,
1885.

9. Grundzuge der Theorie des wirthschaftlichen Gulerwerths.
Conrad's Jahrbucher, N.F. vol. xiii. Jena, 1886. 

10. Grundlegung der theoretischen Staatswirthschaft. Vienna,
1887. 


Book I: The Elementary Theory of Value

Chapter 1
The Origin of Value

    Whence do things get their value? If we put the question to
any intelligent and trained man of business, who had no knowledge
of the various attempts of theorists towards an explanation of
value, whose mind was unbiassed by the forms of speech which echo
learned theories and have passed into ordinary business use, and
who was, therefore, capable of judging only through the medium of
his own personal experience, he would undoubtedly answer, as the
first theorists did, -- "from their Utility." He would be very
much surprised to learn that several considerations made the
truth of this answer improbable, and that many facts -- some of
them to a certain extent generally known, and familiar even to
himself -- seemed to prove, with almost absolute certainty, that
utility could not be the source of value. These facts we may
state as follows. 
    First: goods which are to be had in superfluity, and which
any one may appropriate at will, no one will pay anything for, be
they ever so useful. In many places water, although indispensable
to man, is entirely without value. Of course this observation
refers immediately only to value in money, the so-called
"exchange value," and it might be thought that it was not true of
value in the using of goods, the so-called "value-in-use." Closer
examination shows, however, that it is true also of value-in-use.
In the household, as in the market, the superfluous is regarded
as the valueless, and is clearly separated from those things of
which there is no superfluity. However frugally we may act with
regard to other things, we should never think of economising in
things which we are always sure of having in over-abundance. No
one will ever try to secure possession of them: there is no
property in them; no interest is taken in them. They are used,
but we think no more about them. 
    Second: things which have a great deal of use have often a
smaller value than those which have little use. Iron, for
instance, has less value than gold. This is true equally of its
money value, and of its value-in-use, in the market and in the
household. Even in the socialist state -- supposing its citizens
still to possess the aesthetic sense -- it will be considered of
less moment to lose an ounce of iron than an ounce of gold. 
    Third: a large quantity has, under certain circumstances,
less value than a smaller quantity of the same thing. It is well
known that the Dutch East India Company destroyed a considerable
part of their produce and of their plantations, in order to
create a more lively demand, and so secure for the remainder a
greater value than the whole property had originally possessed.
The same thing is observed as regards the returns derived from
good and from bad harvests, -- the bad harvests showing better
than the good. This also, as I hope to show later, applies to
value-in-use as well as to exchange value. 
    Fourth: while the measure of use is in such frequent and
striking contradiction with that of value, it happens, as often
and as strikingly, that value is in agreement with the exact
antithesis of use -- namely, with costs. I say "antithesis"
because, if goods, by their use, prove themselves the friends of
man, they prove his enemy by the costs which they necessarily
involve. 
    A great many of the writers who have occupied themselves in
the investigation of value -- and, we may add, for a long time
many of the best of them -- have for this reason refused to
consider at all the idea that value may arise from utility; they
assert that the value of goods comes from the difficulty of their
attainment, and is proportionate to it. Those again who have
based their theory upon utility, have, for the most part, done so
in a manifestly unsatisfactory fashion. They have either placed
themselves in contradiction to the facts already mentioned
without explaining away the contradiction, or laid so much stress
on these facts that, in the end, they can scarcely be
distinguished from those writers who have rejected the principle
of utility, except by their express avowal of that principle.
Only a few authors, the more important of whom are mentioned in
the preface, have struck the right road. These have conceived the
idea of Use Value in such a way that it is neither confuted nor
disturbed by the foregoing considerations, but on the contrary is
entirely confirmed by them. 
    It is as these last-mentioned writers understand it that I
mean to state the theory of value. Before beginning, I may be
allowed to make a single introductory remark as to the manner in
which I intend to carry out my task, and, particularly, as to the
nature of the proofs which will be used.
     The economist who undertakes to explain value has to explain
the procedure of those who value. He describes in plain language
the meaning of transactions carried on, times without number, by
all of us. He does, on a large scale and with a difficult
subject, the same thing as one who accurately describes some
trade or some mechanical operation, which every one can do, but
which it is not easy, without the assistance of concrete
instances, to present and follow up in all its complexity of
conditions. As the poet gives expression to the thought which
every one feels but cannot express, or the actor's genius shows
the passion which perhaps he may not even feel, so does the man
of science describe in words, and apart from their concrete
realisation, the actions which every one is accustomed to
perform. He does not require to have any actual case before him,
or to accompany his description with any practical working out. 
    Any layman in economics knows the whole substance of the
theory of value from his own experience, and is a layman only in
so far as he does not grasp the matter theoretically, i.e.
independently, and for and by itself, -- but only practically, --
that is to say, in some given situation, and in connection with
its working out in that situation. If this be true, how else
shall we better prove our scientific statements than by appealing
to the recollection which every one must have of his own economic
actions and behaviour? For this reason, every expression which
may be taken as confirming this recollection, is welcome as an
aid to our investigation. For instance, when we find that the
unbiassed answer of the layman indicates that he considers
usefulness to be the source of value, this judgment is a
finger-post which we dare not neglect, unless the most searching
and careful examination has proved that it points in a wrong
direction. And who else is the final judge of the theory but the
public? The only true theory of the estimate we call "value,"
will be that to which practical life gives its entire assent.
Only, of course, the judge must first himself be educated. He has
to judge whether he recognises himself in a description which
informs him about his own life and being, and which he himself is
incapable of giving. 
    I trust that what follows may meet the approval of those who
not only act economically, but reflect on their actions. I have
no other wish than to gain this approval, but I cannot allow the
right of judgment to those who protest without having reflected.
It costs much trouble to give a clear description of even the
simplest and most familiar trade or business, and certainly, in
the theoretical study of a matter so many-sided and complicated
as that of value -- even though it is so familiar to all, perhaps
because it is so familiar to all -- we cannot do without the most
earnest and ample reflection. 


Chapter 2

The Value of Satisfaction of Want

    In its ordinary use among economic writers the word Want
signifies every human desire, whether great or small, justifiable
or unjustifiable, necessary or unnecessary, material or
immaterial. Bodily well-being, idle delights, artistic pleasure,
moral satisfaction may all be classed together as objects of
human want. 
    In this sense all the "use of goods" -- all the utility which
goods afford -- amounts in the last resort to satisfaction of
wants, and the opinion that the value of goods arises from their
use may be more exactly stated by saying that it rests upon the
satisfaction of wants which they furnish. It is the satisfaction
of wants which, in the first instance, has value, or "worth" or
"importance to" us. Satisfaction is that which is really desired,
and is worthy of desire: and, as we do not desire goods for
themselves, but for the satisfaction they give, so do we value
them only for that satisfaction. The value of goods is derived
from the value of wants. 
    The theory of value, then, has first of all to do with the
value of wants, this being the form in which value first appears.

    What it is that gives value to the satisfaction itself we
shall not here attempt to explain. It will be enough if we give
the symptom by which the degrees of value or importance are
recognised. It is the intensity with which the satisfaction is
desired. Were we to place the different satisfactions on a
graduated scale, it would probably be remarked that those which
stand highest are not those which provide the purest pleasure, or
which will most serve to beautify our lives. Our most urgent
concern is rather with the warding off of extreme want, and with
the prevention of care and suffering; the necessaries of life
must first be assured "before we can reach the good things of
this world." There is a difference between what men might like to
have, and what they must first decide to secure; and it is
according to the latter, not the former, that interests are
actually ranged above and below one another. The actual ranking
of the valuable -- no matter how moral judgment or fancy would
dictate -- is simply that which men recognise by their actions
when they are called on to choose between having one thing and
another. 
    In this sense the amount of the value of want depends on the
class of want, but, within this class, it depends upon the degree
of satisfaction already attained. 
    This latter point in detail we must now discuss. Here, first,
we shall have occasion to remark the influence of quantity upon
value. And it is not the value of goods alone that is affected by
quantity, but the value of wants. 

Chapter 3

Gossen's Law of the Satiation of Want

    Every one knows that the desire for food decreases as the
want is gradually satisfied, until, finally, when what we may
call the "satiation point" is reached, the desire is for a
certain time entirely allayed, and possibly changed into its
opposite, surfeit and disgust. Every one knows that the same
happens in the case of numerous other desires; satisfaction
diminishes the craving, and in the end fully destroys and
transforms it. 
    There are several authors who have the merit of having,
independently of each other, extended this observation
scientifically speaking, and made it the starting-point of their
theory of value. These have been mentioned in the preface. Among
them Gossen is worthy of particular notice, owing to the fate of
the book in which he gave expression to his discovery and to his
ideas on economics generally. His Entwicklung der Gesetze des
menschlichen Verkehrs und der daraus fliessenden Regeln fur das
menschliche Handeln, was published in Brunswick in 1854, but it
almost entirely disappeared from sight in Germany, although its
author had hoped to win for it a Copernican fame. Any one who
reads the book will understand why, as well on account of the
peculiarities of its excellences as of its faults, both of which
are great. Jevons, in the introduction to the second edition of
his Theory of Political Economy, and also Walras, in an essay
which appeared in the Journal des Economistes in 1885, have given
somewhat detailed accounts of both book and author. Economics
owes a great debt to Gossen, and it is with this feeling that I
call the law of the satiation of want Gossen's Law, although my
statement of it is not entirely in accordance with his. 
    It scarcely requires illustration. Gossen himself added to
its clearness by the following addition. Alongside of the
weakening effect which continued satisfaction has upon desire, we
find also, in certain circumstances, the opposite tendency; that
the desire grows by repetition and exercise, inasmuch as it is
thus developed, gets to know itself, its own end and its own
means, becomes purified and elevated. Thus, during the period of
development, the law of diminishing desire meets with an opposite
tendency, and the law applies unlimitedly only to wants which are
entirely developed. Granting this, however, it applies to every
want without exception. 
    There can be no doubt that it applies to those coarser
material wants, which recur periodically, as, for instance, the
desire for food. Here, however, we must distinguish between the
want as a whole and the several feelings of want which are
included in it. 
    The want as a whole of course retains its strength so long as
man retains his health; satisfaction does not weaken but rather
stimulates it, by constantly contributing to its development,
and, particularly, by giving rise to a desire for variety. It is
otherwise with the separate sensations of the want. These are
narrowly limited both in point of time and in point of matter.
Any one who has just taken a certain quantity of food of a
certain kind will not immediately have the same strength of
desire for another similar quantity. Within any single period of
want every additional act of satisfaction will be estimated less
highly than a preceding one obtained from a quantity of goods
equal in kind and amount. 
    Many material wants are not intermittent, but require a
continuous satisfaction. Such for instance is the need of warmth,
the human body requiring to be kept at a certain temperature.
Here also Gossen's law applies. That action which is needed to
secure the required minimum temperature, -- that is, the
expenditure for clothing, fuel, and so on, indispensable for
keeping the body in sufficient warmth, -- will be most intensely
desired, while the multiplication of this necessary expenditure
does not affect our well-being in the same degree, and will be
much less eagerly desired. In the long run the prospect of any
further increase will be met with aversion. 
    With regard to the higher wants, -- those which come into
existence whenever the necessaries of life are secured, -- the
same law obtains. It is not, however, so noticeable to ordinary
observation, and, indeed, appearances are rather against it. The
wants of wealth appear to be the very opposite to those of
poverty. The latter are urgent but narrowly limited; the former
can be done without, but, when awakened, show themselves
many-sided and extensive. Many-sided, because they are from the
first rich in varieties, and become always more so, as one gives
rise to another; and extensive, because they frequently include
objects of great compass, increasing with the degree of culture
attained. On this account it might well be thought that such
wants were infinite and subject to no diminution. But on looking
more closely at the matter we shall find that, when the same act
of enjoyment is repeated without variation, -- the very same, and
neither extended nor changed,the result is in this case also
weariness and disgust. The thirst of a collector seems to be
insatiable, and his object certainly is one of extraordinary
compass, even though it be confined to one article. The man who
collects books or pictures requires a great fortune, and may not
even then be able to fully satisfy his wish. Every new book he
acquires serves to stimulate instead of to weaken his desire, and
this is not due to morbid extravagance: it is entirely
justifiable, as it brings him nearer to his object, the
possession of a perfect library or a perfect picture gallery. 
    But how would it be, if he were offered a duplicate of some
work he already had? This and this alone, as Gossen remarked,
would be a case of exact repetition, -- of the repeated
satisfaction of the same impulse; and here, without doubt, the
desire would be much lessened, probably entirely destroyed. And
thus we shall ever find it to be if we direct our attention
strictly to the proper object. Even desires such as that of power
or of wisdom, even ambition, greed of honour, thirst for
knowledge are not exempt from the same rule. The sum of what
these crave, when at their height, is infinite; no man's life or
strength is sufficient to satisfy them wholly even once, not to
speak of repeating it. But the single acts which make up this
whole sum, the individual effects, exercises of power,
acquisitions of knowledge can be repeated and tired of. The charm
of the whole lies in the power to vary the items. Nothing on
earth is of such a nature that man can go on enjoying it over and
over again, and lose himself in its contemplation. This holds of
all emotions, from hunger to love. 

Chapter 4

The Scales of Satiation

    If we were to follow out the course of satisfaction of a
want, and mark every separate act of satisfaction with the value
that accompanied it, we should obtain a diminishing scale, the
zero of which would be reached with full satisfaction or
"satiation," while its higher point would correspond with the
first act of satisfaction. If we had a common and exact measure
for desire and non-desire, we might be able to put into figures
the "satiation scale" of every want, and so compare the scales
with each other. We are far from having that. But we are able to
say quite positively that there are great disparities between the
individual scales. It is not only that the higher points of such
scales differ, and differ to an extraordinary degree, as the
experience of every one sufficiently shows, but that, in the
scales, the degrees between one act and the next are very
different. There are many wants which almost leap from the point
of highest desire to that of full satisfaction -- such, for
instance, as the coarser needs of daily life. There are others
which, although little felt to begin with, continue for long
periods without any very perceptible diminution of their
strength, -- as, for instance, many of the finer wants. Even as
regards the individual want the decrease of desire is frequently
quite irregular -- decreasing more slowly now at the beginning,
now at the end of the scale. It must not in the least be expected
that every scale will present all the different degrees of desire
between which it is possible to distinguish. Assuming the
possibility of distinguishing between one hundred different
degrees of intensity of desire on the whole, we should certainly
find no single scale that would show exactly all the hundred
degrees; each would miss one, or another, or even many of the
degrees; we should not perhaps find any scale which would
regularly move, say, ten degrees at a time. Individual scales
are, indeed, likely to be formed with considerable irregularity,
and we shall find such a series as 100, 90, 80, 10, 0; or 20, 14,
5, 3, 2, 1, 0, and so on. 
    This statement, rude and imperfect as it is, will be found of
great use in what follows. We shall have to turn back to it at
several important points. Even here, it gives us a first
suggestion of how one of the fundamental difficulties of the
problem of value may be overcome; that, namely, arising from
observation of the contradiction between value and usefulness. A
few words will make this clearer. A sensation of want which
belongs to a very important class of wants may nevertheless not
possess any great importance. The importance of the entire class
is measured by the entire scale of satiation, especially by its
highest degree. But the importance of every separate sensation of
desire is measured by some particular and possibly low point upon
the scale, according to the condition of satisfaction which has
already been reached. The want for food, measured by its class,
is more important than that for adornment or finery, but none the
less may the individual sensations of vanity, in the first stages
of their satisfaction, be far stronger than the desire for food,
supposing the latter desire to be satisfied for the time being. 
    Classes of goods correspond to classes of wants, and
judgments concerning the importance of classes of wants will
correspond with judgments on the usefulness of classes of goods.
But the single commodity need no more realise the usefulness of
its class than the separate sensation of desire need realise the
importance of its class. The last course eaten by one who has
almost dined has a comparatively small utility, although it
contains in itself the property of saving from the pangs of
hunger. Suppose that one has a sufficiently large number of goods
of the highest usefulness, some of them can be put only to a very
trifling use, and, indeed, if there is a superfluity of them, he
will have no use whatever for that part of the supply which is in
excess of the demand. 
    In economic life we have to do not only with classes of wants
and classes of goods, but also with the state of subjective
satisfaction already reached, or the supply. We cannot,
therefore, judge of goods simply by their usefulness; we must
judge by the amount of use attainable in the individual case;
and, consequently, the value of goods must be kept at least as
distinct from their usefulness as the use to which we put them
is.


Chapter 5

Marginal Utility

    Even where nature is most lavish with her gifts, there are
but few kinds of goods with which she provides man in such
superfluity that he can satisfy every, even the most
insignificant, sensation of want. As a rule the supply of goods
of which he can avail himself is so scanty that he must break off
his satisfaction at a point on the scale short of complete
satiation. This point -- the smallest utility obtainable in the
circumstances, assuming the most thorough possible utilisation of
the goods -- is of peculiar importance, both for the act of
valuation and for economic life. To it refer the expressions,
"Werth des letzten Atoms," of Gossen, "Final degree of utility,"
or "Terminal utility" of Jevons; and "Intensite du dernier besoin
satisfait (rarete)" of Walras. Menger uses no particular
designation. The name "Marginal Utility" was suggested by me
(Ursprung des Werthes, p. 128), and has since been generally
accepted. 
    Where the supply of goods is too scanty to satisfy every
sensation of desire, the necessary break must be so made that it
will be felt as little as possible. This will be the case when we
begin by satisfying the most intense sensations of want, and go
on to extend to its utmost the compass of enjoyment; or, in other
words, when we reach, in unbroken satisfaction, the lowest
possible marginal point of enjoyment. Economic conduct requires
that the marginal utility in this sense be placed as low as
possible. The means by which to reach this end are, on the one
hand, the utmost possible quantitative exploitation of goods,
and, on the other hand, the utmost care in choosing how the goods
are to be employed where there are several competing ways of
employing them. Such a competition of employments may arise from
two circumstances -- first, where goods are capable of manifold
and various uses, and, second, where supplies are accumulated and
their consumption should be spread over periods of time. In the
first case our concern must be to choose between the separate
forms of employment, and to keep the economic balance even; in
the second, to distribute the goods so as best to meet the wants
of the whole period. 
    The difference between the various satiation scales of wants
comes into play in the case of goods of many-sided usefulness.
Every different kind of employment has its own particular scale
of satiation, with a culminating point peculiar to itself and a
course of satisfaction peculiar to itself. On account of this the
determination of the marginal utility in the given case becomes a
very complicated matter. Its principle will be best explained by
an example, and we need be at no loss for examples, as goods of
manifold utility are numerous enough. The most important are
found among the means of production. Who could count up the
services which iron, wood, or coal is capable of rendering? Or
those for which human labour is fitted? The most many-sided of
all goods is, however, money; through exchange it can be turned
into almost any other commodity, and thus made serviceable for
the satisfaction of almost any want. From no other commodity can
we obtain so clear a presentation of the idea of "marginal
utility." I therefore take it as example, although money is
really useful only as a medium, and presupposes the existence of
exchange, a phenomenon of which we shall not treat till the
following book. 
    The money income of the richest man is usually not sufficient
to cover every outlay that he might desire. Acting economically
therefore, so as to secure what Gossen calls the Grosste an
Genuss, the greatest possible enjoyment, we shall distribute our
expenditure so as to "make it go as far as possible," from the
satisfaction of the most urgent wants down to the most
insignificant. The larger the income is, the farther it will go,
and the longer will it be before we need to break off our
satisfaction. But the Grosste an Genuss could not be reached if
the separate branches of expenditure were not adequately weighed
against each other. Nowhere must the boundary-line be
overstepped, which is fixed by the general circumstances of our
wealth. Every overstepping in one branch will have to be paid for
in another, which other, as represented by a higher degree on the
scale of wants, will impose a sacrifice greater than the
enjoyment got from it. To this extent it is quite possible to
speak of a "level of household expenditure," of a general
condition of life prescribed for every household by the peculiar
amount of its demand and the peculiar amount of its means, and
necessitating strict adherence to it in all its branches. It
would, however, be a mistake to believe -- as almost every writer
who has occupied himself with this question has done, Jevons more
than any other -- that it is necessary to keep strictly in every
branch of expenditure to the same degree of satisfaction, the
same level, the same marginal utility. That is quite against the
nature of wants, for wants have not each an equal but each a
peculiar satiation scale. Were the "level of household
expenditure" to be understood in this way, every addition to
income would require to be laid out equally in corresponding
enlargement of every branch of expenditure. As a matter of fact
it is usually spent on a few individual branches, while the
others remain as they were; or, if the additional income be so
great as to allow of an improved condition of things all round,
the extra expenditure is distributed in the most irregular
manner. The satiation scales of wants are very diverse; the
receptive power of one want is great, that of another
comparatively small; that is to say, one is susceptible of a
degree of intensity which another does not teach, or which it
oversteps. The principle for the economic employment of goods of
manifold usefulness is not, then, that we must, in every
employment, obtain the same lowest possible marginal utility, but
that in all employment as low a marginal utility be reached as is
possible without necessitating the loss, in some other
employment, of a higher utility. 
    What has just been said applies as well to the economic
management of supplies of goods destined to cover periods of
time. Premature and extravagant indulgence should not impose
unnecessary burdens on the future. It would be best to divide the
enjoyment equally over the whole period, but this is frequently
made impossible by the nature of goods, which does not allow of
their being kept, as also by the uncertainty of providing for
changes of value in the economy in question. The limit of
employment should always be of such a sort as promises the
greatest amount of utilisation on the whole.(1*) 
    A special question is here suggested: -- Are present and
future satisfactions to be estimated entirely alike? Is not
precedence in time also precedence in degree of importance? Is it
not right that enjoyments should be considered of less value the
further they are in the darkness of the future? Jevons has
answered this question in the affirmative, and since him many
others, some with great positiveness, though, as I think,
wrongly. We cannot avoid going into this matter more closely,
even though it detains us a little from the attainment of our
present object, the deduction of the elementary law of value. 

NOTES:

1. See Ursprung des Werthes, p. 146, and Sax, p. 371.


Chapter 6

The Value of Future Satisfactions of Want


    If we did not possess the power of providing for future
wants, our lives would be but poorly provided for. No new
products would be prepared; those we already possessed would be
thoughtlessly dissipated; only chance and the goodwill of nature
would provide for the morrow. And as it is of importance that we
should be sensible in advance of the wants of the future, so is
it of importance that the degree of that sensibility should be
sufficient. Anxiety about future necessaries should be as
powerful as the passion with which we give ourselves away before
the urgent feelings of the moment. If future satisfactions of
want were represented in present valuation, not at their full
future value but at only a small fraction of the same, all
economic life must in the end fall to pieces, just as though they
were not represented at all; only that the course of economic
decay would be less rapid and its end farther off.
    It is evident that man possesses the capacity of acting in
consideration of future feelings of want, but observation of
human nature makes it very obvious that he will act with less
energy than when he is under the influence of present feelings.
The future want, wherever it comes into the domain of the
present, is preceded by a psychical reflection, and this
reflection is of a totally different nature from the want itself.
It is far finer, more innerlich, and, even in the case of purely
bodily wants, is always mental. The hunger of a future day, e.g.,
does not act as hunger, but as anxiety for sustenance; the object
of desire is the same, but the desiring is different. Instead of
a want of we have an interest in. Is not, then, some energy lost
in this change from the coarser to the finer? Must not the
anxiety about a future want always have less weight than the
actual appetite that comes after it? 
    If men in civilised societies do possess the degree of
foresight required for a prosperous economic condition, one thing
is certain; -- they have not always possessed it. It has been
gained through the labour of civilisation, just as, in moral
conflicts, strength to meet the fires of passion has been gained
through the feeling of duty. At bottom the economic conflict
between the needs of to-day and those of to-morrow is really of a
moral nature; it is a special case of the struggle between
impulse and reason. Uncivilised races are only to a small extent
capable of considering in advance the wants of the future; -- to
so small an extent, in fact, that the miserable condition in
which they are found can be fully explained by this alone. It is
not only the foreknowledge that is wanting, but, quite as much,
the previous mental excitation, the uneasiness which the
civilised man experiences in the consciousness that wants are
coming for which there is no provision. A heavy numb apathy
deadens the sense of the savage. He awaits with indifference, or
at most with a feeling of helplessness, the misery from which he
does not suppose it possible to escape, but which he certainly
could escape had he only the energy to will it. 
    Whether civilised races have reached the high-water mark of
development that is desirable, may easily be ascertained by
consideration of their economic actions. How do they behave in
the majority of cases? Do most people sacrifice their means for
the pleasure of the moment, or do they lay by for future needs?
-- There can be no doubt that, on the whole, the wise
householders outnumber the spendthrifts. Certainly there is no
one entirely without economical sin; no one who has never
consumed too soon some thing which he afterwards bitterly desired
and had not. But, on the whole, it is an economic principle which
is as well obeyed as any of the fundamental economic principles,
that wealth and income should be economised with a view to the
future and to old age. Every supply of goods should, so far as
possible, be distributed over the wants of the period of time
which it is intended to cover, in such a way that, whether the
time at which they occur be earlier or later, all the more
important sensations may be satisfied, and only the less
important -- those which it is impossible for the supply to cover
-- be left out. The exceptions to this rule are so few in number,
that a theoretical inquiry which regards the principle as
invariable, and asks as to its further effects will help to
explain our economy, not only as it ought to be, but also as it
actually is. 
    To avoid misunderstanding I shall try to explain my meaning
more exactly. I have no wish to deny that, in general, the
futurity of an event has the effect of weakening its impression.
As a rule this is also true in economics. It seems to me,
however, that, in a civilised state, every good householder, and,
in the main, every average one, has learnt to master this
weakness of human nature in one respect; -- so far, namely, as to
distribute a regularly-acquired income among regularly-expected
wants, and, in connection with this again, so far as to try to
acquire a regular income, and secure the conditions thereof by
exercise of labour power, and maintenance of the parent stock of
wealth. The call for forethought in this latter connection is
peculiarly strong, and it should not excite wonder that it is
more active here than in any other direction. 
    Moreover a well-regulated and prosperous economic condition
does not in the least demand that every future sensation be fully
realised in the present. Only those require to be considered
which have to be provided for, and those again only in so far as
they require to be provided for. First in importance are all
those wants which must be covered by the present supply of
consumption goods, and by the income available at the moment, and
which consequently, in economic management, come into conflict
with present desires. Alongside of these we may put the far more
numerous wants which have to be covered by suitable employment of
the present parent wealth. Our conception of both groups of
wants, but particularly of the latter, takes a peculiarly
simplified form, which easily gives the impression that they are
entirely shoved into the background. They are conceived of in the
mass, and grouped together in periods of time; and we are
generally conscious of them only in so far as they are
represented by the goods which are devoted to their satisfaction.
Foresight for the wants of a remote future and of later
generations, for instance, is seen in the precept which forbids
diminishing of the parent stock of wealth, even although this
precept only refers to the goods which form the wealth, while the
wants themselves appear to retreat more and more into a darkness
which the imagination does not seek and need not seek to
illuminate.(1*)

NOTES:

1. Many economists would explain interest, particularly the
interest on productive capital, by the difference in value
between present and future feelings. This seems to me an error.
Interest derived from productive capital is a phenomenon of the
very best ordered economic transactions, of those managed with
the highest possible degree of foresight. It is not in the least
a sign of a defective economy. See, however, Book IV. 


Chapter 7

The Value of Goods

    Originally only the human has importance for man. Thought for
one's self, interest in one's self, comes by nature. Towards
things, on the other hand, man is originally indifferent, and his
interest in them only awakens in so far as he finds them
connected with human interests and destinies. This takes various
forms; such as pity, when the lower animals are seen to suffer
just as man does, or religious or poetic emotion, when
observation of the living in nature awakens suspicion of the
connection of all life, or, finally, economic valuation, when
things are conceived of as instruments to and conditions of human
well-being. This is the coldest form that our interest takes, as
it regards things simply as means to human ends; it is, however,
at the same time, the most far-reaching, as it embraces most
things, and claims not only existence, but property. 
    Our natural indifference towards things is nevertheless so
great that it requires a special compulsion, a peremptory
challenge, to make us look upon them as objects of importance,
objects possessing value. Nor does the mere observation that
things are "of use" to us, and that the use has for us importance
or value exert this compulsion. Where we employ goods for our own
uses, but where at the same time these goods are at our disposal
in absolutely assured superfluity, we use them, but concern
ourselves no more about them than about the sands of the sea.
Whether they increase or decrease -- always supposing that the
superfluity remains -- we merely think, "What does it matter? we
have always enough and more than enough of them!" In Paradise
nothing would have value but satisfactions -- neither things nor
goods. Because there one could have everything, one would not be
dependent on anything. 
    On the other hand, where there is not an assured superfluity,
interest awakens in the train of self-seeking calculation, and
communicates itself to such goods as we notice ourselves using
and not caring to lose. Men in general thus lay their account
with things, as the egoist with persons. And here we are not
speaking only of cases of real need, of extremest want, where the
little that one has is guarded with an Argus eye; nor of objects
of great scarceness or rarity, such as a work of art which is
quite unique, and whose loss it would be impossible to replace.
We refer also to cases where people are fairly prosperous, but
nevertheless require to economise; and even to cases of extreme
wealth -- always supposing it is not assured natural superfluity
-- where, in many respects, a man has everything, but where, all
the same, the "everything" requires continual guarding,
administration, and renewal. In these circumstances there is not
a single change in a man's possessions which is entirely
indifferent. Every addition brings some addition of enjoyment;
every loss, even the slightest, disturbs, makes some gap, and
breaks the expected line of enjoyments. Happiness and sorrow are
dependent on our possessions; the destinies of goods mean the
destinies of men. There is an intimate association of ideas
between human interests and goods. Goods, indifferent in
themselves, receive value from that value which their employments
have. 
    Goods which are to be had in an assured and natural
superfluity are called Free goods; all others are Economic goods.
Thus only economic goods can possess value. The value of goods,
according to Menger's definition, is "the importance which
concrete goods, or quantities of goods, receive for us from the
fact that we are conscious of being dependent on our disposal
over them for the satisfaction of our wants."
    It should be noticed that no part of free goods receives
value; neither that part which is superfluous, and cannot
therefore be used, nor yet that part which is used. Of the water
which flows abundantly from some spring, neither that portion
which fills the jar, nor that which overflows has value. The
value of goods, although it has its origin in use, does not all
the same reflect the utility: there are cases in which great use
is obtained, where nevertheless no value -- i.e. no value of
goods -- is created. The theorist, therefore, who would explain
value must not content himself with explaining the change in
amounts of utility; he must go further and examine those laws by
which amounts of utility are changed into amounts of value. It
may be suspected -- and we shall find this suspicion confirmed in
what follows -- that value, owing in many cases so little of its
origin to utility, is, even where it has so originated, equally
far from always containing the full amount of utility. 
    If the use of a good in the individual case be so far removed
from its general usefulness, its value, if our suspicion is
indeed confirmed, must be even further removed from that general
usefulness -- and here is opened up to us a second point of view
from which we may explain and make intelligible the
contradictions which experience points out between value and
usefulness. 


Chapter 8

The Valuation of a Single Commodity

    Goods are valued either individually and by themselves, or in
connection with other goods. The latter form of valuation takes
place chiefly in one of three ways. A good may be valued in
connection with other similar goods belonging to one and the same
stock or supply; or in connection with goods from which it can be
produced; or in connection with goods which can be added to it by
purchase. Of these three cases the first is the elementary one,
to which both of the others may be traced back. It is with this
first alone, therefore, that we shall deal in the elementary
theory of value. 
    It is extremely seldom that goods are valued singly. It may
be some chance or other which has isolated them, or it may be a
consequence of some peculiar character which allows of them being
obtained only individually. In the first case, they are
irreplaceable during the period of their isolation; in the
second, they are altogether so; and, in both cases, they must, on
any reasonable valuation, have ascribed to them the full value of
the utility which is expected from them. The means without which
an end cannot be reached must be valued as highly as the end
itself. If the good is by nature fitted for several purposes
which, however, mutually exclude each other, so that it can
actually serve only one of them, that employment to which the
greatest importance belongs decides its value. Only a barbarian
could value the Venus de Milo by the utility of the material of
which it is made. A starving man will value his last bite at its
full life-saving value, -- supposing the saving of his life to be
of consequence to him. 
    Now and then, too, considerable supplies of goods are valued
as one indivisible whole, and, consequently, as one good. A
vendor may, for instance, lay down as a condition of selling some
large supply of goods, that it be bought entire or not at all. If
circumstances force the buyer to consent to this condition, he on
his part must estimate the value of the supply as a whole. He has
to reckon up the whole sum of useful services which he may
expect, from the highest utility which the goods composing the
stock are capable of rendering, down to the marginal utility
fixed by the amount of the stock and of the demand for it; and
the sum of all those services gives him the value. Value here
reflects the whole utility aimed at in employing the goods. 
    Suppose a community were forced to buy the grain it requires
from some foreign country and in one lot, if the conditions just
described were laid down, the government would have to make a
valuation which would be almost infinite. It would require to
consider that, without the purchase, a great part of the
community might die of hunger, and to calculate all that would be
gained by the prevention of this most extreme misfortune, and by
securing the health and vigour of the people. 
    Besides that would have to be reckoned all the less important
useful results, which really are obtained although their marginal
effects are inappreciable. It is obvious that the valuation of
the harvest which is actually made stands far behind any such
valuation as this. And what is the reason of it, seeing that the
actual effects of the harvest are no less important, -- that it
does in truth keep away hunger and misery, and maintain the
strength of the citizens? Why does its full use not enter into
the valuation? The reason is, obviously, that we are not forced
to obtain and value the harvest in one lot. It comes through
thousands of busy hands, by a thousand different means of
transport, from thousands of storehouses; and it passes through
thousands of purchases to those who need it, and is by them
consumed in thousands of different acts. The question as to the
effect on the whole is never put; the only thing we have ever to
do with is the effect of individual parts, which, compared with
the whole, are vanishingly small. And this brings us to a law of
valuation by which an amount of value is ascribed to the single
part, and, therefore, finally, to the sum of all the parts, which
is as far removed from the amount of value that would otherwise
pertain to the united whole, as the resisting power of all the
single rods in a bundle is from that of the whole bundle. 
    This law we have now to trace. It might be described as the
General Law of Value, since it holds in almost every case. Almost
all supplies which we possess and employ, which are bought and
sold, which are used up and produced, are acquired and used in
parts. Seldom only is a supply of goods the object of economic
use and valuation as a whole -- a whole of which nothing can be
lost without everything being lost. As a rule every supply or
stock of goods comes to us as a sum of parts, each of which has
its separate destiny, and can be individually disposed of. 


Chapter 9

The Valuation of Goods in Stocks. The Law of Marginal Utility the
General Law of Value

    Suppose a poor man receives every day two pieces of bread,
while one is enough to allay the pangs of positive hunger, what
value will one of the two pieces of bread have for him? If for
instance a still poorer man, who has nothing whatever, begged of
him one piece, what sacrifice would the first make in complying
with the request? Or -- what comes to the same thing -- what use
or utility would he retain if he refused to comply with it? The
answer is easy enough. If he gives away the piece of bread he
will lose, and if he keeps it he will secure, provision for that
degree of want which makes itself felt whenever positive hunger
is allayed. We may call this the 2nd degree. 
    One of two entirely similar goods is, therefore, equal in
value to the 2nd degree in the scale of utility of that
particular class of goods. One of three goods, under the same
conditions, will have the value of the 3rd degree; one of four,
of the 4th; in short, any one good, in a stock of goods of the
same kind, will have in general the value of the final or
marginal utility. The larger the supply -- the need remaining
unaltered -- the smaller will be the marginal utility and the
value, and vice versa; while, on the other hand, the greater the
need the higher will be both marginal utility and value, and vice
versa.(1*)
    This, however, is not enough. Not only has one of two goods
the value of the second degree of utility, but either of them has
it, whichever one may choose. In our example, neither of the two
pieces of bread -- so long as the possessor has both -- will have
that value which belongs to the allaying of positive hunger,
because, so long as they are both in his possession, he will
never be exposed to this extremity. He may give away one of them
-- whichever he likes, so long as he keeps the other -- without
losing his provision against starvation. But, if either of the
two pieces is equal in value to the second degree of utility,
both together have twice this value. And three pieces have
together three times the value of the third degree of utility,
and four pieces have four times the value of the fourth degree.
In a word, the value of a supply of similar goods is equal to the
sum of the items multiplied by the marginal utility. 
    Say that a harvest, consisting of 1,000,000 quarters, is
short, and that the community has to be so sparing in its use of
it that grain dare not be consumed unless the act of consumption
yield a satisfaction equal to the figure 10: the value of the
harvest will be calculated as 1,000,000 x 10. The value of a
harvest of 2,000,000 quarters, where the act of consumption need
only yield, say, 4, is equal to 2,000,000 x 4. The value of
1,000,000 tons of iron, where the marginal utility is 1, is
1,000,000, and the value of 100,000 oz. of gold, with a marginal
utility of 50, is 5,000,000. 
    As the use obtained from free goods represents no value
whatever, so is the use obtained from supplies of economic goods
not fully represented in their value, and for the same reason In
the case of free goods we need not concern ourselves at all about
their use, that being always assured so long as the goods remain
in superfluity; and in the case of economic goods, our only
concern is with the marginal utility, all the higher utilities
being assured so long as the amount of the supply remains
unaltered. In the former case we need have no anxiety as regards
the provision for our wants generally; in the latter we need have
no anxiety as regards the provision for the principal part of our
wants -- and the larger the supply the less the anxiety -- and
need only concern ourselves to see that the proper margin of
employment is maintained. 
    The law of value just described owes its existence, on the
one side, to the peculiar formation of the scales of want, but,
on the other, to the peculiar conditions under which goods are
possessed. If goods did not come forward in stocks or supplies
consisting of similar items, but only individually and each with
a separate form, the law would not hold. Where such stocks do
appear, however, it must hold. How could things entirely similar
be differently valued, -- supposing, of course, that they belong
to the same person, and are used to satisfy the same demand? Even
if any one in an anxious mood were to set apart certain items, as
a reserve for extreme exigency, and, as such, might think of
putting a special value on them, he would surely find, on
reflection, that the reserved goods were in no way different from
all the rest, and that there would be no danger of this extreme
case arising, even if some accident destroyed the reserve, so
long as the other stock held out. 
    This law of value unites the conceptions of value and of
utility in a way that is fully confirmed by facts. When
experience shows that iron is worth less than gold, and that an
abundant harvest may be of less value than a poor one, our law
can give the explanation. In the main, it clears up all the
contradictions which appear to separate the conceptions of value
and utility from each other; and it only remains for us now to
combine the fact of costs with the law of marginal utility, -- a
task we shall undertake later. Meanwhile we have not yet
completely exhausted the elementary theory of value. In the first
place we have only externally resolved the contradictions between
value and utility. Under certain conditions iron must be of less
value than gold, and the rich harvest of less value than the poor
one -- but what hidden import is contained in this? However
unconditionally one adopts our law and is convinced by our logic,
he will nevertheless scarcely be able to deny that its inmost
content is veiled in darkness. In one connection it appears
paradoxical; in another it even seems to comprehend within itself
a complete antinomy. The final task of the elementary theory of
value will be to clear up this paradox and explain away this
antinomy. Only when this is done, shall we obtain a clear idea of
the essential nature of the phenomenon of value.(2*)

NOTES:

1. The amount of supply depends chiefly on the result of
production, and thus the elements of production come into
relation with value. The nature of this relation we shall first
discuss, however, in Book V, under the head of "Costs." Meantime
we shall assume that supplies exist without production. 

2. We have here reached a decisive point in our examination.
Experience shows us daily that similar goods obtain similar
prices; and the majority of theorists (although they may use
different names for the same thing) are agreed that these prices
are fixed by a marginal law. In this is involved that exchange
value, which rests on prices, is the same for all similar goods,
and obeys a marginal law. We, however, have gone still further,
and say that Value generally and in every form, even in that of
use, and even where there is no exchange -- as e.g. in a
community organised on a socialist basis -- must be the same for
all similar goods, and must obey a marginal law. Jevons, Gossen,
and Walras have not gone so far as to assert this. To these
writers the utility of the separate portions or items of one
supply is different, according to the amount of use which each
actually gives. I can scarcely hope to have brought home to the
reader, and still less to have converted him all at once to such
an unfamiliar aspect of the question. But I trust that the
following presentation of the theory of value, which is founded
on the foregoing, and which examines, and -- so far as my
judgment goes -- explains all the different relations of value,
will be found convincing. 
    There is just one more point to which I should like now to
draw special attention. Price not only regulates the amount paid
by buyers, but also the amount of production by sellers: it gives
to the latter its level. All goods produced for the market are
produced under a valuation which considers similar goods as equal
to one another, and which subjects them to a marginal law, and it
is with reference to this valuation that the costs permissible
are calculated, that all stocks are inventoried, that all
undertakings make up their balance-sheets, and that all profit
and loss is reckoned. If a socialist community were to give up
exchange -- the payment of buyer to seller -- it would not on
that amount require to give up this measuring scale for the
valuation of goods. It could continue to value similar goods at
the same figure, and to bring them all under a marginal law. And
might we not gave some right to ask, what reasons it would have
to discontinue this? Certainly it would require weighty ones to
justify a change in a method of valuation which has been followed
ever since, if not before, human economics began to be enlarged
through trade. And, finally, we have still to ask whether it
would ever be possible to cease valuing goods in this way. Is it
possible to value equal things unequally? Can we ever regard the
useful but unimportant as important? 
    Menger's theory of value differs essentially from its rivals
on this point. He asserts that the law of equality and the
marginal law refer not only to price but to value. In my opinion
this places his theory in advance of all the others, and wins for
him the fame of being the first to lay a perfect foundation for
the theory of value. The other authors we have named examine only
the laws of want and the laws of price. Menger alone includes the
laws of value. His view of the question is the most
wide-reaching, inasmuch as it not only aids us to the clearest
comprehension of the present economy, but also enables us to
think out possible future forms of economy. 


Chapter 10

The Paradox of Value

    Assume that a man owns one good, and that the employment of
it gives a utility equal to 10; and suppose that his holding
gradually increases up to 11 goods, in the course of which the
marginal utility decreases proportionally down to 0. The value of
the stock at each point will be as follows: -- 

When he has        The value is         =  
    1                 1 x 10           10
    2                 2 x 9            18
    3                 3 x 8            24
    4                 4 x 7            28
    5                 5 x 6            30
    6                 6 x 5            30
    7                 7 x 4            28
    8                 8 x 3            24
    9                 9 x 2            18
   10                10 x 1            10
   11                11 x 0             0
 goods              units of value

Here a regular decrease of the marginal utility, and, therefore,
of the value of the single good, is seen to take place along with
an increase of the supply, and further explanation is
unnecessary. Each additional good brings with it a diminished
increment of utility and must, therefore, bring only a diminished
increment of value. It is otherwise when we consider the value of
the whole stock, and follow its development from 10 up to 30, and
back again from 30 down to 10 and 0. Judged from the standpoint
of that aspect of value with which daily economical life
impresses us, this scale seems completely paradoxical. Value is
commonly regarded by us as a simple and absolutely desirable
characteristic of goods, mathematically expressible as a positive
amount. It corresponds with this view when the series shows an
increase of value along with the first additions to the stock,
but it entirely contradicts it when, towards the end of the
series, every further addition to the stock is accompanied by a
corresponding decrease in value, until, finally, when the point
of superfluity is reached, value completely disappears. Whence
comes this contradiction? How is it to be explained? The first
half of the series appears to confirm the view that value is
something desirable, something positive, while the second shows
it as a negative quantity, something burdensome or evil. Which
then is true? And how can both ever be brought to agree? 
    Very easily, so soon as one gives up the preconceived notion
that value is a simple positive amount. Value (as marginal value)
arises from a combination of two elements, the one positive, the
other negative. It is a complex amount; or, more exactly, a
residual amount. So soon as one distinguishes between these two
elements in the formation of value, the series we have just drawn
above explains itself in the simplest manner possible; and the
semblance of irregularity, which must have proved insuperable for
those who expected and sought a simple progression, disappears. 
    Both elements in the formation of value have been explained
by what has already been said. 
    The positive element is the enjoyment in the use of goods.
Every additional use which is furnished by a newly-acquired good
is welcome. The good which is first acquired brings the largest
increment of utility because it satisfies the most urgent stage
of desire; every one that follows has a lesser utility because it
meets a desire which has been already comparatively satisfied.
And should the accretion of goods cross the margin of want, there
will be no addition to the positive element in the formation of
value. There will now be no employment for additional goods; they
will not bring enjoyment to any one. 
    Taking the former figures, the increment of the positive
element in value will be as follows: -- 

    With        there will be
    1               10
    2                9
    3                8
    4                7
    5                6
    6                5
    7                4
    8                3
    9                2
   10                1
   11                0
 goods              units of goods


    And the total amount of this positive element, calculated for
the whole stock, will be as under: -- 


    With            The total enjoyment is
    1                   10 
    2                   19   (10 + 9)
    3                   27   (19 + 8)
    4                   34   (27 + 7)
    5                   40   (34 + 6)
    6                   45   (40 + 5)
    7                   49   (45 + 4)
    8                   52   (49 + 3)
    9                   54   (52 + 2)
   10                   55   (54 + 1)
   11                   55   (55 + 0)
 goods              units of value


The negative element arises from the indifference with which men
naturally regard goods. Only when forced to it, do we transfer
our interest from the uses of goods to the goods themselves; and,
in the process of transferring, we have to overcome a natural
opposition which varies in strength according to the
circumstances. The greater the need, the more eager will we be to
get possession and keep possession of goods: the smaller in this
case will be the opposition. The opposition will be completely
broken down where our need rises to extremity, for here we
identify our destiny with that of the goods, and in their loss we
see our own calamity. On the other hand, the opposition will be
complete where everything is present in superfluity; here we can
enjoy without any feeling of gratitude for, or interest in, the
objects which procure for us the enjoyment. Between extremest
need and superfluity the opposition is a graduated one: we bestow
upon goods an amount of interest derived from the interest we
have in the services they render us. But we do not give them the
whole of this interest; we make a certain reservation. That is to
say, all the single items of a stock are considered only at the
value of their marginal utility. The surplus value, that which
goes beyond their marginal utility, is withheld from the goods.
Here, then, is the numerical expression for the strength of this
opposition: the negative element in the formation of value is
equal to the subtracted surplus value. Making use once again of
the foregoing figures, we find that, so long as we own only one
good, there is no deduction in the formation of its value; the
entire value of the use is transferred, undiminished, to the
good. With two goods, on the other hand, there will be a
deduction of 1 from the value, as each of these is valued only
according to its marginal utility 9, while the utilities of both
added together amount to 10 + 9. Three goods have each a value
only of 8, and their utility is equal to 10 + 9 + 8, the surplus
value deducted being therefore 3. Reckoning further in the same
way, we shall find the minus amount in the formation of value as
follows: --

With a stock of         the minus is
    1                       0
    2                       1
    3                       3
    4                       6
    5                      10
    6                      15
    7                      21
    8                      28
    9                      36
   10                      45
   11                      55
 goods                  units of value.

If we put together the plus and minus amounts we shall obtain the
following as result: --

    Positive (+)       Negative (-)        Residual (+)
 1       10                  0                10
 2       19                  1                18
 3       27                  3                24
 4       34                  6                28
 5       40                 10                30
 6       45                 15                30
 7       49                 21                28
 8       52                 28                24
 9       54                 36                18
10       55                 45                10
11       55                 55                 0
goods  units of value   units of value      units of value

Thus we obtain the same scale as that which resulted from the
multiplication of amount by marginal utility. 
    It is now seen that the apparent irregularity of the scale is
really a consequence of the strict regularity of its conditions. 
    The value of a supply must increase with the increase of its
items so long as the positive element preponderates; in other
words, so long as the increment of value, furnished by the
utility of the newly-acquired good, is greater than the value
which is lost through the decrement of value which its addition
causes to every good already in the stock. This is the ascending
branch of the movement of value, or, as we might call it, the "up
grade" of value. 
    On the other hand, the value of a supply must decrease with
its augmentation, whenever the negative element gains the
ascendency. This is the descending branch of the movement of
value, or the "down grade" of value. 
    Strange though it seems, the value must touch zero twice in
the course of its development: in the one case, where we have
nothing; in the other, where we have everything. If we possess
nothing, there are no objects to value; if we possess everything,
there is -- just on account of the superfluity -- no subjective
inducement to an act of valuation. Only if we possess something
-- be it much or little -- does the phenomenon of value appear;
and between the two zero points, so different in their
importance, it has its existence. It presents itself with the
first goods that come into our possession, and increases up to a
certain culminating point, from which it decreases, until, when
superfluity is reached, interest is again completely withdrawn
from the goods. 
    As a matter of fact, human economies move almost entirely in
the ascending branch. In most things we are so far from having a
superfluity that almost every multiplication of goods shows a
corresponding increase in the total value. The single good
certainly falls in value as the stock increases, but as a rule we
find that the loss in the items is outweighed by the gain on the
whole. On this account we are accustomed to measure wealth and
riches by the sum of value of their constituent parts, and regard
it as a misfortune if the value of property and revenue goes
down. And therefore it appears to us paradoxical when, at times,
we are forced to notice that, although the amount of goods and of
enjoyments, of wealth and well-being, has been augmented, their
value has decreased. It may be that exceptionally favourable
weather has resulted in an over-abundant harvest; or it may be
the discovery of some new productive stratum of unsuspected
fertility; or some sudden and enormous increase of returns
through advance in technical processes: or it may be caused by
some error on the part of the producer, who has been misled by
greed of gain, or a mistaken and exaggerated estimate of demand,
into too greatly enlarging his production. But it is always some
unusual accident when individual branches of economy are
transferred to the descending branch in the movement of value. It
is improbable that our whole economic system will ever
permanently come under such favourable conditions, and production
be brought so near to superfluity, that the ascending movement of
value will cease to be the dominant one. The example, however, of
those few free goods which nature offers leaves us no room for
doubt that value disappears whenever superfluity is reached; and
this is really the best proof for our contention that value must
begin to decrease whenever superfluity approaches. Even though
experience shows the scale of value to have many gaps, yet it
gives us sufficient facts to let us trace its ideal course from
end to end. 


Chapter 11

The Antinomy of Value and the Service of Value


    As consequence of the observation that, in the overwhelming
majority of cases, the value of possessions increases with
economic prosperity, the exceptions have been either entirely
forgotten, or put on one side as unessential and unimportant
disturbances. The idea has gone abroad that value is the highest
principle in economic life, and that all our economic action must
be regulated with reference to it. It has been said that people
should so act as to obtain on the whole the greatest amount of
value. 
    If this idea were correct, our economic life would be
directed by a power which would, in some measure, work against
the aims of economic conduct; to the extent, namely, of
preventing the realisation of economic ends beyond a certain
point; that is, beyond the up grade of value. And one would be
justified in speaking of an antinomy in the law of value, which
would refer not only to exchange value, as Proudhon has asserted,
but to every form of value. It would be expedient for every one,
not only from a money-making and selling point of view, but in
his own private economy -- even for a Robinson Crusoe who could
not sell at all -- to convert superfluity into want, and want
into greater want, in order to create and increase value. No one,
however, would wish to act in this way, and it is therefore
untrue that value has the guidance of our economies. The highest
principle of all economy is utility. Where value and utility come
into conflict utility must conquer; there is nothing in the
nature of value which could give it the ascendency. Utility is
imperfectly contained in value, with the accompanying peculiarity
that the amount of utility which is contained is intimately
associated with the very idea of goods. But this latter
phenomenon cannot have the effect of preventing any one from
entering into transactions which a complete addition of the
utilities to be got from the goods acquired would show to be
profitable. If I were able, by any method whatever, to secure for
myself a constant superfluity of all the services of goods, the
idea that my interest need not thereafter be cared over from the
services to the goods themselves, would not cause me a moment's
hesitation in securing the superfluity. Or suppose that I
expected a great amount of utility from some transaction. and the
transaction at the same time caused me a certain loss of interest
in the goods, this latter circumstance would not deter me in the
faintest degree from carrying through the transaction. 
    Under these conditions, then, what service remains for value
to render in economic life? A highly important one. The cases
where there is a conflict between value and utility -- where
increase of the one is decrease of the other -- occur but seldom.
Experience shows that economic life moves almost always on the
"up grade," and here the tendencies of increase or decrease are
similar for value and utility. Whenever the utility of a stock
increases with the augmentation of the stock, the value also
increases, and whenever the utility of a stock decreases with a
diminution of the stock, the value also decreases. A greater
value almost always corresponds with the greater utility, and a
lesser value with the lesser utility, and on this account
transactions which commend themselves in consideration of their
utility, commend themselves also in consideration of their value.
The service of value consists, then, in representing utility
wherever both show the same tendency. We do not calculate
utilities; we calculate values. Value is the form in which
utility is calculated, and this renders calculation infinitely
more easy. It is difficult indeed to estimate the utility of a
stock; easy to estimate its value. That is to say, the value of a
stock can be expressed as the single product of stock and
marginal utility; it is a multiple of the marginal utility:
whereas utility can be expressed only by a sum which contains as
numerous and as various amounts as the stock contains items. The
utility, for instance, of a harvest of a million quarters can be
represented only by an almost inexhaustible description of all
the benefits accruing from it, from its greatest effects down to
those of the least important employments economically permissible
in the circumstances of the case. The value of this same harvest
is easily and shortly ascertained by multiplying the utility of
the marginal employments by the whole amount. mathematically
expressed, the formula for expressing the utility of a stock of
50 items, the most intense use of which -- that of the first item
-- reaches the figure of 100, if we assume a regular decrease in
intensity for every successive item, will run: 100 + 99 + 98 +
... 51. But the value formula will be simply: -- 50 x 51.(1*)
    The simplification of economic calculation by the use of a
value instead of a utility measurement is noticeable in
proportion to the economic state of development. While the
utility formula becomes continually more wearisome and less
clear, the value formula becomes more comprehensive and uniform,
particularly through the entrance of costs, -- which we shall
discuss later. Where money is the medium of exchange everything
is measured equally, for purposes of trade, according to its
money value; all utility in its illimitable variety is reckoned
by the value of coin, the separate items of which are all equal
to each other, and the amounts of which appear in the
calculations as multiples of one and the same unit. 
    It is the possibility of calculating utility in terms of
value which first puts us in a position to draw out exact
economic plans and foresee their necessary limitation. Thus value
comes to be the controlling power in economic life. 


NOTES:


1. The value formula is an abridged utility formula. Only that
part is left out which, on the one hand, renders calculation more
difficult, and, on the other hand, is really unnecessary as an
adequate motive to economic actions; viz. that surplus utility
which is above the marginal utility. Economic actions which have
value (in the up grade) for their motive, are not only
approximately, but completely and exactly weighed and limited.
The greater utility is always reached when the greater value is
aimed at. 
    It may be interesting to go more into detail regarding this.
There are two occasions on which economic goods become objects of
valuation; first, when we wish to acquire goods, and to measure
the amount of the acquisition; and, second, when we wish to part
with goods in order to devote them to some given end, and to
measure the amount of the service which they thus will render. On
the one side, then, we have to measure results in goods, and, on
the other, outlays in goods. It may be remarked in passing that,
without some such end in view, goods are never valued: they are
never valued for valuing's sake. At most, goods are valued in
advance to be ready for any contingency; but value never plays
the role so readily ascribed to it by, theory; -- it never acts
simply as the means of valuing wealth. Wealth may be valued in
all sorts of ways, according to the purpose which it is intended
to serve. The rules of valuation which are actually followed have
their origin in the fact that they serve towards the ends of
economic life, whatever these may be. Value is adapted to its
economic environment, and can only be understood through it. 
    First, as to the measurement of results in goods. All
acquisitions of goods which increase value are profitable. Of two
acquisitions, between which one may choose, that one will be
chosen which gives the greater amount of value, because it also
gives the greater utility. Augmentations of value arising from
intentional destruction of goods are unprofitable, and, in
consideration of utility -- which is the stronger consideration
wherever there is a collision between it and value -- are
forbidden. Acquisitions of goods which, inasmuch as they follow
the "down grade" of value, diminish the amount of value, are
nevertheless profitable. 
    An increase of value occasioned by increased necessity, and
unaccompanied by any change in the amount of goods, must not be
described as an economical result. It is not created by any
economical act. Once created, however, it naturally influences
economic action, etc., through the fact that it changes the value
of goods used as outlay. 
    Second, as to the measurement of "outlay" in goods -- whether
in purchase of other goods, or in production, or in mere
satisfaction of personal want. In every appropriation of goods to
a particular purpose the value of the sacrifice involved must be
estimated an compared with the expected result. The greater the
sacrifice of value, -- if we disregard the circumstances of the
"down grade," -- the greater the sacrifice of utility, and it
must be justified and made good by the obtaining of a higher
result. It is different to show this as regards consumption. The
employment of goods towards the satisfaction of personal wants
must also be guided by the value of goods. But how can marginal
value serve this end? Would not that require that only marginal
wants be satisfied? The difficulty solves itself whenever we give
up the old and deep-rooted but erroneous belief that consumption
as such is an economical act. Consumption as such does not arise
from any economical considerations. It is only economising in
consumption that is economical (see Ursprung des Werthes, p.
133). The demands of economising are, however, exactly met when
we keep to the marginal utility. In other words, value does not
control consumption: it only forbids uneconomical consumption;
that, namely, which would not assure uninterrupted satisfaction
down to the lowest attainable utility. This prohibition and
nothing else is expressed in marginal value; no employment of
goods which goes below the margin drawn can be allowed. Through
the fact that want on its side is active and demands
satisfaction, economic satisfaction is reached by a combination
of claims and refusals. Whoever possesses 1000 items of the value
of 10, may permit himself every enjoyment which has an intensity
of 10 or more. Whoever possesses 2000 items of the value of 8 may
go further, and allow himself all enjoyments which have at least
an intensity of 8, two thousand times. This is the true meaning
of that estimate of the value of supplies of consumption goods,
to which we generally give the more material formulation, that
the first possesses 1000 x 10 = 10,000, and the second possesses
2000 x 8 = 16,000 units of value.
    See, upon the calculation of value my Ursprung des Werthes,
p. 180, and Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, p. 46; further, on the service
of value, Book II, chaps. iv and v and Book V, chap. xiii below.

