                                Karl Marx 
 
                             INTRODUCTION TO  
             A CONTRIBUTION TO A CRITIQUE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
 
 
          Written between end of August and middle September 1857. 
 
          Marx intended this to be the Introduction to his  
          _Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy_ (1859), 
          but, as his Preface to that work notes, he decided to  
          omit it. 
 
          The unfinished rough draft, which was found among Marx's 
          papers after his death.  First published 1903, in _Die  
          Neue Zeit_.  Would become the first manuscript in the 
          _Grundrisse_.  
 
 
    I. PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION, DISTRIBUTION, EXCHANGE (CIRCULATION) 
 
 
                   3. The Method of Political Economy 
 
When examining a given country from the standpoint of political economy, 
we begin with its population, the division of the population into 
classes, town and country, the sea, the different branches of 
production, export and import, annual production and consumption, 
prices, etc.  
 
It would seem to be the proper thing to start with the real and concrete 
elements, with the actual preconditions -- e.g., to start in the sphere 
of the whole economy with population -- which forms the basis and the 
subject of the whole social process of production.  Closer consideration 
shows, however, that this is wrong.  Population is an abstraction if, 
for instance, one disregards the classes of which it is composed.  These 
classes, in turn, remain empty terms if one does not know the factors on 
which they depend -- e.g., wage-labor, capital, and so on.  These 
presuppose exchange, division of labor, prices, etc.  For example, 
capital without wage-labor, without value, money, prices, etc., is 
nothing.  If one were to take population as the point of departure, it 
would be a very vague notion of a complex whole and through closer 
definition, one would arrive analytically at increasingly simple 
concepts; from imaginary concrete terms, one would move to more and more 
tenuous abstractions, until one reached the most simple definition.  
From there, it would be necessary to make the journey again in the 
opposite direction until one arrived once more at the concept of 
population, which is this time not a vague notion of a whole, but a 
totality comprising many determinations and relations.  The first course 
is the historical one taken by political economy at tis inception.  The 
17th century economists, for example, always took as their 
starting-point the living organism, the population, the nation, the 
state, several states, etc., but analysis led them always, in the end, 
to the discovery of a few decisive abstract, general relations (such as 
division of labor, money, and value).  When these separate factors were 
more or less clearly deduced and established, economic systems were 
evolved which from simple concepts, such as labor, division of labor, 
demand, exchange value, advanced to categories like state, international 
exchange and world market.  This latter is obviously the correct 
scientific method.  The concrete concept is concrete because it is a 
synthesis of many definitions, thus representing the unity of diverse 
aspects.  It appears, therefore, in reasoning as a summing-up, a result, 
and not as the starting-point -- although it is the real point of 
origin, and thus also the point of origin of perception and imagination.  
The first procedure attenuates meaningful images to abstract 
definitions; the second leads from abstract definitions by way of 
reasoning to the reproduction of the concrete situation.  Hegel 
accordingly conceived the illusory idea that the real world is the 
result of thinking, which causes its own synthesis, its own deepening, 
and its own movement; whereas the method of advancing from the abstract 
to the concrete is simply the way in which thinking assimilates the 
concrete and reproduces it as a concrete mental category.  This is, 
however, by no means the process of evolution of the concrete world 
itself.  For example, the simplest economic category -- e.g., exchange 
value -- presupposes population, a population moreover which produces 
under definite conditions, as well as a distinct kind of family, or 
community, or state, etc.  Exchange value cannot exist except as an 
abstract, _unilateral_ relation of an already existing concrete organic 
whole.  But exchange value as a category leads an antediluvian 
existence.  Thus, to consciousness -- and this comprises philosophical 
consciousness -- which regards the comprehending mind as the real man, 
and hence the comprehended world as such as the only real world; to 
consciousness, therefore, the evolution of categories appears as the 
actual process of production -- which, unfortunately, is given an 
impulse from outside -- whose result is the world; and this (which is 
however again a tautological expression) is true in so far as the 
concrete totality regarded as a conceptual mental totality, as a mental 
fact, is indeed a product of thinking, of comprehension; but it is by no 
means a product of the idea which evolves spontaneously and who think 
proceeds outside and above perception and imagination, but is the result 
of the assimilation and transformation of perceptions and images into 
concepts.  The totality as a conceptual entity seen by the intellect is 
a product of the thinking intellect, which assimilates the world in the 
only way open to it, a way which differs from the artistic, religious 
and practically intelligent assimilation of the world.  The concrete 
subject remains outside the intellect and independent of it -- that is, 
so long as the intellect adopts a purely speculative, purely theoretical 
attitude.  The subject, society, must always be envisaged therefore as 
the precondition of comprehension, even when the theoretical method is 
employed.  
 
But have not these simple categories also an independent historical or 
natural existence preceding that of the more concrete ones? This 
depends.  Hegel, for example, correctly takes ownership -- the simplest 
legal relation of the subject -- as the point of departure of the 
philosophy of law.  No ownership exists, however, before the family or 
the relations of master and servant are evolved, and these are much more 
concrete relations.  It would, on the other hand, be correct to say that 
families and entire tribes exist which have as yet only _possessions_ 
and not _property_.  The simpler category appears, thus, as a relation 
of simple family or tribal communities to property.  In societies which 
have reached a higher stage, the category appears as a comparatively 
simple relation existing in a more advanced community.  The concrete 
substratum underlying the relation of ownership is, however, always 
presupposed.  One can conceive an individual savage who has possessions; 
possession in this case, however, is not a legal relation.  It is 
incorrect that in the course of historical development possession gave 
rise to the family.  On the contrary, possession always presupposes this 
"more concrete category".  One may, nevertheless, conclude that the 
simple categories represent relations or conditions which may reflect 
the immature concrete situation without as yet positing the more complex 
relation or condition which is conceptually expressed in the more 
concrete category; on the other hand, the same category may be retained 
as a subordinate relation in more developed concrete circumstances.  
Money may exist and has existed in historical time before capital, 
banks, wage-labor, etc., came into being.  In this respect, it can be 
said that the simpler category expresses relations in a more advanced 
entity; relations which already existed historically before the entity 
had developed the aspects expressed in a more concrete category.  The 
procedure of abstract reasoning which advances from the simplest to more 
complex concepts to that extent conforms to actual historical 
development.  
 
It is true, on the other hand, that there are certain highly-developed 
(but nevertheless historically immature) social formations which employ 
some of the most advanced economic forms -- e.g., cooperation, developed 
division of labor, etc.  -- without having developed any money at all -- 
for instance, Peru.  In Slavonic communities, too, money -- and it's 
precondition, exchange -- is of little or no importance within the 
individual community, but is used on the borders where commerce with 
other communities takes place; and it is altogether wrong to assume that 
exchange within the community is an original constituent element.  On 
the contrary, in the beginning exchange tends to arise in the 
intercourse of different communities with one another, rather than among 
members of the same community.  Moreover, although money begins to play 
a considerable role very early and in diverse ways, it is known to have 
been a dominant factor in antiquity only among nations developed in a 
particular direction -- i.e., merchant nations.  Even among Greeks and 
Romans (the most advanced nations of antiquity) money reaches its full 
development, which is presupposed in modern bourgeois society, only in 
the period of their disintegration.  The full potential of this quite 
simple category thus emerges historically not in the most advanced 
phases of society, and it certainly does not penetrate into all economic 
relations.  For example: taxes in kind and deliveries in kind remained 
the basis of the Roman empire even at the height of its development; 
indeed, a completely-evolved monetary system existed in Rome only in the 
army, and it never permeated the whole complex of labor.  Although the 
simpler category, therefore, may have existed historically before the 
more concrete category, its complete intensive and extensive development 
can nevertheless occur in a complex social formation, whereas the more 
concrete category may have been fully evolved in a more primitive social 
formation.  
 
Labor seems to be a very simple category.  The notion of labor in this 
universal form (as labor in general) is also extremely old.  
Nevertheless, "labor" in this simplicity is economically considered just 
as modern a category as the relations which give rise to this simple 
abstraction.  The Monetary System, for example, still regards wealth 
quite objectively as a thing existing independently in the shape of 
money.  Compared with this standpoint, it was a substantial advance when 
the manufacturing or Mercantile system transferred the source of wealth 
from the object to the subjective activity -- mercantile or industrial 
labor -- but it still considered that only this circumscribed activity 
itself produced money.  In contrast to this system, the Physiocrats 
assume that a specific for of labor -- agriculture -- creates wealth, 
and they see the object no longer in the guise of money, but as a 
product in general, as the universal result of labor.  In accordance 
with the still circumscribed activity, the product remains a naturally 
developed product, an agricultural product, a product of the land _par 
excellence_.  
 
It was an immense advance when Adam Smith rejected all restrictions with 
regard to the activity that produces wealth -- for him, it was labor as 
such, neither manufacturing, nor commercial, nor agricultural labor, but 
all of them.  The abstract universality which creates wealth implies 
also the universality of the objects defined as wealth: they are 
products as such, or once more labor as such, but in this case past, 
materialized labor.  How difficult and immense a transition that was is 
demonstrated by the fact that Adam Smith himself occassionally relapses 
once more into the Physiocratic system.  It might seem that in this way 
merely an abstract expression was found for the simplest and most 
ancient relation in which human beings act as producers -- irrespective 
of the type of society they live in.  This is true in one respect, but 
not in another.  
 
The fact that the specific kind of labor is irrelevant presupposes a 
highly-developed complex of actually existing kinds of labor -- none of 
which is any more the all-important one.  The most general abstractions 
arise on the whole only when concrete development is most profuse, so 
that a specific quality is seen to be common to many phenomena, or 
common to all.  Then it is no longer perceived solely in a particular 
form.  This abstraction of labor is, on the other hand, by no means 
simply the conceptual resultant of a variety of existing concrete types 
of labor.  The fact that the particular kind of labor employed is 
immaterial is appropriate to a form of society in which individuals 
easily pass from one type of labor to another, the particular type of 
labor being accidental to them and therefore irrelevant.  Labor, not 
only as a category but in reality, has become a means to create wealth 
in general, and has ceased to be tied as an attribute to a particular 
individual.  This state of affairs is most pronounced in the United 
States, the most modern form of bourgeois society.  The abstract 
category "labor", "labor as such", labor _sans phrase_, the point of 
departure in modern economics, thus becomes a practical fact only there.  
The simplest abstraction, which plays a decisive role in modern 
political economy, an abstraction which expresses an ancient relation 
existing in all social formations, nevertheless appears to be actually 
true in this abstract form only as a category of the most modern 
society.  It might be said that phenomena which are historical products 
in the United States -- e.g., the irrelevance of the particular type of 
labor -- appear to be among the Russians (for instance) naturally 
developed predispositions.  But in the first place, there is an enormous 
difference between barbarians having a predisposition which makes it 
possible to employ them in various tasks, and civilized people who apply 
themselves to various tasks.  As regards the Russians, moreover, their 
indifference to the particular kind of labor performed is in practice 
matched by their traditional habit of clinging fast to very definite 
kind of labor from which they are extricated only by external 
influences.  
 
The examples of labor strikingly demonstrates how even the most abstract 
categories (despite their validity in all epochs) -- precisely because 
they are abstractions -- are equally a product of historical conditions 
even in the specific form of abstractions, and they retain their full 
validity only for and within the framework of these conditions.  
 
Bourgeois society is the most advanced and complex historical 
organization of production.  The categories which express its relations, 
and an understanding of its structure, therefore, provide and an insight 
into the structure and the relations of production of all formerly 
existing social formations the ruins and component elements of which 
were used in the creation of bourgeois society.  Some of these 
assimilated remains are still carried on within bourgeois society; 
others, however, which previously existed only in rudimentary form, have 
been further developed and have attained their full significance, etc.  
The anatomy of man is a key to the anatomy of the ape.  On the other 
hand, rudiments of more advanced forms in the lower species of animals 
can only be understood when the more advanced forms are already known.  
Bourgeois economy thus provides a key to the economy of antiquity, etc., 
but it is quite impossible [to gain this insight] in the manner of those 
economists who obliterate all historical differences and who see in all 
social phenomenon only bourgeois phenomenon.  If one only knows rent, it 
is possible to understand tribute, etc., but they do not have to be 
treated as identical.  
 
Since bourgeois society is, moreover, only a contradictory form of 
development, it contains relations of earlier societies often merely in 
very stunted form, or even in the form of travesties -- e.g., communal 
ownership.  Thus, although it is true that the categories of bourgeois 
economy are valid for all other social formations, this has to be taken 
_cum grano salis_, for they may contain them in an advanced, stunted, 
caricatured, etc., form -- that is, always with substantial differences.  
What is called historical evolution depends, in general, on the fact 
that the latest form regards earlier ones as stages in the development 
of itself, and conceives them always in a one-sided manner -- since only 
rarely, and under quite special conditions, is a society able to adopt a 
critical attitude towards itself.  In this context, we are not, of 
course, discussing historical periods which themselves believe that they 
are periods of decline.  The Christian religion was able to contribute 
to an objective understanding of earlier mythologies only when its 
self-criticism was, to a certain extent, prepared, as it were 
potentially.  Similarly, only when the self-criticism of bourgeois 
society had begun, was bourgeois political economy able to understand 
the feudal, ancient, and oriental economies.  In so far as bourgeois 
political economy did not simply identify itself with the past in a 
mythological manner, its criticism of earlier economies -- especially of 
the feudal system against which it still had to wage a direct struggle 
-- resembled the criticism that Christianity directed against 
heathenism, or which Protestantism directed against Catholicism.  
 
Just as, in general, when examining any historical period or social 
science, so also in the case of the development of economic categories 
is it always necessary to remember that the subject (in this context, 
contemporary bourgeois society) is presupposed both in reality and in 
the mind, and that therefore categories express forms of existence and 
conditions of existence (and sometimes merely separate aspects) of this 
particular society, the subject; thus the category, _even from the 
scientific standpoint_, by no means begins at the moment when it is 
discussed _as such_.  This has to be remembered, because it provides 
important criteria for the arrangement of the material.  For example, 
nothing seems more natural than to begin with rent -- i.e., landed 
property, since it is associated with the earth, the source of all 
production and all life -- and agriculture, the first form of production 
in all societies that have attained a measure of stability.  But nothing 
would be more erroneous.  There is, in every social formation, a branch 
of production which determines the position and importance of all 
others; and the relations obtaining in this branch accordingly determine 
the relations of all other branches, as well.  It is as though light of 
a particular hue were cast upon everything, tinging all other colors and 
modifying their special features; or as if a special ether determined 
the specific gravity of everything found in it.  Let us take, as an 
example, pastoral tribes.  (Tribes living exclusively on hunting or 
fishing are beyond the boundary line from which real development 
begins.) A certain types of agricultural activity occurs among them, and 
this determines land ownership.  It is communal ownership and retains 
this form in a larger or smaller measure, according to the degree to 
which these people maintain their traditions -- e.g., communal ownership 
among the Slavs.  Among settled agricultural people -- settled already 
to a large extent -- where agriculture predominated, as in societies of 
antiquity and the feudal period, even manufacture (its structure and the 
forms of property corresponding thereto) have, in some measure, 
specifically agrarian features.  Manufacture is either completely 
dependent on agriculture, as in the earlier Roman period, or as in the 
Middle Ages, it copies in the town and in its conditions the 
organization of the countryside.  Even in the Middle Ages, capital -- 
unless it was solely money capital -- consisted of the traditional 
tools, etc., and retained a specifically agrarian character.  The 
reverse takes place in bourgeois society.  Agriculture, to an increasing 
extent, becomes just a branch of industry and is completely dominated by 
capital.  The same applies to rent.  In all forms in which landed 
property is the decisive factor, natural relations still predominate; in 
the forms in which the decisive factor is capital, social, 
historically-evolved elements predominate.  Rent cannot be understood 
with capital, but capital can be understood without rent.  Capital is 
the economic power that dominates everything in bourgeois society.  It 
must form both the point of departure and the conclusion and it has to 
be expounded before landed property.  After analyzing capital and landed 
property separately, their interconnection must be examined.  
  
It would be inexpedient and wrong therefore to present the economic 
categories successively in the order in which they have played the 
dominant role in history.  On the contrary, their order of succession is 
determined by their mutual relation in modern bourgeois society and this 
is quite the reverse of what appears to be natural to them, or in 
accordance with the sequence of historical development.  The point at 
issue is not the role that various economic relations have played in the 
succession of various social formations appearing in the course of 
history; even less is it their sequence "as concepts" (Proudhon) (a 
nebulous notion of the historical process), but their position within 
modern bourgeois society.  
 
It is precisely the predominance of agricultural people in the ancient 
world which caused the merchant nations -- Phoenicians, Carthaginians -- 
to develop in such purity (abstract precision) in the ancient world.  
For capital in the shape of merchant or money capital appears in the 
abstract form where capital has not yet become the dominant factor in 
society.  Lombards and Jews occupied the same position with regard to 
mediaeval agrarian societies.  
 
Another example of the various roles which the same categories have 
played at different stages of society are joint-stock companies, one of 
the most recent features of bourgeois society; but they arise also in 
its early period in the form of large privileged commercial companies 
with rights of monopoly.  
 
The concept of national wealth finds its way into the works of the 
economists of the 17th century as the notion that wealth is created for 
the state, whose power, on the other hand, is proportional to this 
wealth -- a notion which to some extent still survives even among 18th 
century economists.  This is still an unintentionally hypocritical 
manner in which wealth and the production of wealth are proclaimed to be 
the goal of modern states, and production itself is regarded simply as a 
means for producing wealth.  
 
The disposition of material has evidently to be made in such a way that 
[section] 
 
     One - comprises general abstract definitions, which, therefore, 
           appertain in some measure to all social formations, but in 
           the sense set forth earlier.  
 
     Two - the categories which constitute the internal structure of 
           bourgeois society and on which the principal classes are 
           based.  Town and country.  The three large social classes; 
           exchanges between them.  Circulation.  The (private) credit 
           system.  
 
     Three - the state as the epitome of bourgeois society.  Analysis of 
           its relations to itself.  The "unproductive" classes.  Taxes.  
           National debt, public credit, Population, Colonies, 
           Emigration.  
 
     Four - international conditions of production.  International 
           division of labor.  International exchange.  Export and 
           import.  Rate of exchange.  
 
     Five - world market and crises. 
 
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
                                           
