



Natural Value

	by Friedrich Wieser



Book III: The Natural Imputation of the Return from Production

PART I: The General Principles of Imputation

Chapter 1

Return Value

    Production goods, as well as consumption goods, afford
utility. Land, capital, and labour afford utility inasmuch as
they produce useful objects of consumption. As the latter serve
directly, so do the former indirectly, toward the satisfaction of
wants. The seed, the tree, the soil, the yarn, the coal, the
machine: -- these are not indeed ripe or finished goods, like the
fruit and the garment, but they are just as really goods. They
contain prospective or potential utility.
    And the production goods, land, labour, and capital, must
receive value on account of their utility, so far as they are not
available in superfluity. The atom of air, which floats above the
field in company with the countless others that throng space, is
useful but valueless, because its place is at any time taken and
fined by another. On the other hand, in the judgment of economic
men, all those elements of production must receive value on
account of their useful effect, which, however numerous they be,
are yet not numerous enough to prevent even a small loss in them
being perceptible and bringing harm in its train. Production does
not despise free goods; it does not disdain the fruitful land
although it should stretch away in excess of all requirements, or
the wood in the primeval forest, or free water power: on the
contrary, it seeks them out and prefers to use them wherever it
can, because their services are the most perfect possible, and
present no break in the rendering. None the less it must be said
that production pays little attention to free goods, -- indeed
less than little. It does not consider them at all. It merely
uses them; it ascribes to them no value. It does not even reckon
to them the services they render. Utility alone gives no value;
there must be limitation of supply as well, before value emerges
from utility. Utility is and remains the source of value, but in
order to set the source flowing there must be a peculiar motive
power, which will direct the attention of man to the necessity of
watching and attending to it. 
    It is, however, not usual to follow the value of production
goods to its source in utility. To estimate the value of a field
I do not consider what satisfactions of want can be had from its
crop. I content myself with calculating what and how much crop it
will probably yield; this crop then I estimate according to the
value which attaches to it in virtue of its utility; and this
value is to me the basis from which I ascertain the value of the
field. The act of valuation of production goods, which ought to
reach right back to wants, is, therefore, usually carried only to
that point at which the relation of these goods to the value of
their products is clearly established, for in the value of
products the calculation of the wants is already represented. To
this extent it is possible to say that the value of production
goods is determined by the value of their products or by the
value of the return. Productive value is return-value. The
consideration that, from production goods, one can obtain a
return in goods which possess not only utility but value, gives
production goods their value. 
    According to the manner in which production is planned and
carried out, it is possible to obtain from the same goods widely
diverse kinds and amounts of return. Economic principles demand
the obtaining of the greatest possible return; that is, the
return possessing the greatest value which it is possible to
obtain under the circumstances. It is this "greatest possible
return" whose value should serve as basis for the valuation of
production goods.(1*) Probably it never is possible to decide
this beforehand with absolute accuracy, but some anticipatory
estimate there must be. It is not therefore actually the value of
the return which forms the ground of production value, -- but the
expectation which is formed of it. It is the anticipated value of
the anticipated return.
    The greater the return reckoned on, the greater will be the
productive value. The greater the dividend expected from a stock,
the higher will be the value put upon the stock. This frustration
of stocks and dividends is, on the whole, the best that could be
given to explain productive value. Every means of production,
every tool, every piece of land or raw material, every service of
labour, represents, if one may say so, a share in an undertaking.
This share contributes to the result of the undertaking, and
consequently gets ascribed to it a quota of the result, and upon
the amount of this result its value must depend.(2*) 

NOTES:

1. The value of the productive unit again is decided according to
the marginal law -- i.e. by the least among these returns. See
below, Book III. chap. viii. 

2. The classical political economy really examines only the value
of products, or, more exactly, of produced consumption goods. So
far as the factors of production are concerned, it looks upon
them, on the one side, as sources of income (rent, interest,
wage, and, perhaps, also undertaker's income); on the other side,
as the elements which go to form the costs of production, and are
considered to decide, principally, the value of the products. 
    But when one compares with this the endeavours which,
explicitly or implicitly, guide the new writers on the theory of
value, we find the circle of the phenomena to which the idea of
value is applied extraordinarily widened. Factors of production
-- better expressed by the later writers as "production goods" --
are conceived of all through as objects of value; costs are
directly phenomena of value; and even income must be so
conceived. Further than this, the relations between the value of
utilities and the value of production goods is turned just the
other way about -- the former being considered as determining,
the latter as determined. On the present occasion we have first
to do with the proposition which may serve as starting-point for
the whole theory, -- that production goods receive their value
from the value of the products which they serve to create.
Gossen, Jevons, Menger, and Walras are all agreed on this point
In my opinion it is again Menger who gives the most clear and
comprehensive statement of the matter. He divides (as does also
Gossen, though much less perfectly) the entire goods which stand
in the productive nexus into Ranks, and value is conducted from
rank to rank. The first and lowest rank is formed by those
utilities which receive their value direct from wants. The value
thus received passes over first to goods of the second rank,
those, namely, which serve directly towards the producing of
goods of the first rank; as e.g. the meal and the labour of the
baker in the preparation of bread. From these value passes on to
goods of the third rank (e.g. wheat and the labour of the
miller); and so on, step by step, till it reaches the highest,
or, as Bohm-Bawerk calls them, the most remote ranks. 

Chapter 2

The Problem of Imputation

    No productive instrument, be it ever so efficient, yields a
return by its unaided agency; it always requires the assistance
of others. And the more the art of production is developed, the
more numerous will be the productive instruments which
co-operate. The very simplest products often require the most
complicated methods of production, because they, more than any
others, allow of the application of machinery and, therefore, of
power in the mass. The proposition that production goods obtain
their value from the value of their returns, suffices only for
the valuation of the co-operating productive factors as a whole;
not for their valuation individually. To obtain this also, we
need a rule which will make it possible to divide up the whole
return into single parts. 
    When land, capital, and labour work together, we must be able
to separate out the quota of land, the quota of capital, and the
quota of labour from the joint product. More than that, we must
be able to measure the services of each separate piece of land,
of each separate quantity of capital, and of each separate
labourer. Of what use is it to know the return which falls to
machinery, coal, and raw material together? It is necessary to
distinguish what each has contributed to the total result, just
as the contribution of the stone-cutter who hews the block must
be distinguished from that of the artist who chisels it into the
statue. 
    If we may form a judgment from economic practice, we should
say there is such a rule of division. No one, practically, is
limited to saying that return is due to all the producing factors
together; every one understands and practises, more or less
perfectly, the art of division of return. A good business man
must know, and does know, what a day labourer and what a skilled
worker would yield him; what profit a machine will bring in; how
much has to be ascribed to the raw material; what return this and
what return that piece of land will produce. If he did not know
this; if he could only compare his outlay and his results as a
whole and in the lump, he would not know what to do in case the
return proved less than the outlay. Must he give up the
production altogether? Must he alter the management? Must he be
more saving with labour or capital, with machinery or raw
material; or, on the contrary, must he employ more of these? Only
if there is some adequate means of following out individually the
working of each productive element, can he judge clearly upon
these points That there is such a means is testified by the fact
that economic decisions of the nature we have just mentioned are
made, and made with as much confidence and as favourable results
as are any other decisions in matters of value generally. The
existence of this means of calculation is still more certainly
proved by the fact that decisions of this nature are so often
made in the same way by many people, -- in fact, by all persons
who find themselves in the same circumstances. Why at a certain
point of time does the entire body of undertakers, in some
particular branch of manufacture, suddenly replace hand labour by
machinery, when previously they had not found machinery
profitable? Why is agriculture in one country so much more
"intensive" than in another? Chance and caprice are here out of
the question. It is calculations of production that effect these
alterations. They give arithmetical proof that it is advantageous
to eliminate the one element of production, with its accompanying
share in the return, and substitute for it the other. The more
perfect the production, the more exact will be its calculations,
and the more highly will the art of distributing the return be
developed. A "model economy" calculates everything. But the
rudest peasant, and the wildest savage, make calculations,
inexact and hasty though they be. They, too, make use of their
experience, though very imperfectly of course, in regard to
matters where the impulse and the confidence are given by nature.
The peasant, dwelling in some cleft of the mountain, says to
himself that this field is more valuable than that; and this he
could not do unless he understood the art of separating the
return of the field from the return of the co-operating
labourers, tools, and materials. These are rules which arise
naturally, from the very nature of man, when he finds himself
confronted with the problems of economic life. In applying them,
the attempt would undoubtedly be made even by a communistic
state, to calculate the result of each individual productive
element. And in a highly cultivated state these calculations
would be made with great exactitude, in order to lay down that
plan of production which, for the time being, was most effective.

    It is singular how few of those writers who have attempted to
grasp economic procedures into the unity of theory have tried to
discover this rule, -- which is certainly one of the most
important followed in practical economic dealings. Of the many
difficulties which have to be overcome if we are to get, apart
from actual transactions, a purely theoretical and scientific
account of what people actually do when impelled by
circumstances, probably the first and most difficult of all is to
put before ourselves what are the problems really put in business
transactions. Every theory begins with the least important of the
things it has to do, and only in the end arrives at its true
vocation. 
    The second difficulty is to state the problem correctly. The
few writers who have managed to get over the first obstacle
mentioned have almost all come to grief at the second. For the
most part they pitch the question too high, and thus change, what
to the simple man is a simple and natural thing, into a subtle
and sophistical riddle, of which they then say, rightly enough,
that no solution is possible. They try. to discover which portion
of the joint product, physically considered, each factor has
produced, or of which part of the result each factor is the
physical cause. This, however, is not to be discovered. At the
most it could be possible only in cases where the product is a
complex of materials externally bound together; and even that
only so far as regards the materials, and not as regards the
power which makes them a complex -- a power whose effects inhere
in all the constituent parts of the mass, without being
incorporated in any one of them. Looked at in this way, we cannot
get beyond the proposition that the result is the joint product
of all its factors and causes; that those factors must work in
combination or they cannot work at all, -- like the four brothers
in the tale who saved the princess only by their united
endeavours. If we wish to find the principle for division of
return which is applied in practical life, the question must be
put quite differently; it must be put as practical life puts it,
and it must be put simply. 
    The causes of any phenomenon, whatever it may be, can be
interpreted in very various ways. The philosopher looks at them
in one light, the peasant in quite another; and yet both may
judge rightly, and, so far as their judgment is correct, may
apply rightly their conception. The difference in their opinions
rests on the fact that they judge from different points of view.
The former searches after the final causes that may be grasped by
human reason; the latter limits his attention to the proximate
and immediate causes, taking for granted the agency of all those
which are further removed. Each would fail were he to make use of
the other's knowledge; the peasant's maxim does not answer the
purpose of philosophy, and the philosophic conception has no
place in the economy of the peasant; yet each is serviceable
enough in its own place. In whatever industrial situation men
come to a judgment as to the causes of the phenomena which they
encounter, the horizon of the judgment is always strictly limited
by the point of view they take. Whatever lies beyond that cannot
properly be taken into consideration, or the judgment would never
come to anything. It would only end in needless critical
reflection, which would be of no help as regards the objects
aimed at. If we wish to obtain a practical judgment the object
must be kept in view, and the matter looked at from the point of
view of those concerned. A theory which proposes to explain the
idea in business life, must, of all things, not be above its
business; it must limit itself, so as not to give too deep a
meaning to, and thereby really distort, the limited subject.
    A science nearly related to our own as regards its subject,
that of jurisprudence, may give us admirable instruction on this
point. For an act of murder there must necessarily be a
perpetrator, a victim, an instrument, and an opportunity. Besides
these, the act is influenced by innumerable circumstances, which
can often be shown to reach back to a far distant past in the
previous history of the murderer, and even in the history of the
community among which he came into existence and grew into
manhood. The sociologist, the historian, the philanthropist, and
the lawgiver will have much to consider that has but an indirect
connection with the committing of the murder. But, however far
back they may carry their consideration, some idle brain can
always go still further, and follow ad infinitum the series of
causes which led to the deed, -- as, for instance, the history of
the tool with which it was done, as well as the history of the
doer. The judge, on the other hand, who, in his narrowly-defined
task, is only concerned about the legal imputation, confines
himself to the discovery of the legally responsible factor, --
that person, in fact, who is threatened with the legal
punishment. On him will rightly be laid the whole burden of the
consequences, although he could never by himself alone -- without
instruments and all the other conditions -- have committed the
crime. The imputation takes for granted physical causality. It
cannot fall upon any one who stands outside the series of causes
which led to the result, and any proof that the accused does
stand outside exempts him from condemnation. But if the causal
nexus is once established, far more is laid to the account of the
doer than was or could be physically done by him. Only a foolish
interpretation of the judgment could take exception to this. The
expression "this man has done it" does not mean "this man alone
has done it," but "this man alone, among all the active causes
and factors, is legally responsible for the deed."
    In the division of the return from production, we have to
deal similarly not with a complete causal explanation, but with
an adequately limiting imputation, -- save that it is from the
economic, not the judicial point of view. Observation of the
fruits of the earth suggests to a religious mind the Creator of
all things. A scientific investigator is directed by the same
observation towards the pursuit of the cognisable causes of their
creation. A Faust pines after knowledge regarding the hidden
forces of their life. The farmer, as farmer, thinks differently
from all of these. He ascribes his crops, soberly and
unsentimentally, to a very limited and small circle of all the
causes which have actually produced them. He asks -- "Towards
what things must I direct my economic attention in order to
receive this return?" -- and reckons the result accordingly. He
therefore sets apart from the total active causes all those which
lie behind in the past. From the present causes he then sets
apart all those which can be of no use, or are not recognised as
having any use. From the recognised and useful, again, he divides
off all those which are not under economic command. From these
last he, finally, separates out all those causes which need not
be cared for, because they are present in superfluity. As we can
readily understand, he does not in the least believe that the
remainder is the sole originating cause of his return. At the
same time he rightly attributes or imputes the return to it
alone, taking the working of all the other elements as assured.
His judgment, though limited, is neither false nor even inexact.
It embraces all the causes which have to be considered by him if
his labour is to be attended by good results. 
    If, in the economic working out, parts of the total result
should be traced back to individual instruments of production, it
is that we continue the reasoning with which we started: we trace
back the total result not to its numerous wider causes, but
simply to the economic instruments of its production. In regard
to the part we limit ourselves still more than we did in regard
to the whole; we seek out that one among the economic elements to
which the part is practically to be imputed, although, certainly,
it could have produced it only in combination with the other
elements. Here, again, there is neither fallacy, nor even
inaccuracy. On the contrary, so far as this method succeeds in
founding, upon the imputation of the return, a valuation of goods
and a plan of production which insures the most successful
employment of each single element, it is the height of practical
wisdom. 
    To show that imputation in this sense is both allowable and
practicable take one single case. Suppose that two fields, the
one fertile, the other poor, but both worked with similar amounts
of capital and labour, give different returns. To which account
is the surplus return of the better field to be attributed -- to
that of the seed, or the manure, or the plough, or the labour?
But these were the same in both fields. Is it not rather to be
attributed to the land itself and its greater fertility? No one
can be in doubt as to that, nor can one raise the objection that,
without seed, manure, plough, and labour, there could have been
no surplus return. Taking things as they are, more depends upon
the possession of the better soil -- just as much more, in fact,
as the surplus return amounts to. 
    It is of great importance that we should try to formulate
theoretically the rules for the imputation of productive return,
not only as regards land but as regards all productive
instruments. If we do not succeed in doing so, the valuation of
production goods will remain an enigma; and the existing order of
things, under which the actual imputation of returns forms the
basis for the distribution of national income among the citizens,
will lie under the accusation of arbitrariness, if not the worse
accusation of force and injustice. It would not even be possible
to justify the difference in wages paid to some labourers as
compared with others. If there is no rule by which to adjust the
quarrel between owners and workers, neither is there any by which
to measure the rank of the inventor against that of the
day-labourer who carries out the invention. It would be purely
arbitrary if one tried, even approximately and by way of
valuation, to show respect to genius, devotion, art, power, skill
-- in short all the virtues and excellences which, from time
immemorial, have been held in respect in economic matters as well
as in others, and which society has to thank for the most
beneficent and useful services of its members. 

Chapter 3

The Socialist Reading of the Problem. The Claim of the Labourer
to the Entire Return


    The socialist theory so greatly limits the circle of those
things which may be counted as means of production that the
problem of imputation is also sensibly narrowed. 
    Socialists do not recognise three productive factors, land,
capital, and labour: they acknowledge only a single productive
power, Labour. Only human labour, they say, is creative; it alone
can really produce. Of course, to be effective, it requires land
and capital, but these hold a subordinate position to labour, and
act merely as auxiliary means of production. But in the existing
order of things, landowners and capitalists -- as having
exclusive possession of the material auxiliary means of
production -- are placed in a position to force the labourer to
give up to them a great part of the product of labour, as it is
only on this condition that they will lend their property and
allow labour to use it. By reason of this, land and capital have
become sources of personal income for the idle classes, but
unjustly so; and it would be a great error to infer the fact of
productive power from that of income. When the owners refuse to
grant to labour the use of these auxiliaries, they place
obstacles in the way of labour, as Rodbertus says; when they do
grant this use, they do nothing more than merely remove the
obstruction they have themselves created; they simply withdraw
their own arbitrary fiat. It is always the labourer who must
produce. Land and capital are only conditions, not causes of
production. All return is exclusively labour-return. 
    As a matter of fact Rodbertus is perfectly right when he says
that no conclusion can be drawn from personal income to material
return. The problem of distribution of return must be entirely
separated from that of distribution of income, if it is to be
judged of correctly. But if the problem is to be entirely
separated, it must also be so in its application. Let us then
leave the personal quarrel entirely out of consideration. Let us
completely disregard the question as to what persons should have
the products; and, without regard to consequences, simply apply
ourselves to find out which factors are to thank for their
production, and to which factors they should be imputed. Let us
imagine to ourselves the communistic state as seeking for the
natural laws of imputation. Here the entire product falls to the
enjoyment of the labouring commonwealth. The question then is: --
Does it therefore consider the whole product as a result of its
labour, or does it also impute the product to its possession of
land and capital? 
    Clearly this will depend on the standpoint from which the
imputation is calculated. If it is the moral imputation that is
in question, then certainly no one but the labourer could be
named. Land and capital have no merit that they bring forth
fruit; they are dead tools in the hand of man; and the man is
responsible for the use he makes of them. Evidently all those
who, in any sort of way, have assisted in bringing about the
result, are counted among the labourers, -- those who direct as
well as those who carry out. Indeed, there is no possible doubt
that the greatest thanks are not due to mechanical exertions, if
we are speaking of imputation in the highest sense of the word.
Above these must stand the services of those who direct the
executant labourer; who not only supply him with ideas,
organisation, and energy, but also procure for him the materials
for labour, contrive the machinery, and bring together the
labourers who are to work with him. Compared with potencies such
as these, the executant labourer himself takes the same position
as the material means of production do as compared with himself.
Morally considered, things are auxiliaries to him, but he himself
is the auxiliary of his leader. 
    This moral imputation may be important for the personal
disposition of income; for the material division of return, of
which alone we are now speaking, it is of no consequence. The
question here is: On what factors are we practically dependent if
the return is to be obtained? Every one who knows economic life
as it is, will answer quite plainly. Upon labour and productive
wealth. Increase of possession raises the return just as surely
as does additional industry. No one feels that the return is
dependent upon those production goods of nature which are as
abundant as the atom of air floating above the field, or the
trees in a primeval forest. But every one feels that the return
is dependent upon all goods which, however abundant they may be,
are yet scarce; those goods which one economises and tries to
multiply. Where would not such possessions have value? And if
they have value why is it, if not on account of the return, and
according to the amount of the return, which they secure? So long
as men consider themselves rich in possessing land and capital,
so long do they prove that they impute to them a portion of the
fruits which they assist in bringing forth, and so long do they
attribute to labour only the remainder of the total return. The
socialist who wishes to see his state as rich in property as
possible, confutes thereby as completely as possible his own
theory, that labour alone makes rich.(1*)
    All means of production in which value is recognised, are
recognized thereby as practically influential causes of
production. To these means of production land and capital will
belong, so long as they are not available in ever-assured
superfluity. No one can seriously doubt this. The only thing that
can be doubted is whether it be just and advantageous for society
to permit the existence of private and individual property in
land and capital, whereby the return from land and capital is
transferred exclusively to single individuals. On this question
it is not so easy to come to a decision, and so far as we have
gone we have not made any, nor even tried to do so. We have only
explained the material relation between products and means of
production, without in any way anticipating the ranking of
personal claims. 

NOTES:

1. We shall find further on (Book V. chap. x), in the socialist
theory itself, a much clearer confession that labour is not the
only factor in the formation of value. See also Book III, chap.
xvii.

Chapter 4

Previous Attempts at Solution

    The only writer who has made any attempt at an exhaustive
treatment of the problem now occupying our attention is Menger.
In this Menger starts from the fundamental idea of his theory of
value. Supposing that I possess a stock of consumption goods, the
clearest way of finding the value of one single item of the stock
is by assuming that I lose it. In this way I find what enjoyment
depends upon this item -- the marginal enjoyment already
described, -- and find at once the source and amount of its
value. This method of determining value Menger now applies to the
more complicated case in which one has to decide the value of a
single item, among several co-operating production goods. Here
also he asks what would be the consequence of losing a single
item, or a definite portion of any such item, from among the
entire group of available goods (land, seed, agricultural
implements, labour, cattle, manure, and so on) -- e.g. a
cart-horse or quantity of manure. The decrease in the total
return which would take place, gives him the amount of return
which the owner feels to be dependent upon the possession of the
item in question, and gives him at the same time the foundation
of its value. 
    In applying this Menger has arrived at some very remarkable
and important results. No production good can work by itself: to
accomplish anything every good requires the co-operation of
others; and, in so far as production goods mutually demand and
supplement each other, they are, to use Menger's expression,
"complementary goods." At the same time the combinations which
they enter into are less strict than might be expected. If a
single good falls out of a productive group of goods, the
efficiency of the remaining goods is not, as a rule, completely
destroyed thereby. It happens frequently that the group may still
remain a group, and still be effectively employed, although with
somewhat diminished return, without the lost good being replaced
at all. Land, e.g., yields some return even without manure, or
without the whole amount of manure demanded by good farming. Or
the loss may be made up, if not with quite the same effect, by
the substitution of a good taken from some other group, in which
latter group, naturally, the return must equally sink a little.
Or it may happen that the goods left over become ineffective, or
too little effective, when grouped as was originally intended,
but allow of being annexed to other groups, whose return is
thereby raised, although, perhaps, not by the entire amount of
what was lost originally. Take, as example, agricultural capital
and labour, which have lost their original employment through
laying waste of the ground for which they were intended, and are
turned to industrial purposes. 
    It will be seen that the complementary nature of goods does
not reach so far as at first sight might be supposed. Every
single good requires the co-operation of others in order to be
really of use, but the connection of the goods is not a very
strict one. Only a portion of the return from the combination
ever depends upon any one single element of production; never
(except in a few cases which scarcely require to be considered)
the entire return. 
    What Menger has done is distinguished, as well by the logical
sequence of his argument as by his skill in observation, and the
lifelike interpretation of that observation. It brings light into
the darkness of a subject which no other theorist could have
faced, much less illumined. At the same time even Menger has not
given the entire solution quite perfectly. An example will make
this clear.
    Suppose three productive elements, employed in the most
rational plan of production possible, promise in combination a
product whose value amounts to 10 units of value. If the three
elements were to be employed otherwise, in combination with other
groups, they would certainly raise the return of these groups,
but it is against our hypothesis -- which is that of the most
rational plan of production, -- that the return can be raised by
10 units; otherwise the first combination chosen would not after
all have been the best. There is always an infinite number of
ways in which the elements in question can be grouped, but there
is always one plan, and that the best, which should be carried
out: if this be given up in favour of another, the result must be
smaller, even if only to a trifling extent. 
    Suppose, again, that the three elements are employed in some
plan other than the best -- which, be it remembered, demanded
their being combined with one another in a distinct group. Say
that, by being each separately employed in some other group, the
return of each of these three groups is raised by 3 units, and
the three elements accordingly now produce a return amounting to
9 units of value. 
    How in this case will the value of each single item be
reckoned according to Menger's principle? By the decrease in
return which ensues in the case of loss. In this case the
decrease amounts to 10 units -- the full return of the best
combination now broken up -- of which, however, 6 can be
recovered by the new employment of the two remaining elements.
The loss, therefore, amounts finally to 4, and this is true
indifferently of any of the three goods. 12, then, is the value
of the three taken together. But this is impossible, since, when
most profitably employed, they can give only a return of 10. 
    This mistake in the result proceeds from a mistake in the
method. The normal and determining assumption on which one
calculates the value of a good, is not that of its loss, but that
of its undisturbed possession, and of the use it gives in
fulfilling its end. The assumption of loss serves, in certain
circumstances, to show more clearly the advantage of possession.
I see more clearly what I have by possessing a thing when I
imagine what would be the consequence if I ceased to have it. But
this holds only under certain circumstances, namely, as regards a
stock of goods of the same kind, where if, in imagination, I take
away one good from the others, it is this one good alone and
nothing else that is taken away. It does not hold in the case of
a stock of heterogeneous and co-operating production goods, where
if, in imagination, I remove one, I deprive the others also of a
portion of their effect. 
    The full effect of all the elements in any productive
combination can only be realised when these elements remain
together undisturbed; it is therefore impossible to discover what
value I receive and enjoy from this undisturbed possession, if I
begin by assuming the dissolution of the combination, and then
ask what still remains. The question must be put positively: What
do I actually obtain from the goods as they stand at my disposal?
Those productive employments which stand first, -- the
employments which are most desirable and would be first chosen --
decide the value; not those which stand second, and would be
taken up only in the exceptional case of some disturbance of the
original combination. Two persons who are both in exactly the
same circumstances, and whose judgment agrees as to the best
arrangements for production, must obviously ascribe precisely the
same value to their productive possessions, although one of them
should have something better to fall back upon in case the first
plan falls through. According to Menger, however, the values, in
this latter case, would require to be assessed differently, and
indeed the higher valuation would be that of the person who had
the least to fall back upon, because to him it would be much more
important that the first plan should not fall through. 
    The assumption of loss is sufficient if what is required is
the dividing up of the return which the elements of one
combination guarantee when put into other combinations; but it is
of no use when what is wanted is to calculate as well the surplus
by which the first-chosen combination excels all others. This
surplus is left an undivided remainder of the return, and as
regards it the problem of imputation is not solved, but comes up
again for solution.(1*)
    It needs only a very slight turn to correct the error in
Menger's theory. Every well-thought-out train of reasoning
teaches by its very faults, as these faults also possess the
first requisite of scientific insight, that is, clearness; and
Menger's theory contains in itself the indication as to how the
error may be corrected. The deciding element is not that portion
of the return which is lost through the loss of a good, but that
which is secured by its possession.(2*) 

NOTES:

1. Menger reckons this undivided residue to each separate factor
instead of charging it to the entire amount, and thus the value
comes out too high. In our example the surplus equals 1 (10-9).
Menger calculates it three times instead of only once; thus
calculating two units too many, and showing a value of 12 where
there is only a return of 10. 

2. The other attempts at solution of the problem do not go beyond
suggestions. In Bohm-Bawerk alone (Werth, p. 56) is there a more
detailed statement, -- and it professes only to point out the
direction in which probably the solution of the problem might be
sought -- "To measure the share which each one of several
co-operating factors takes in producing the common product."
Bohm-Bawerk, speaking first of some less important cases of
"complementariness," establishes firmly the fundamental maxim
that no element in a group which admits, firstly, of a separate
employment outside the group, and which, secondly, may be
replaced at the same time in the group by other goods of the same
nature -- obtained from some outside source -- can receive a
value higher than its "substitution value." By substitution value
he means "that which is derived from the decrease of utility in
those branches of production from which the substituted goods are
procured." Of such a nature are, e.g., the bricks destined for
housebuilding. If some cartloads of these are destroyed, it will
not hinder the building, as they are simply replaced by others.
This proposition Bohm-Bawerk applies to the cases of productive
complementariness, dividing the total amount of complementary
production goods into two categories. Of these, one -- which
includes the overwhelming majority -- contains those goods which,
as marketable wares, are "replaceable at will"; e.g., "the
services of hired labourers, raw materials, fuel, tools, and so
on." The other category -- which contains the minority --
includes those productive elements which "cannot be replaced, or
are difficult to replace; e.g. the piece of land which the
peasant cultivates, mines, railway plant, factories, the activity
of the undertaker himself with his high personal qualities." The
value of those goods which belong to the first group is decided,
in every case, through the other employments possible to them; it
is, so far, fixed. This value is first deducted from the total
return, and the residue then falls "to the member or members
which cannot be replaced"; thus the "peasant ascribes it to his
land, the mine-owner to his mine, the manufacturer to his
factory, the merchant to his capacity.
    "Similar ideas may be found more or less clearly stated by
various writers; in the Ursprung des Werthes I have myself
pointed to a similar solution. Probably we should not be far
wrong were we to assume that the reason why so many writers have
neglected to take up this problem of distribution, is that they
supposed distribution in this sense to be as easily solved in
theory as it is in practice. How is it, however, when several
"unreplaceable" goods come together? Do not the mine and the
activity of its owner, as employer, go together? And are not many
-- indeed very many-replaceable goods often combined? The value
of these, which, practically, can always be ascertained by
referring to their secondary employment and valuation, must,
theoretically, be first separated from the combination, as again
the secondary employment itself always requires combination with
complementary goods, -- but how can this be done unless the rules
of distribution are known? 
    If these observations of Bohm-Bawerk can give no solution of
the problem of imputation, they none the less contain an
important and notable contribution towards its theory, for that
could never be complete without recognising the distinction to
which he has drawn attention. On this point see, in Book III,
chap. xii, the examination of "cost goods and monopoly goods." 

Chapter 5

The Principle of Solution. The Productive Contribution

    Suppose that a hunter's life depends on his last cartridge
killing the tiger about to spring on him. If he misses, all is
lost. Rifle and cartridge together have here an exact calculable
value. Taken together, the value equals that of the success of
the shot, neither more nor less. Taken singly, on the other hand,
there is no means of calculating the value of each. They are two
unknown quantities for which there is only one equation. Let us
call them x and y, and put the successful result at 100; all that
can be said as to their value lies in the equation x + y = 100. 
    Again, suppose an artist were to fashion a pewter vessel
which commanded great admiration on account of its perfect form.
Suppose, further, that this were the only artist who could do
really artistic work, and that his was the only artistic work
known. And suppose that, besides the piece of pewter which he had
employed, no other material of similar suitability were to be
had, neither gold, silver, wood, clay, nor even another piece of
pewter. It would be absolutely impossible to distinguish in the
value of the vessel between the value of the labour and that of
the material. The skill of the artist who conceived and executed,
and the suitability of the material which yielded to his hand and
retained the form he gave, would be regarded as equally
irreplaceable conditions of success. If we, under existing
economic conditions, do understand how to value the artist, and
how to value the material, we have to thank the circumstance
which distinguishes every act done under the influence of
exchange from the adventure of the lonely hunter; -- the
circumstance, namely, that these acts are not isolated, but take
place along with many others of the same kind, and can be
compared with them. This very pewter, out of which the artist
creates a vessel of great artistic value, serves at the same time
to furnish articles for ordinary use of very trifling value. We
conclude from this that the pewter itself can have but a trifling
value, and that only a small portion of the high value of the
artistic product falls to it, while by far the greater share must
be the property of the artist. We should be confirmed in this
opinion were we to observe that every work of the artist was
highly valued. But if, at the same time, we observe that he also
works with such materials as gold and precious stones, and that
these, on their side, equally lend a high value to all products
of which they form part, we are forced to the conclusion that, in
spite of his talent, the greater part of the value of his
products does not always belong to the artist, and that, when he
employs these materials, a highly important, if not very much the
more important, part of the value must be ascribed to them.
Certainly we can never succeed in considering either the artistic
power or the material by itself alone, and thus we cannot succeed
in measuring the effects of which they are independently capable.
Every productive factor, if it is to be effective, must be
combined with others and join its action with theirs; but the
elements that are bound up with it may alter, and this fact makes
it possible for us to distinguish the specific effect of each
single element, just as though it alone were active. 
    It is possible not only to separate these effects
approximately, but to put them into exact figures, so soon as we
collect and measure all the important circumstances of the
matter; such as the amount of the products, their value, and the
amount of the means of production employed at the time. If we
take these circumstances accurately into account, we obtain a
number of equations and we are in a position to make a reliable
calculation of what each single instrument of production does. To
put in the shortest typical formula the full range of expressions
which offer themselves, we have, for instance, instead of the one
equation x + y = 100, the following: -- 

            x +  y = 100.
           2x + 3z = 290.
           4y + 5z = 590.

    Here x= 40, y= 60, and z= 70.
    According to the number of individual productive combinations
carried out within the entire field of production, will be the
individual equations. In these equations the combined factors of
production on the one side, and the value of the jointly acquired
(or anticipated) returns on the other, are set against each other
as equivalent amounts. If we add together all the equations, the
total amount of productive wealth will stand as equivalent
against the total value of the return. This sum must be ascribed,
entirely and without remainder, to the individual productive
elements, according to the standard of the equation value. To
every element there thus falls a definite share in the total
performance, and this share could not be figured out either
higher or lower, without overthrowing the equivalence between
productive wealth and return. 
    It is the share in the return, thus credited to the
individual productive factor, which is usually called shortly the
"return" of the factor in question; -- the return of labour,
return of land, return of capital. I shall describe it as the
"Productive Contribution" (see Ursprung des Werthes, p. 177), in
order that it may always be clear whether we are speaking of the
return as a whole, or of the share of the single factor in the
return. The productive contribution, then, is that portion of
return in which is confined the work of the individual productive
element in the total return of production. The sum of all the
productive contributions exactly exhausts the value of the total
return. 
    It need scarcely be said that, as a matter of fact,
calculation can rarely be made so exactly, and never so
comprehensively. The equations indeed are all set down, and in
every case the productive outlay is estimated according to the
standard of the greatest attainable return. But the stating of
the equations is frequently made with only a trifling degree of
exactitude; and the sum of all the equations is never fully
taken, and thus cannot be divided out among the individual
elements. None the less we are constantly trying to ascertain the
result of the addition and division; only that, instead of
calculating directly, we try to attain our end, in a somewhat
circumstantial way, by a method of testing. The values obtained
in the individual case are applied, so far as they appear
suitable, to other cases, and corrected, the one by the other,
till in the end the right division is attained. And this is
rendered immeasurably easier by the fact that we already possess,
in the familiar and authenticated productive values, a key to the
division which only requires to be adapted to the changes which
emerge from time to time, At no time has the whole mass of
production goods to be calculated all at once; it is only the
contributions of individual members among these which require to
be calculated anew, and even for them a good basis is found in
the old values. New calculations require to be made only in those
branches of production where the attainable returns and their
values either rise or fall. This gives rise to new equations for
the factors in question, either with more favourable or less
favourable total values. According as it is one or the other,
will production be extended or limited, and productive elements
attracted from other branches of production, or attracted to
them, until the most favourable plan of production is again
discovered. The experience obtained while transferring now one,
now another productive element, and watching the effect of each
combination upon the value of the return, gives us sufficient
information as to the amount with which the individual elements
are bound up in the total return.(1*) 

NOTES:

1. If we are to succeed in our calculation of the productive
contributions there must be a sufficiently large number of
equations. There must be at least as many equations as there are
unknown quantities. Now this condition is certainly fulfilled.
How many unknown quantities are there? Just as many as there are
classes of production goods distinguishable in exchange. Without
doubt these are very numerous. When theorists speak simply of
land, capital, and labour, they include within each of these
groups an enormous number of classes of goods which in exchange
are as far as possible from being homogeneous. The value of
labour is not to be calculated as one thing; there must be
separate calculations for every kind and quality of labour
between which one can distinguish. In calculating the value of
agricultural land there will be, in one and the same district, as
many different and distinguishable types of land, as would be
distinguished in the register of a perfectly exact land tax
imposed both on the cultivating and propertied agricultural
classes. As to capital and its incalculable variety of forms we
need not speak. But however far exchange may be specialised, the
classes of productive combinations are undoubtedly even more
numerous than the classes of production goods. The classes of
combinations into which a good like iron or coal (even of one
distinct origin or quality) may be introduced, are incalculable,
and the same may be said of unskilled or day's labour. One and
the same field is planted in rotation with the most various
crops. And thus it comes that a mere change in the quantity of
the same kind of goods in a group is sufficient to produce a new
equation. Among all the many kinds of goods employed in
production, it would be difficult to find one which, either as
regards quantity or kind, would always be combined with others
according to the same unalterably fixed formula. Different
degrees of wealth, of knowledge, of skill, of local conditions,
involve that even those kinds of goods which only admit of one
single kind of employment, -- that is to say, which are only
suited to produce one single kind of product -- must, at the same
time and for the same purpose, go into a manifold variety of
combinations. If there are exceptions to this rule they are only
isolated ones. The contribution of such goods can, however, still
be calculated -- always supposing that there are not two such
elements in one and the same group. In this case, indeed, the
principle we have established would not work, because we should
have two unknown quantities and only one equation. 

Chapter 6

The Principle of Solution (continued). Contribution and
Co-operation

    The difference between our solution and that of Menger is as
follows. 
    Menger assumes an economic course of events different from
that which actually regulates economic life. To discover what
return is obtained from the production goods which we possess, he
tries to show what would happen should we cease to possess them.
According to Menger, for example, the value to a farmer of a
cart-horse is calculated by the diminution of return which would
ensue were the farmer to lose the horse, and be forced to go on
without it. That portion of return calculated by Menger to the
single production good we may designate "the share dependent upon
its co-operation." We, on the other hand, start by assuming an
economic course of events such as owners of production goods
would expect. We trace the effects that will ensue if all the
production goods which we possess are actually employed as we
wish and plan. In this way we calculate what we have called the
"productive contribution" of each factor. 
    The sum of all the "productive contributions" is exactly the
same as the sum of value of all the products; the sum of all the
"shares dependent upon co-operation" is, on the other hand, as we
have already shown, greater. In other words, the "productive
contribution" is essentially smaller than the "share dependent
upon co-operation," We reckon for instance the return which the
cart-horse gives to the farm lower than Menger does, as we only
estimate it at a portion of the decrease that would ensue were
the owner obliged to farm without it. According to Menger,
consequently, the farmer who loses his cart-horse loses only the
value of the animal, whereas, according to our conception --
which calculates differently the same numerical loss -- not only
does he lose the value of the animal, but he suffers, beyond
this, some disturbance in the value of his remaining productive
wealth. 
    Menger's is undoubtedly the simpler and clearer method. The
distinction which we find it necessary to make between the
"contribution" and the "co-operation" of a factor, appears
contradictory and artificial. As a matter of fact, we introduce
into the question no more difficulties than are actually
contained in it. "Contribution" and "Co-operation," under
whatever names they may be known, are everywhere distinguished,
and must be distinguished, from each other in practical economic
life. It is a generally-accepted fact that every productive
factor furnishes the basis, not only for its own value, but also
for that of all the other factors in the production. If any
essential element is removed from any undertaking whatever, the
whole undertaking must sensibly suffer. If there be a scarcity of
raw material, human labour and machinery will lose some of their
capacity of service, and vice versa; experience can show
thousands of such cases. In innumerable ways experience shows
that means of production mutually demand and mutually hamper each
other. Increased activity on the part of labour raises the return
to productive wealth, and extended exploitation of productive
wealth raises the return to labour. What does this prove but that
the share of return which furnishes the basis of value for its
factor -- the "return" imputed to it which we have called its
"contribution" -- does not exhaust the entire share contributed
by it to the success of the production? Thus we find that the
distinctions mentioned really exist, and are not introduced by us
into economic life for the purpose of aiding our solution; we
find that, by means of this solution, we explain an otherwise
inexplicable economic contradiction, and our theory receives
thereby no small degree of support and credibility. Or does it
appear no contradiction to say that labour, besides affecting
"its own" return, makes the "return to capital" rise or fall, or
that capital, besides "its own," also affects the "return to
labour"? 


Chapter 7

The Principle of Solution (continued), The Economic Service of
Imputation

    Thanks to the imputation of the "productive contribution,"
every production good, without exception, has ascribed to it a
greater effect than it could obtain through its own powers, No
production good, not even the most powerful of all, labour, could
by itself produce anything; every such good requires the
co-operation of others, and is nothing by itself. On the other
hand, again, every production good without exception, has, thanks
to this imputation, a lesser effect ascribed to it than might be
expected from the degree of dependence in which the complementary
goods stand to it. If we take from a group any element, however
unimportant, so long as it is a necessary and economic element,
not only is its own return lost, but the other elements also are
robbed of a portion of their effect. This holds of labour in its
relation to capital, as well as of capital in its relation to
labour. The well-worn argument, then, that without labour nothing
would bring forth fruit, and that to labour consequently must be
imputed the entire return, is false. Only those who misunderstand
the rules of imputation in everyday use, could employ it. Nothing
is easier than to reduce it to an absurdity by supposing labour
obliged to work without land or capital. 
    The imputation of the productive contribution assigns in this
way to every production good a medium share.(1*) To calculate the
productive contribution, and therefore also the value, at this
medium amount, is sound common sense. It is the only practical
and useful kind of calculation; it justifies its logic by its
utility, The value of production goods should be the controlling
power of production. Now it will be so, most perfectly, if it is
based, according to our standard, on the productive contribution
of these goods. On the other hand, it will be so only imperfectly
or not at all, if we depart from the principle. The sum of all
the contributions is, as we have seen, equal to the value of the
greatest possible total return, and this return will be actually
reached if we demand from each factor a service equal to the
contribution imputed to it. If we do not impute anything to the
means of production, we deprive ourselves of all possibility of
controlling their employment by reference to their value. If we
impute to them either more or less than their actual
"contribution," our control will be at fault, as it will induce
us either to a too limited or a too extensive employment. 
    Perhaps I may be allowed to pursue these ideas still further
into detail. 
    If we did not ascribe any share in the return to labour, nor
yet to land and capital, we should have to use all these without
being in any way guided by their value. If again the whole return
were imputed to labour and none of it to the material
instruments, production would be misled by productive value. Land
and capital would be declared valueless; there would be no need
to consider them at all; whereas labour would be overestimated,
and would, consequently, be far too greatly withheld. The most
overestimated would be that labour which got the most intensive
material assistance, and so gave the absolutely largest returns.
Labour which, in cooperation with a large amount of capital, gave
a total return of 100, would be estimated more highly than labour
of equal amount, but different quality, which, with a tenth part
of the capital, gave a return of 99. Artistic labour, working
without much outside assistance, would have a low valuation,
while plentifully assisted labour, even although unskilled and
mechanical, would have a high valuation. With the former
extravagance might be allowable, while with the latter we should
have to economise. The whole sphere of production would be
dominated at every point by confusion and perversity. 
    The imputation of return to land, capital, and labour,
according to the measure of their respective productive
contributions, is a natural economic dictate; it holds in all
forms of economic life in the communistic state as well as in the
present one. It may -- possibly -- be a just demand that the
whole product be given over to the labourers as personal income;
but in any case, and even should this come to pass, it is an
economic demand that the products be credited to the sources of
the return, according to the contributions which they afford, in
order that we may have a standard for the further employment of
the means of production. 
    It need scarcely be said that there is a limit to the
application of this law. When too large a number of production
goods are grouped together as one unit -- as when theorists talk
of all kinds of labour as "labour," all kinds of capital as
"capital," and all varieties of ground as "land" -- there is no
longer the number of equations necessary for any solution. Of
"land, capital, and labour" there is nothing to be said except
that, together, they bring forth everything; alone, nothing. In
practical life, we have often occasion to look at things in this
wholesale way. But, even if these occasions were more frequent
than they actually are, the individual imputation would not be
any the less necessary. Although production is carried on under
these wholesale modes and conditions required for preparation,
introduction, and security, still, in the conduct of production
it necessarily comes, in the long run, to detailed calculation.
The man who calculates the result most exactly, who measures and
makes a difference as regards even the smallest amounts, will, so
far as it depends on the working out, get the largest total
result; while the poorest will fall to him who estimates things
only in the gross, and in an outward and superficial way. If it
be everywhere a sign and a principle of human advance that we
make more and more minute division and classification of causes,
it must also be so in the great sphere of economic life. If
socialism means to do away with the productive imputation, it
will induce a condition of things worse than that experienced in
the deepest barbarism. The savage knows what he owes to his net,
and what to his bow and arrow, and would be badly off if he did
not know. Happily the same instinct which directs him is
possessed by all men, and no amount of theories will ever make
people neglect to measure the effects of the productive powers in
the way that practical self-interest demands. 
    On the other hand, again, the individual imputation does not
do away with the necessity of considering production as a whole.
The preparation for and introduction of productive labour often
requires, as has been said, very large and wholesale standards,
where it is not sufficient merely to reckon up the productive
contributions. These contributions correspond to the individual
results which emerge where production succeeds. But how if it
does not succeed? How if certain goods are wanting, and the want
retards production, limits it, or even makes it quite impossible?
Then, indeed, we get results from the single good which go far
beyond the amount of its contribution. Then it becomes evident
that the individual good not merely creates "its own return,"
but, besides this, conditions the returns of other goods. The
disturbing power of a want or loss of goods -- the difference
between "contribution" and "co-operation" -- is larger, the
larger the quantity of goods lost. Where, then, there is any
danger of a loss, and especially a loss of wide extent,
individual imputation is not sufficient; it reckons the damage
too low; its only standards have too small a range. In this case
it is necessary to be fully informed concerning the whole circle
of conditions upon which the production depends, and the whole
importance of the co-operation of all the factors. 
    Individual imputation and observation of production as a
whole, although they may lead to different valuations of the same
goods, do not on that account contradict each other, nor cancel
each other. Each valuation can be employed only for its own
purposes. Individual imputation serves, in the carrying out of
production, to measure the economic employment of each portion of
a nation's resources; consideration of production as a whole
serves to guarantee that the production is carried through. The
labour powers of a nation, for instance, must be individually
valued and employed according to the exact amount of their
contributions, while, at the same time, particular care must be
taken to meet the perils which so often all at once threaten the
labour power of individual groups, and indeed of great classes.
Again, the various forms of a nation's capital must be
individually valued and employed according to the measure of
their contributions. At the same time care must be taken that
capital as a whole, and capital in the chief branches of
production, remains and increases in the face of possible danger
and attack. The consideration of production as a whole must thus
aim at securing against all disturbance the essential foundations
of production, and the harmonious relation of its elements. 
    In the economic life of to-day individual imputation devolves
chiefly upon the individual citizen, while consideration of
production as a whole is mainly undertaken by the government. The
former belongs peculiarly to the sphere of private economic
valuation, the latter peculiarly to that of public economic
valuation. Here we only indicate the distinction, leaving more
exact consideration to the last book. 

NOTES:

1. Medium, that is, between the greater and the lesser shares
just mentioned. The share of labour, for instance, is not
determined by the (socialist) consideration that capital without
labour is dead, nor by the (opposite) consideration that labour
without capital is crippled. In becoming organic every element
gains in importance by becoming arbiter of others, but loses as
it puts itself into the same position of dependence upon others.
-- W.S.


Chapter 8

The Principle of Solution (continued). Imputation and the
Marginal Law

    In the case of production goods which are available, not
individually but in stocks, imputation of the productive
contribution follows the marginal law. To each single item or
quantity is imputed the smallest contribution which, under the
circumstances, can be economically aimed at by the employment of
this particular item or quantity -- the "Marginal Contribution"
as I have already called it (Ursprung des Werthes, p. 177), or,
looking at it from a different point of view, the "Marginal
Product." Bohm-Bawerk has drawn attention (Werth, p. 502) to the
fact that this law of exchange value has long been recognised in
the case of certain production goods: -- "Thunen, and all the
body of economic doctrine after him, have taught that the rate of
interest is decided by the productiveness of the last applied
dose of capital, and the rate of wages by the return of the last
labourer employed in the undertaking." Now what is here conceded
to a limited extent holds generally of all production goods, and
for every form of value, as a law of natural valuation. 
    It is self-evident that the marginal law which holds as
regards produced consumption goods, holds also as regards the
goods which produce them. We know that, in every stock of
consumption goods, every unit receives its value from the
marginal utility; thus the value which the products are expected
to have is already adjusted to the marginal level, and the value
of the production goods, as derived from this, is consequently
placed, from the beginning, on the basis of the marginal value.
if the communistic state wish to produce a million new rifles to
one pattern, it will, in the calculations previous to production,
reckon every individual rifle as equal in value; and thus it is,
from the first, impossible that one quantity of metal destined to
make these rifles should obtain a value different from any other
quantity of like amount and quality. If from 1000 productive
units 10,000 units of product are produced, each with a marginal
value of 5 (the total value being exposed by the formula 10,000 x
5 = 50,000), the entire productive stock receives a value of
50,000, and each individual unit will be valued equally at 50.
    While this application of the marginal law to production
goods results indirectly, through the medium of products, we have
to consider a second and direct application. Production goods
which are capable of being employed in many different ways, are
used to create products of various kinds. In each kind, taken by
itself, the value of the product is adjusted to the level of its
particular marginal utility, but we need not expect -- and, in
fact, it would be essentially a mere chance -- that the marginal
amounts of all the different kinds should, when compared with
each other, entirely agree. We have already shown (in Book I.
chap, iv) that only in a limited sense can one speak of a common
level of household economy; and it is only in the same limited
sense that we can speak of a common level of production.
Production stocks must always be employed in such a way as to
bring forward those products which will secure the greatest
possible satisfaction of want. In particular, the destination of
production goods to individual branches of production, -- or,
what is the same thing, the choice of the kind and amount of
goods to be produced, and the investment of labour and capital in
the individual classes and branches of production, -- must always
be weighed and decided with a view to prodding the greatest
possible satisfaction of wants. This does not, however, in the
least imply that products must everywhere have the same marginal
utility. Many products satisfy wants of trifling extent, where
the satiation point is reached very speedily: others again
satisfy wants whose receptive capacity is very great, and where
the scale of satisfaction shows the finest shades of transition
from the stronger intensities of desire downwards. To take as
drastic an example as possible, compare the employment of gold in
the filling of teeth with its employment for purposes of luxury.
The two scales of satisfaction do not in the least correspond
with each other, and it is quite impossible in the two kinds of
employments to keep always exactly to the same marginal amount.
All economic demands are fulfilled when care is taken that goods
of less marginal utility are never produced from production goods
which, if employed in producing other things, might have brought
a higher marginal utility. It may, therefore, very well happen,
and, in the case of all means of production which are capable of
numerous and varied employments, it will always happen, that the
marginal amounts in the different classes of production will
differ from each other. 
    Suppose, for example, that from one stock of iron are
produced three kinds of products, which we may designate as A, B,
and C; that, in kind A, the unit of iron receives a value of 10
-- corresponding with the economically-attainable marginal
utility of 10; -- that in kind B the unit receives a value of 9
-- corresponding with the marginal utility 9; in kind C, a value
of 8 -- corresponding with the marginal utility 8. Here we have a
case where utility, at the stage of the products, is not yet
completely adjusted to the marginal level, and where the
equalisation must first take place directly and at the stage of
the production goods. That the equalisation must ultimately take
place cannot be doubted. It is quite impossible to estimate
one-third of the iron higher than another third; indeed, assuming
it to be all of one quality, there would be no possible way of
deciding which concrete portion of the stock should have the
preference over the rest. So long as any appreciable quantity of
the iron is destined to turn out products with a marginal utility
of 8, no unit of the entire stock can be valued at a higher
return. To every unit in such a case must be imputed the marginal
return of 8, and the value of the entire stock is found by
multiplying the number of units which it contains by the marginal
value 8.(1*)
    The fact that the marginal law applies, partly directly
partly indirectly, to production goods also, first renders it
possible for value actively to fulfil its peculiar economic
service, as the form in which we calculate utility and the means
by which we control it. Compared with stocks of consumption
goods, stocks of production goods are larger, more concentrated,
and more homogeneous. In the household of an individual there are
not many stocks of anything, but the elements which produce
almost all he possesses are accumulated in stocks -- in the hands
of producers sometimes in enormous stocks, -- and thus become
subject to the simplified calculation of value, where the
economic amount of each stock is expressed by a multiple of its
amount and marginal value. And thus, through the law of costs
(see note below), products also are subjected, in great numbers,
to this simplified form of calculation. 
    We constantly see producers making calculations as to their
warehouses, materials, plants, and stocks in this simple way;
namely, by taking the amount and the price of the unit, and
putting down as the total value the amount obtained by
multiplying the one into the other. This observation by itself is
sufficient proof of the wide extent to which the marginal law
obtains in the economy of to-day. Not only are prices decided by
a marginal law, but, by means of prices, the whole sphere of
production, which makes its calculations throughout in terns of
price, is based all through on a marginal valuation. Is it not
worth while to discover what is meant by the application of a
marginal valuation such as this? And is it not satisfactory to
know that the naive form of estimating goods, pursued from time
immemorial in virtue of the original prompting of man's nature,
is a wonder of simplicity and appropriateness? 

NOTES:

1. This is one of the most pregnant applications of the marginal
law; we shall return to it again and again later on, particularly
in the fifth book, where we consider the subject of costs. To
assist our comprehension of the law of costs, we may here
anticipate so much as to say, that the productive marginal value
on its part has a levelling effect upon the value of products. In
the above example the value of the marginal utilities 10 and 9,
in kinds A and B respectively, will be alike pressed down to the
productive marginal amount of 8. 


Chapter 9

The Individual Factors of Imputation. I. -- Supply

    Those things which are always adduced as causing the changes
in the value of production goods, effect this change, in the
first instance, by altering the amount of contribution imputed to
the production goods. We shall now discuss these in turn, and
this may possibly prove the most wearisome part of our task. 
    In the first place we have to notice the available supply.
The larger the available supply of any definite kind of
productive instruments, the less important may and must be the
goods produced -- always supposing that in other respects no
disturbing change of circumstance takes place. If more iron be
raised, iron products of smaller marginal utility may and must be
made. It is inevitable that this result should be attributed to
the material, the iron, and expressed in a lower valuation of its
marginal productive service. It cannot be imputed to any other
factor, such as the labour that cooperates in the production, as
no change has taken place in the circumstances of any other
factor. Of all the equations of return, only those in which iron
occurs have been reduced, those in which labour occurs, expended
on other materials, remaining unaltered; consequently the
calculation is lower for the former, not for the latter. To iron,
therefore, and not to labour, is imputed a smaller share of the
return. If one were to calculate everything as before, or were to
impute to labour the diminished return, the calculation would
defeat its own purpose; one would be calculating as if everything
could be spent as before, or as if labour could be employed with
greater freedom. Neither of these could be allowed. 
    Of all production goods, the smallest contributions must be
imputed to those the supplies of which are most abundant in
comparison with the demand for them. These may be spent most
freely, down to their most insignificant uses. So far as
productive exploitation is concerned, it is desirable that those
goods which are most needed should also be the most abundant, and
should have the smallest contributions imputed to them.(1*)

NOTES:

1. It may be of use to the English reader to note how our
representative English economist expresses similar ideas: --
"Other things being equal, the larger the supply of any agent of
production, the farther will it have to push its way into uses
for which it is not specially fitted, and the lower will be the
demand price with which it will have to be contented in those
uses in which its employment is on the verge or margin of not
being found profitable; and, in so far as competition equalises
the price which it gets in all uses, this price will be its price
for all uses. The extra production resulting from the increase in
that agent of production will go to swell the national dividend,
and other agents of production will benefit thereby; but that
agent itself will have to submit to a lower rate of pay." --
Marshall, Principles of Economics, 2nd edit., p. 565. -- W.S.

Chapter 10

The Individual Factors of Imputation (continued). II. -- Demand
and Complementary Goods

    In the case of goods for immediate consumption, demand and
want coincide: the amount of agricultural produce required for
the full satisfaction of personal want forms the demand for
agricultural produce. It is otherwise with production goods; here
personal want does not always create a demand. If land, of its
own accord and without cultivation, were to bring forth fruits in
superfluity, there would be no demand for agricultural
implements. And likewise, on the other hand, if land refused to
make any return, if all land were waste and barren, there would
be no demand for agricultural implements, there could be no use
for them. A demand for means of production arises only when, on
the one hand, we are obliged to employ them or else go without
what they produce; and when, on the other hand, we can employ
them, inasmuch as we have at our disposal the necessary
complementary goods. So long as the complementary goods are
wanting, we can, at best, speak of a latent demand; the demand is
effective only when we have also acquired the complementary
goods.(1*)
    It follows from this that the effective demand for means of
production must vary, not only when there is a variation in
personal want, but also when there is a variation in the quantity
of complementary goods.(2*) In both directions we must examine
the effect upon the imputation, and thus, in looking at demand in
the case of production goods, we have a far more complicated
causal connection than in the case of consumption goods. We shall
find, however, that the law remains the same for both. The
contribution imputable to production goods always varies with the
demand, just as does the value of consumption goods. If demand
increases, from whatever cause, so does the contribution, and, as
demand sinks, the contribution sinks with it. To prove this in
the shortest manner possible. 
    First: it may be granted that the effective demand rises when
the abundance of complementary goods increases, personal want
remaining the same. Suppose e.g. that the amount of agricultural
capital and available agricultural labour power increase, and
that the effective demand for land also increases thereby,
inasmuch as latent demand becomes active; suppose, that is to
say, that it is now and henceforth possible, -- so far as depends
on complementary goods, -- to cultivate more land and more
completely satisfy want. How will this affect the calculation of
agricultural return? Evidently there are again several cases
which must be distinguished from each other. It may be that the
ground will not permit of any further cultivation, so that, in
spite of increased facilities in capital and labour, production
cannot be extended, -- as might readily happen with vine-growing
land in a specially favourable situation. Or the return may
increase in perfect proportion with the increase of capital and
labour, as we may assume to be possible on the slightly
cultivated land of a new colony. Or, finally -- and this is the
general rule in old countries -- the return may indeed be
increased, but not entirely in proportion to the increase of
complementary goods; here indeed all the new capital and labour
find employment, but with diminished results. 
    Different as these cases are, the final result is the same in
all, although it comes about in a variety of ways. In every case
a larger share of the return will be imputed to the land. 
    (a) If production cannot be extended, the value of the
products remains the same as before, as no reason for change has
emerged. What does change is the distribution of the imputation.
The equation on which, in the above example, is to be calculated
the return of the vine land, of the capital employed upon it, and
of the labour employed upon it, all taken together, remains as it
was. But the added capital and labour must now find employment
elsewhere; must enter into new combinations, either on other
land, or in some trade or industry where they give a smaller
return. Their equations are, therefore, on the whole less
favourable, and the consequence is that the equation, which the
wine production presents, is now solved in a way less favourable
for them. Their marginal productive contribution sinks, and, less
being deducted for capital and labour, the value of the wine
leaves a greater share to the credit of land. Land obtains a
greater share, as it were, by absorption of the effects which can
now no longer be attributed to the complementary goods, inasmuch
as the marginal law requires that these should everywhere be
estimated at the same value, and inasmuch as the common margin of
their possibility of employment has fallen. 
    (b) Where production admits of being extended indefinitely
the total value of the products rises (in the "up grade" of the
movement of value), although the single product may lose in
value. The equations of return are more favourable equally for
all factors concerned, and the greater total return gives,
equally to land, capital and labour, an absolutely greater share.

    (c) Where production can be only partially extended we have a
combination of both results. The contribution credited to land
experiences a double augmentation, one due to increased
utilisation, and the other to the reduced valuation of the
auxiliary means employed. 
    Second: the effective demand rises when personal want
increases, complementary wealth remaining the same. Here the
matter is very simple. The figures of the ratio which decide the
distribution of return remain unaltered, but the value of the
return has risen. The consequence is that the same quota has an
absolutely greater value. 
    Every-day experience makes the changes of relation, which we
have just pointed out between the co-operating factors of
production, sufficiently familiar to every one who knows about
exchange value. Every undertaker knows that it is to his
advantage when the auxiliary means he employs come upon the
market in larger quantities, whether it be because they are being
more largely produced, or because there is less use for them in
other directions. He can now extend his business, or make more
out of it, by spending less upon the auxiliary means of
production he requires, while the return remains unaltered. Every
undertaker, on the other hand, knows that it is to his
disadvantage when the auxiliary means he employs become scarcer
in the market, or, what amounts to the same thing, are drawn off
in larger quantities by other branches of production. In the
communistic state entirely similar calculations will require to
be made, in order to estimate correctly the mutual effects of the
complementary goods on each other. Assuming the circumstances
just mentioned, a vineyard, even in the communistic state, would
inevitably be more highly valued wherever the auxiliaries towards
its cultivation came forward in greater quantity, or were less
freely employed in other directions: and it would certainly be
estimated at a lower figure wherever the auxiliaries towards its
cultivation were more highly valued, either on account of a
diminished amount of them coming forward, or of their increased
employment in other directions. Further, its share in the return
would sink to zero whenever the auxiliary means of its
cultivation were so highly valued that their contributions
equalled the whole return of wine; and its cultivation would have
to be given up entirely whenever it became impossible to meet
these contributions out of the return of wine. 
    Should any one factor of production, be it land, capital, or
labour, come more freely into our disposal, the natural rules of
imputation require that all the others obtain a higher valuation;
as they also require that all the factors be more highly valued
if there should be an all-round increase of personal want. 

NOTES:

1. See on this point Menger, p. 39.

2. Compare with this Marshall's Principles, p. 563: -- "In the
account given of the demand for the several agents of production,
it was indicated that the ultimate demand for each depended on
the co-operation of the others in raising the joint product of
their labour; or, to state the case even more broadly, that the
demand for each is in a great measure governed by the supply of
the others." -- W.S.


Chapter 11

The Individual Factors of Imputation (continued). III. --
Technique


    Technique is the art of making the best use of productive
instruments. Every advance in technique improves either the
quantity or the quality of products. Even a so-called
"labour-saving" machine acts in the long run like an intensified
utilisation. By dispensing with another productive instrument at
a certain point or for the present, it preserves it for other or
later employments. 
    Improvement in the quality of products raises their value.
Multiplication of their quantity certainly diminishes the value
of the individual product, but at the same time (in the "up
grade" of value, which, for the sake of brevity, we shall alone
consider at present) increases the sum of value of all the
products taken together. Technical improvements have, therefore,
this result, that the known quantities, in the equations of
return by which the contributions of the production goods are to
be calculated, are put higher, while the unknown quantities
remain the same. Thus, according to circumstances, the
contributions of all the factors, or simply of individual factors
in the production in question, will be raised; it frequently
happens, however, that the circumstances are such that the
contributions of certain factors must be calculated at less. 
    What happens, for example, when some expedient to reduce cost
is introduced into a kind of production incapable of further
extension -- say, the production of wine in a limited area
already cultivated to the utmost extent? The return of wine
remains the same, and its value remains the same, but to the
vineyard must be imputed a larger share of the return than
formerly, because it has to share it with a smaller number of
productive factors. The elements of production thus saved can and
will find another employment; they increase the supply available
for other purposes while the demand for such purposes remains the
same. The final result is consequently a reduction of their
productive contribution. The same is true of all means of
production which have been driven from their former employments
by reason of technical improvements. The familiar effect of
labour-saving machinery is that it makes wages fall; and this
arises from the fact that, in the first instance, it reduces the
contribution of labour. Even in the communistic state this part
of the effect would emerge. The more labour could be replaced by
machinery, the more labour power would there be left to dispose
of; and the less remunerative the employments to which it would
be devoted. If formerly it had been a mistake to devote it to
such employments, it would now be a mistake not to do so. The
role of labour in production would have altered; it would take
another position; and other effects would have to be imputed to
it, if the imputation is to be based on natural principles, --
that is, principles which promote the most advantageous
employment possible. 
    In all cases where production is limited by certain specific
elements, the chief advantage obtained by improvement of
technique is ascribed to these elements. Means of production
which have a more extensive employment are but little affected by
changes in individual branches of production; only those
technical improvements which affect all, or a greater part of
their employments, are of much importance to them, since it is
only in these cases that the equations of return are noticeably
altered in their favour. The improvement in means of transport,
which brought with it the increased utilisation of an enormous
number of industries, is an example of a comprehensive technical
improvement which actually had the power to raise the returns of
almost all means of production. 
    Every change in technical art naturally calls for a certain
change in the plan of production, a certain rearrangement in the
disposal and destination of our productive resources. Other
results seem now the more attractive; other products are now the
marginal products. The rapid development of industry in the
course of the present century has attracted many labourers from
agricultural to industrial pursuits. This transference, which was
a very serious matter to the landowners since, among other
things, it compelled them to pay the labourers they had left at
the higher rate given by the manufacturers, was entirely
beneficial for production generally. It removed the labourers
from occupations which brought them little, but were, however, in
the absence of anything more remunerative, permissible up till
that time, into others in which they could assess their powers at
a higher contribution. If in the communistic state a similar
phenomenon should ever come in the train of technical
development, it also would require to be met by a similar
transference of capital and labour, the measure for which would
be obtained by observation of the marginal productive
contributions. 

Chapter 12

The Individual Factors of Imputation (continued). IV. -- The
Imputation to Cost Goods and to Monopoly Goods

    What has been said as to the influence of supply, of demand,
and of technique, gives sufficient evidence that, in the
imputation of return, there is a certain category of production
goods particularly favoured, and another peculiarly prejudiced.
The line of division, however, which separates these two
categories cannot be drawn with any great strictness; the
transferences from one group to the other are imperceptible; the
grouping changes with the change of circumstances; and, even
within the separate groups, there is the same division. Goods
which are favoured above many others may nevertheless be quite
the reverse in comparison with just as many more. 
    The first group is composed of those goods to which attaches
a natural monopoly (as opposed to a legal monopoly).
Characteristic of this group is the comparative rarity of such
goods as compared with the demand for them, or, it may be, the
comparatively small quantity that can be produced. As examples of
goods which have pronouncedly the character of monopoly may be
mentioned the following; -- scarce raw materials, land
exceptionally situated, the work of one peculiarly gifted, --
particularly an artist or scientific worker of the highest rank,
-- a secret and at the same time successful process (or, more
exactly, the exclusive knowledge of such a process, whereby the
persons who have it obtain a preference over others), and,
finally, works of human hands, which, on account of their size,
or on account of technical difficulties, cannot be repeated. 
    Goods which belong to the second group may be called "Cost
Goods," inasmuch as they are the elements in the calculations of
cost.(1*) They are goods easily accessible and abundant, or goods
whose production can be indefinitely increased. The following
goods have markedly this character; -- unskilled labour, coal,
wood, the common metals, and also land devoted to industrial
undertakings where there is no question of any particular
advantage in situation. Things which are to be had in superfluity
are not counted among cost goods; indeed they are not reckoned
among economic goods at all. While monopoly goods are specific
elements of individual industries, cost goods are the common
cosmopolitan and indispensable powers and materials of
production. 
    Articles whose making requires no monopoly goods may be
produced, comparatively to others, in the largest quantities; on
the other hand, those will be produced in the smallest quantities
which demand productive factors of a peculiarly marked monopoly
character, even although cost goods, subject to very little
limitation, should be employed along with them. Assuming equal
wants, then, the value of goods produced under monopoly must, by
reason of their small available quantity, stand comparatively
high; and consequently, to monopoly goods, as compared with cost
goods, must generally be imputed a contribution of higher value.
This is the first advantage which monopoly goods enjoy. In the
course of economic development, however, many other advantages
accrue to them, as the development itself accentuates the gulf
which naturally exists between them. 
    In the ordinary course of economic history the available
supply of many monopoly goods increases but slowly, or not at
all, -- in many cases, indeed, it becomes smaller; whereas the
available supply of many cost goods increases rapidly and
uninterruptedly. We have here two causes which widen the
difference between the two imputations, inasmuch as the
contribution imputed varies for every good in inverse ratio to
the change in its supply, and in direct ratio to the change in
complementary wealth. Now in the ordinary course of economic
history, wants are continually increasing, and the numbers of
those who want are continually increasing, while, at the same
time, technique is always becoming more perfect. Both of these
facts create a tendency towards raising the value of production
goods. This tendency affects monopoly goods unreservedly, but, in
the case of cost goods, on the other hand, it is frequently
outweighed, -- either immediately or after a certain lapse of
time, -- by the opposing tendency which comes from their
increase. Generally speaking, cost goods gain only by such rises
in the value of return as are wide-reaching enough to extend
beyond the sphere of one single industry. Rises in value which
are confined to individual branches of production are completely
absorbed, as we have shown (Book III. chapters x, and xi) by the
specific elements in that branch, by the monopoly goods. And even
should there be no such elements -- as sometimes happens -- an
increase of value in one particular industry has comparatively
little effect upon elements which are simultaneously employed in
a great many. 
    Although cost goods are thus prejudiced in the calculation of
the return, they have nevertheless the strongest influence on the
result of production and its regulation, and, consequently also,
on the basis of imputation. They are the goods of universal
diffusion -- the goods which are to be found in every market;
they form the majority of goods, and build up generally the body
economic. Monopoly goods must conform more to circumstances made
for them; the using of them changes constantly with the change in
the general economic conditions, for it rises and falls with
them, just as the level of a stream when it runs below ground
rises and falls with the level above. Thus, practically, it would
seem to come to this; that the imputation of the share due to the
monopoly goods is made only after that due to the cost goods is
finished. The shares due to cost goods are always first deducted
from the total return of production, and the residue then falls
to the monopoly goods. But closer consideration shows the matter
to be somewhat different. It is only in the individual case that
such a calculation can be made. In the totality of cases it is
impossible to overlook the influence of monopoly goods upon the
ordinary formation and imputation of return. This influence is in
part an indirect one, inasmuch as great quantities of cost goods
are employed in monopoly productions, whereby the marginal
productive return of the monopoly goods must be indirectly
affected; and it is in part direct, inasmuch as through the
results of monopoly productions, value equations are furnished,
which are indispensable to the total valuation. 
    Monopoly goods have often received a quite peculiar position
in theory. Ricardo, for example, teaches that they owe their
value altogether to their scarcity, while all other goods receive
their value from the labour of producing them. A sufficiently
wide consideration, however, shows that monopoly goods come
altogether under the ordinary conditions of valuation, and differ
from other economic goods only in that they display much more
strikingly the character common to all.(2*)

NOTES:

1. See below, Book V.

2. In the second note to Book III. chap. iv. reference was made
to the present chapter, stating that it would there be shown
that, without taking into account the distinction to which
Bohm-Bawerk has drawn special attention, and which deals with the
opposition between monopoly goods and cost goods, the subject
could not be finally settled. The importance of the distinction
ought by this time to have become clear. The reader will remember
that, in distribution as Menger would have it, there is an
"undivided residue." Now, in every combination, this "undivided
residue" falls, for the greater part, to that good which
possesses most strongly the character of a monopoly.
Consequently, where a pronounced monopoly good is combined with
pronounced cost goods, the "undivided residue" is imputed to the
monopoly good; where cost goods alone are combined it is imputed
to that good which most nearly resembles the monopoly goods; and,
lastly, where several monopoly goods are combined it is imputed
to that one which most distinctly bears the monopoly character. 
    It must be noted, however, that only the greater part, not
the whole, of the "undivided residue" is to be imputed to the
good in question. Some part of it -- although often a most
trifling and indeed practically indistinguishable part -- must
always be ascribed to the other co-operating goods, as all of
these experience a certain increased utility from the maintenance
of the combination, while the dispersing of it would destroy that
plan of production which is regarded as best. The share to be
ascribed to the other co-operating goods will be the greater, the
more the maintenance of the above-mentioned combination is
dependent upon them -- i.e. the more they themselves possess the
character of monopoly goods, and the less they possess that of
cost goods. A scarce good will, as a rule, be more seriously
affected by a trifling change of productive destination than one
that is less scarce; as was explained in the text, there must be
considerable alterations in demand and supply before the value of
goods which are most distinctively cost goods, shows a
corresponding change. 
    The difference, therefore, between "contribution" and
"co-operation" remains fundamentally clear for all cases,
although practically it does not come to much, and, so long as
only units of goods are concerned, need for the most part
scarcely be taken into account. So much the more important is it
when we are examining the influence that larger quantities of
production goods have upon the amount of productive return. 
    In this sense I had, in the Ursprung des Werthes, although
only by way of suggestion, already disposed of the problem of
"complementarity." There I stated that to production goods must
be imputed their "marginal productive contribution," while, to
the "specific productive factors belonging to individual
productions" falls the residue of return, after deducting the
quotas of all supplementary goods. The only matters omitted were:
what would happen were several monopoly goods combined together,
and an exact formulation of the law for calculating the
contributions. 


Chapter 13

The Individual Factors of Imputations (continued). V -- The
Imputation to Productive Factors of Preferable Quality

    Of two production goods of the same kind, that one possesses
the better quality which shows the greater "rentability" -- to
use a clumsy but convenient German expression. In other words, it
is that good which, when co-operating with the same amount of
complementary goods, gives a return of higher value; -- whether
it be that the higher value of the return arises from more being
produced, or from what is produced being of a better or
preferable quality. In what follows, for brevity's sake, we shall
consider only the former case. 
    If we possessed several production goods which, in this
specially limited sense, were of different qualities, we should
undoubtedly, in the production, employ the goods of poorer
quality only when the supply of better ones was not sufficient
for the demand; and the share of return which fell to the better
goods would, of course, be higher than that which fell to the
poorer ones, by an exactly ascertainable quota. According as the
better means of production, when working along with an equal
addition of complementary goods, produce a greater total return,
the value equation becomes more favourable to them by the whole
amount of the surplus return. Their productive contribution is
equal to that of the poorer quality plus this surplus return.
Should the poorer goods be present in superfluous amount and so
have no contribution imputed to them, the contribution of the
better goods alone will be credited with the surplus return.
Experience confirms these propositions in thousands of ways; they
answer to the economic observation of everybody. 
    Some economists who have paid very little attention to the
laws of complementarity in general, have shown extraordinary
earnestness in discussing this particular case. Ricardo, in his
theory of land rent, deals with the advantage obtained from
greater natural fertility in the case of agricultural lands, or
the greater productiveness of mines. Then he goes on to the
advantage, as regards return, which industrial capital first
expended has, as against the increments of capital which follow.
His theory of land rent was amplified by pointing out that rent
of land is influenced also by its situation, i.e. by its distance
from the market for its product. Finally it has been shown that
the "rentability" of land in towns, and also that of capital and
labour, is graduated in the same way as that of agricultural
land, and that the opportunity of obtaining for the better
quality a greater rent -- a surplus return and a surplus value --
occurs as often in the one case as in the other. 
    These theoretic statements all relate to price, but they hold
equally as regards the theory of value. The more fertile land,
the land which lies nearer to the sphere of demand, the more
skilled labourer, the more capable machine, are not only more
highly paid, but have imputed to them as well, on account of
their better quality, a comparatively greater share in the
return, -- which, indeed, is the cause of their being more highly
paid. In the communistic state, too, calculation will be made in
the same way. The more fertile or more conveniently situated land
will be cultivated before any other land, and, should other and
poorer land require to be cultivated, the better qualities will
be more highly valued in exact proportion to their surplus
return. 

PART II: NATURAL LAND RENT

Chapter 14

Ricardo's Differential Rent: The First Part

    Ricardo, in his famous Principles, takes up what we may call
Contract rent, the rent which emerges when an owner lets his
land. It is generally granted that the law of this kind of rent
is true also, in all essential respects, of that income which the
owner of the land could obtain without letting it, by selling its
products. What has been said as to imputation has probably shown
that the analogy must be carried still further. The personal
income which land yields is, in the last resort, dependent upon
the fact that the land in question yields a return such that,
after the shares of capital and labour are deducted, there
remains a share which must, on natural laws, be imputed to the
land. The problem of land rent, conceived of primarily as a
problem of division of income, in the last resort contains also a
problem of distribution of return. As a problem of distribution
of return it will emerge in the communistic state just as it does
under existing social conditions, and in both cases the solution
is fundamentally the same. 
    Ricardo begins his statement with a disquisition upon
primitive historical conditions. So long as population is thin,
and it is unnecessary to cultivate even all its rich and fertile
land in order to provide food, no single piece of land can obtain
a rent. Who "would pay for the use of land when there was an
abundant quantity not yet appropriated, and, therefore, at the
disposal of whosoever might choose to cultivate. it"? Should,
however, population increase to a degree which necessitates the
cultivation of land of the second quality, rent immediately
commences on that of the first quality. Land of the second
quality would require a greater expenditure of costs, in order to
produce the same return as that of the first quality; it can
therefore be cultivated only when the increased demand has raised
the price of agricultural produce enough to cover the necessary
costs. But this price leaves a surplus to land of the first
quality, according to the saving of costs which it allows. If,
further, land of the third quality requires to be cultivated, a
rent emerges for that of the second quality, while the rent for
land of the first quality is increased; and thus every new and
poorer quality which is pressed into use creates a rent for those
above it, measured by the difference in quality. 
    To put it into exact figures. Suppose the value of wheat is
40s. per quarter, and that, with an expenditure of ?00, the
cultivation of a piece of land

 of the 1st quality produce a return of 120 qrs with a value of
?40
 of the 2nd quality produce a return of 100 qrs with a value of
?00
 of the 3rd quality produce a return of  80 qrs with a value of
?60

a private owner will confine himself to the cultivation of the
two better classes of land, and will calculate to himself from
the first class a rent of ?0. 
    In the communistic state the result will be the same,
granting the same assumptions. So long as land of the first class
is to be had in superfluity, or is "free," no share in the return
which it helps to produce will be imputed to it. And why? Because
people have still the choice as to which of the many lands of
equal quality they will cultivate, and because they are dependent
upon no single one of these. Land of the second quality is
cultivated only when that of the first is all under cultivation,
and when, at the same time, the demand for land produce has risen
sufficiently to meet the increased cost. When, by the higher
value of the return, however, the increased cost on the second
class of land has been thus covered, there remains to the first
class a surplus which must be attributed to the land as rent. The
land and its better quality are indeed the "cause" of the surplus
return. It is impossible to derive the surplus from the cost
goods, seeing that similar amounts and qualities of costs have
been spent on both classes of land. A very simple negative proof
will confirm the propriety of this method of imputation. Suppose
a piece of first-class land be left uncultivated, the surplus
return will immediately, disappear. the cost goods will be
incapable of reproducing it elsewhere, because there is no other
piece of land of the same quality to take its place. There is no
lack of practical opportunity to establish this conclusion. In
every question as to the utilising of such lands we have to be
fully apprised that they guarantee such and such rent if properly
cultivated, and that this rent will have to be given up if they
are left entirely uncultivated or used in some other way. If e.g,
we have to make a road, we shall soon know that it leads through
lands of the first quality by its costing extra the whole amount
of the rent. But why multiply examples? If we are to calculate at
all in production, it must be in this way. Were we to refrain
from reckoning the differential rent, it would mean that we
disregarded the circumstance that land, as a matter of fact, is
of different degrees of fertility; it would mean that we were
quite indifferent whether we got much return or little.
    In the inventory of the communistic state the lands of better
quality will be entered at an amount corresponding to the
capitalisation of their rents. The agricultural officials will
require to be made responsible for the return of a rent from
these better lands corresponding to their quality. In fact, in
all those connections it will be impossible for the communistic
state to act differently from any large landowner of the present
day, who tries to manage his property economically, and to have
an effectual control over his servants. 

Chapter 15

Ricardo's Differential Rent: The Second Part


    There is a second Part to Ricardo's theory which is
frequently overlooked, although it is really the more important.
From the very nature of land every piece of it has powers of
different quality. Just as only the best lands are at first taken
up, so are only the best powers in each piece of land. Of these
powers the poorest class -- so long as this class is in excess of
the demand -- gives no rent, and the better classes give a net
differential rent. 
    In this second part of Ricardo's theory also, the natural
principles of imputation are found to be in perfect agreement
with the rules he has laid down for the formation of contract
rent. This may be best shown by an example. Say, as before, that
the quarter of wheat brings 40s. Then a certain piece of land,
according as it is cultivated at a greater or smaller outlay in
capital and labour, will produce the following returns: -- 

 to a first ?00 of expenses the return is 120 qrs. and the value
?40
 to a second ?00 of expenses the return is 100 qrs. and the
value ?00
therefore to ?00 of expenses the return is 220 qrs. and the
value ?40
 to a third ?00 of expenses the return is  80 qrs. and the value
?60
therefore to ?00 of expenses the return is 300 qrs. and the
value ?00

Under these circumstances a private owner will find it
advantageous to expend only ?00. He gains thereby a return of
?0; and, instead of sinking the third ?00 in his land and
gaining a return of only ?60, he will do better to employ it in
some other direction, where it may give its full possible return
of ?00. From the ?40 return thus obtained, he reckons ?00 as
the costs; the remaining ?0 he can claim, and the tenant can
pay, as rent. Just so must the communistic state make its
calculations according to these natural principles of valuation.
There, too, natural principles will demand that only ?00 be sunk
in the land, and that the surplus of ?0 thus earned be imputed
to the land as rent.(1*) 
    The differential rent received from preferable powers of the
soil may be called the "Intensity Rent," because it emerges and
rises according as the land is cultivated intensively. This
"intensity rent," according as Ricardo conceives of it, might
quite well be a universal rent for all the lands of a country, or
of the whole world, supposing them to be all cultivated with
sufficient intensity. Ricardo's differential theory in no way
requires -- as is often said -- the existence of no rent land. It
is sufficient if there are no rent powers in the soil. 
    It need scarcely be said that "intensity rents" must receive
as exact consideration from the economist as the rent of better
lands. It is perhaps unnecessary to say anything further on this
point. 

NOTES:

1. If ?00 were sunk a total of ?00 would indeed be received in
return, but none the less would there be a loss of ?0 on the
third two hundred. If only ?00 were sunk, and the surplus of ?0
were imputed not to the land, but to the capital or to the
labour, we should make two mistakes, each contradicting the
other. Firstly, the land, as such, would be declared to yield no
return. The practical conclusion would be that it ought not to be
cultivated, and that the capital and labour should be otherwise
employed, in which case the whole ?0 would be lost. Secondly,
this application of capital and labour would be shown to be
peculiarly profitable -- the practical conclusion of which would
be that it would appear permissible to sink even more capital in
the land. But this ought not to be done, as ?00 is the highest
expenditure economically permissable. The land rent of ?0 is,
therefore, the rational expression of the most advantageous
disposition of production.


Chapter 16

Criticism of Ricardo's Theory

    According to what is certainly the most usual opinion, the
differential rent of better lands, or of better powers of land,
is to be explained simply by the fact that there are not
sufficient of such to meet the demand; that, in fact, as is
frequently said, they "have a monopoly." But it may easily be
seen that this is not sufficient for an explanation. We must add
two other assumptions. 
    First, the lands or powers of land last taken into
cultivation must be available in superfluous amount. In order
e.g, that first quality lands may bear a differential rent, not
only must these lands be insufficient to meet the demand, but
there must be besides them "free" lands of the second quality.
The limitation or "monopoly" of first-class lands is the
proximate occasion of rent, and rent would emerge in any case,
even if there should be no other qualities of land. Then the
interposition of second-class lands, which are more than enough
to meet the demand, and are consequently rentless, has the effect
of keeping down the rent of first-class lands -- which night
otherwise rise indefinitely -- to the amount of difference
existing between the qualities of the two. If second-class lands
were not "free," they also would bear rent; and this rent, again,
could only be kept down to the differential rent through the
intervention of a third class. In short, if there is to be a net
differential rent, there must be a last, rentless, and therefore
"free" category of lands (or powers of land) alongside the better
and limited ones. There must be both limitation and superfluity
of land. 
    Second, there must also be "monopoly" of capital and labour.
Why does any one prefer the better classes of land? Because on
them capital and labour prove more productive. But why should it
be of consequence that capital and labour prove more productive?
Because, as a general rule, we do not have enough of either. If
it were quite a matter of indifference what return was obtained
from definite amounts of capital and labour, because it was
always possible to make up any deficiency by employing other
quantities of the same, it would also be a matter of indifference
from which class of land they got their return -- assuming, of
course, that there was never any scarcity of at any rate the
poorest quality of land. And if, in face of such superfluity of
the poorest class of land, the better and best classes are marked
out and preferred, it is because man has to economise his labour
and capital. The differential rent measures exactly the advantage
which the better and best classes of land secure in the
accomplishment of that task. 
    Thus we see that, wherever a net differential rent exists,
land is partially limited (in the better and best classes),
partially over-abundant (in the poorer classes), while capital
and labour are always limited.(1*) To have overlooked this
circumstance is the first defect in Ricardo's theory. He states
positively that the amount of labour (and under this he includes
capital), which may be expended in production can be had, as a
rule, for the asking -- may be increased at will; while the
rent-bearing classes of land are to be had only in limited
amounts. This defect is connected with another and still greater
one and one that applies not to Ricardo alone; he has no general
theory of economy, of value, and of imputation. All his ingenuity
is expended upon details, such, for example, as the explanation
of land rent, and this in itself shows that these details can
only have been looked at and conceived of in a one-sided fashion.

    A further defect of the differential theory is that it does
not suffice for all cases. It sometimes happens that even the
last cultivated lands, or powers of land, return a rent, and for
this Ricardo has no explanation, or, to speak more exactly, no
law. Whenever the demand for land products has increased to such
an extent that the class of land last taken into cultivation is
not sufficient to meet it, while, at the same time, the value of
the land products has not risen sufficiently to permit of a new
and still lower class being put under the plough, the last
cultivated land returns a rent, although it becomes differential
only when the next class of land has actually been put under
cultivation. And when all the classes of land have been
exhausted, and cultivation in general cannot be further extended,
there emerges a universal land rent, -- universal not only for
all lands (for in this sense the "intensity rent" might be a
universal one), but even for all powers of land. This case -- of
the impossibility of extending cultivation -- occurs more
frequently than one would think. It is not, as would seem at
first sight, a thing to be expected at the very end of the
historical development of economic life, when the whole earth is
over-populated. It belongs rather to the normal phenomena which
occur in the course of this development. Indeed it is just as
regards the past that it can be established with perfect
certainty; while prophecies of what is to come must always be
uncertain, and can never be made with scientific exactitude. A
slight consideration will suffice to make this clear. 
    Land and capital, so far as regards the conditions under
which they are acquired, appear to stand in complete opposition
to each other. All capital, with trifling exceptions, has been
worked for by human hands, and the sum of capital is always
increasing and is capable of indefinite increase. All land, on
the other hand (with exceptions which are quite insignificant as
compared with the whole) has been in existence from the
beginning, and it is practically impossible for human power to
extend its compass -- so at least a geographer or physicist would
have to say. But can we say so economically? Certainly not.
Economically speaking, man has not from the first had command
over the whole solid surface of the earth and its treasures.
Starting with a very insignificant portion of it, the sphere of
his control has extended at a rate which scarcely comes behind
the increase of his capital. The limits of his power are not yet
reached, and he would be a bold man who would say when they must
be reached, and where their limits lie. Looked at economically,
there is always available to him only so much superficies and so
much fruitful soil as he has the means and the knowledge to
utilise. The development of agricultural skill and technique
generally, the employment of manures, growth of population,
emigration, scientific discovery, the spread of commerce, the
perfecting of the means of transport, increase of wealth in
capital and labour -- all these have gradually increased landed
property to an enormous extent. To the hunter belongs only the
surface of the ground; to the peasant who forces his plough down
into it belongs also its interior, and the deeper the plough
goes, so much more of the land comes into the service of man. In
our own time, indeed, the amount of land in far-away countries
which is at the disposal of European consumption, has increased
in a degree that is alarming to European agriculturists. If we
look back on the past, we might almost believe that it has been
quite the same with land as with capital; -- that at first the
provision of it was very scanty, and that later it has gone on
richly and steadily increasing. Certainly the error which this
opinion betrays would be no greater than that betrayed by the
commonly held opinion that land is quite incapable of being
increased. In any case, there can be no doubt of one thing. It is
conceivable that a time may arrive when all land available for
economic purposes has been taken up, and that, notwithstanding,
at some later period, so much new land, economically speaking,
may come into the world's possession, that a much greater
population may be maintained upon it, without even touching the
limits of subsistence. And has this conceivable case never been
an actual fact? Have we not accounts, handed down to us from
primeval times, of overpopulation and emigration caused by urgent
want? Has not the spectre of hunger haunted every land and every
people on the face of the earth, and is it not the case that only
the most highly cultured of nations, at the height of their
development, have been able to escape from its terror?
    Still, however that may be, even supposing it has never
actually happened that the limits of cultivation have been
reached, -- a theory which cannot bring the case of a "universal"
land rent under a law remains an inadequate theory. If we have no
law for the assumed case that all lands and powers of land bear
rent, we have no law for the undeniable fact that all
economically employed labour and capital yield a return; we can
say absolutely nothing more than that the better qualities of
goods have more imputed to them by the amount of their surplus
return. We are incapable of learning what shares are to be
imputed to the common qualities, which constitute the majority of
production goods. The law of a universal land rent, and the
universal law of imputation, are identical, and a theory which
has no formula for the former confesses its utter inability to
solve the problem of the valuation of production goods
generally.(2*) 

NOTES:

1. Among the trees of a primeval forest which have, as a rule, no
value, because they are available in superfluity, there are
nevertheless some which may receive value; all those, namely,
which have peculiar advantages as regards felling and carrying to
market -- say, e.g., that they stand in the near neighbourhood of
a natural watercourse. Their value is exactly represented by the
saving in costs -- saving of labour and transit -- which they
assure as compared with the trees less favourably situated, to
which no value is attached. Here is a capital which bears a
perfect analogy to Ricardo's differential rent from lands of
preferable quality. Even to the pure "intensity" rent there are
analogies in capital. The sheep on the plains of South America do
not receive value in their entire useful content -- I mean a
value corresponding to the entire usefulness of similar sheep in
Europe, or any other district of great demand -- but only in that
portion of the same -- say, perhaps, the hides -- which repays
the costs of transport to the sphere of the greater demand. The
remaining part is meantime valueless, but may also receive value
through an increase in demand. It is easy to infer from these
examples the conditions for a purely differential rent. 

2. A further fundamental defect in Ricardo's theory may be
pointed out;that he has omitted to notice the reaction of land
rent upon the return to capital and labour. Rent is certainly
dependent upon the current valuations of cost, but, on the other
hand, the valuations of cost are dependent upon rent, if not in
the same degree. The return reckoned to capital and labour is
essentially influenced by the amount of capital and labour which
is required for working the land, and by the returns which they
yield in so doing. 
    Finally, Ricardo might also be accused of having overlooked
the universal importance of the differential valuation (compare
Book III, chap. xiii). Even purely differential valuations may be
met with elsewhere than in the case of land, as we saw by the
examples just given of wood in a primeval forest and of the herds
of cattle in South America. But of course it is in the case of
land that we oftenest find the relation which leads to a net
differential valuation of the preferable qualities: viz.
quantitative superfluity as a whole beside quantitative
limitation as regards the best and better qualities. Compare with
this Menger, p. 143. 

PART III

THE NATURAL RETURN TO CAPITAL

Chapter 17

The Productivity of Capital

    Land being permanent and indestructible, it is not a matter
of surprise that it should continue yielding, year after year,
that return which it yields in one year. And if we designate a
continually-recurring return as "rent," the rent of land requires
no special explanation. It is much the same with the fact that
human labour is source of a permanent return. In the case of a
healthy person, labour power is renewed constantly after pauses
for rest and refreshment. 
    On the other hand, it is a matter for wonder to find that the
perishable powers of the soil, and all the movable means of
production, raw materials, auxiliary materials, implements,
tools, machinery, buildings, and other productive apparatus and
plant, which are consumed, quickly or slowly, in the service of
production, are sources of permanent returns, -- returns which
are constantly renewed, although the first factors of their
production may have been long before used up. This brings us face
to face with one of the most important and difficult problems of
economic theory; with the question, namely, how we are to explain
the fact that capital yields a net return.(1*)
    All capital yields, proximately and directly, only a gross
return; that is to say, a return purchased by a diminution of the
parent capital. The condition under which this gross return may
be the source of a net return is very easily formulated. In the
gross return must be found newly produced all the consumed
capital, and beyond this there must be a certain surplus. This
surplus will be net return; -- a return which may, permanently
and without diminution of the parent capital, be obtained and
consumed. 
    If now we ask whether this condition is actually fulfilled,
we find, in the first place, that the nature of capital does
permit of it. If capital is, on the one side, perishable, on the
other, it is reproducible. It serves for production and it is
produced. Is it, however, produced in sufficient quantity, and
produced from capital itself in sufficient quantity, to fully
replace what has been consumed, and leave a surplus beyond?
Before trying to answer this question I should like to make one
observation of a formal nature. 
    Capitals which yield gross return may undoubtedly be
designated "productive goods" on this account alone. They
certainly produce; they transform themselves from an unfinished
form of goods to a finished one, or to one that comes nearer a
finished one. It is, however, preferable to speak of capital as
productive only when it yields a net return. And in this sense
exclusively we shall understand the "Productivity of capital."
    As Bohm-Bawerk has shown, productivity may be either physical
productivity or value productivity. It is important that this
distinction should be clearly kept before us. Physical
productivity exists where the amount of goods which form the
gross return is greater than the amount of capital goods
destroyed; and in the foregoing deduction of the conceptions of
gross and net return we have assumed this physical productivity.
Value productivity exists where the value of the gross return is
greater than the value of the capital consumed. The task of our
theory is, in the last resort, to prove the value productivity of
capital; but for this purpose it is necessary first to prove the
fact of physical productivity, as the scaffolding on which the
other rests. The value productivity already presupposes the
determination of the value of capital, but the value of capital
can only be determined when the question of how to impute the
physical return has been answered, because the value of capital
rests on the share of return imputed to it. Just as the rent must
first be ascertained before the value of any land can be
calculated, and just as, generally speaking, the rules of
imputation must be recognised before the value of production
goods can be determined, so must also the imputation of the
return to capital first be settled before we can take up the
problem of its value. In pursuance of our division of the
subject, we have meanwhile only the problem of the physical
productivity of capital to deal with. 
    There is no doubt that the total return of all three
productive factors, land, capital, and labour, taken together, is
large enough to replace the capital consumed, and give a net
return. This is a notorious economic fact, and as little in need
of proof as the fact that there are such things as goods, or such
a thing as production. Of course, now and then, a productive
undertaking may be unsuccessful, and fail to cover its outlay;
indeed many undertakings furnish no usable product whatever. But
these are exceptions. The rule is that net returns are obtained,
-- indeed, net returns of such enormous magnitude, that not only
can the millions of human beings be supported, but capital can go
on accumulating out of the surpluses. 
    There remains, therefore, but one thing to ask -- whether a
share in this undoubted net return can be imputed to the factor
capital. But the question can not be put seriously. Why to
capital alone should no such share be imputed? Once understood
and granted that capital is one of the economic factors of
production, to which, with the others, the productive return is
ascribed (Book III. chap. iii), it is also understood and granted
that to it belongs by right a share in the net return in which
the productive return first embodies itself. Are we to suppose
that capital is always in a position to produce only somewhat
less than replace itself? This would obviously be an arbitrary
supposition. Are we, then, to suppose it capable only of
replacing its own loss, however various the success of production
may be? This supposition would clearly be no less arbitrary.
Whoever denies net return to capital can only do so by denying it
any return. 
    I should fear to repeat myself were I to bring forward any
formal proof of the fact that capital does have a share in the
productive net return. I shall content myself with mentioning one
or two cases which show, in eminently clear fashion, the
necessity for attributing net return to it.(2*) 
    Wherever labour is crowded out by capital, as, e.g., where a
machine takes over the work hitherto accomplished by human labour
-- a thing which will happen no less frequently in the
communistic state than it does now, -- the capital, or machine,
must be credited with at least the same return as that formerly
imputed to labour. But this was a net return: therefore, the
capital or machine must also be credited with a net return. Were
the machine capable of reproducing only its own substance as that
is worn away in course of use, it would be less effective than
human labour, and would not have had power to displace it. But
why should a machine such as this be favoured in the imputation
more than any other form of capital? What experience would speak
for this? 
    In accordance with the universal law of differential
imputation, every form of concrete capital of better quality has
a higher return imputed to it than the concrete capital of lower
quality, and this return is measured by the amount of increase in
productive results which the employment of the better qualities
brings. And as, when we look at production and its results as a
whole, it is only net returns that are taken into consideration,
it is thereby proved that, in comparing qualities of capital, the
standard of imputation must be taken from the net return. 
    Whoever employs his capital according to the measure in which
he sees it influence the productive net return, employs it well;
whoever does otherwise, employs it badly. On this point universal
opinion is united now, as it will be in the communistic state.
The universal opinion to which we refer is not, however, the
untrained judgment of the public in matters of theory, but the
ripe expression of experience.(3*)

NOTES:

1. In what follows I understand by the term capital the
perishable or (with the extended meaning explained in the text)
the movable means of production. This conception is adapted to
the conditions of a communistic state, in which the national
income is obtained solely through production. To take note of
those forms of capital which serve in the formation of income
outside of production, seemed to me out of place, these being too
closely connected with the specific conditions of the existing
economic order of things. For the same reason I also refrain from
taking into consideration those constituent parts of an
undertaker's capital which do not belong to the technical means
of production. I have, however, appended, in Book IV. chap. viii,
a discussion of the interest on consumption loans and house rent,
and, at the end of Book V. chap. xi, I have looked at the intent
which comes from the undertaker's wage fund. 
    To avoid misunderstanding, I wish once more to emphasise the
fact that, among the technical means of production, I do not
include the means of subsistence which must be held ready at hand
for the labourers. These are conditions of production, but not
its causes. The cause is here the labourer alone. And this is no
contradiction to our previous statement in Book III. chap. iii.
The things on which the labourer employs his strength, and the
things which maintain his strength, stand in totally different
relations to the productive return. The former have a direct
influence upon return; the latter influence it only through the
medium of the labour power into which they must first transform
themselves. If we wish to make the latter factors of production,
it can only be done by regarding the labourer as their first
product (compare Book V. chap. vii, on the "costs of production"
of labour). So far as regards his conception of the means of
subsistence for labourers I am thoroughly at one with Sax (in
particular p. 324), although I explain otherwise the emergence of
intent from this part of an undertaker's capital. 
    Immediately before these pages went to press, Menger's
treatise Zur Theorie des Capitals appeared in Conrad's
Jahrbucher. In this treatise he defends in animated fashion the
popular as against the scientific conceptions of capital, and
interprets the popular conception as embracing all the parent
wealth of an acquisitive economy existing in or calculated in
money, without respect to the technical nature of the instruments
of acquisition. As a matter of fact, the circumstance that
acquisitive instruments are calculated in money is of decisive
importance for their valuation. To calculate in money means --
leaving the form out of consideration -- first, to calculate
exactly, and second, to calculate with reference to exchange and
the unit of all exchange goods which it creates. We also look at
valuation entirely under these two assumptions, although we
substitute the internal exchange of goods in a state economy for
the exchange of private individuals. The natural laws we have
deduced hold only as regards industries on a large scale and
under a highly developed economy. 

2. Among such cases I should include also those where the use of
capital increases the previous productiveness of production. Here
we see with particular clearness that the additional net return
must be credited to the capital. It would, however, be an error
to believe that capital can receive a share of net return only
when its use has directly increased the previous productiveness
of production, or that it would be deprived of this share as soon
as the world became accustomed to the increased effects.
Experience shows us the productivity of capital even in a
stationary economy. On this account all theories are inadequate
which derive the productivity of capital solely from its capacity
to promote the development of economic life. 

3. The theory of interest, like that of rent, has always been
discussed very much by itself; discussed, I mean to say, without
any previous examination of the general laws of imputation. The
result, however, as regards interest, has been immensely less
satisfactory than as regards rent. It is easy to understand that
in the case of interest we have to deal with the essential point
in the problem of imputation, while in the case of rent we have
to deal substantially with a detail capable of being conceived by
itself, -- that, namely, of the differential imputation.
Bohm-Bawerk's great work Geschichte und Kritik der
Capitalzinstheorien (Innsbruck, 1884), translated as Capital and
Interest (Macmillan), has clearly shown to the scientific world
how unsatisfactory all previous attempts at explanation have
been. 
    Ties of family and of friendship bind me too closely to the
author to allow of any praise of his work from my lips being
counted of value by outsiders. I therefore confine myself to
remarking that everything contained in the following pages on the
subject of the return to capital and the value of capital, was
written under the influence of his penetrating criticism, and
that, if there is aught of value to be found in it, it could
never have originated without that influence. It is not
inconsistent with this that I should, nevertheless, arrive at
other conclusions than those towards which Bohm-Bawerk -- so far
at least as may be recognised from the critical and preparatory
work already published -- appears to point. 
    Note. -- Since writing the above, Bohm-Bawerk has published
the second part of his work, Die Positive Theorie des Capitals
(Innsbruck, 1888), translated by me as The Positive Theory of
Capital (Macmillan, 1891). -- W.S. 


Chapter 18

The Calculation of Return to Capital in Primitive and in
Developed Economies


    Those writers who maintain the productivity of capital prefer
to take the most primitive economic circumstances in order to
make their meaning clear. Thunen, for instance (in his Isolirter
Staat, 2nd edition, Book II, division I, p. 74) takes his readers
to a land in which there is no capital to begin with. In its
tropical climate the inhabitants live, in the most literal sense,
by the labour of their hands. There a labourer is in a position
to produce yearly the total amount required to maintain him for a
year -- we shall put this down at 100 -- and, besides that, 10%
more, or 110 units in all. At that he can live and also lay past.
And now some man, supporting himself meantime upon his savings
from former years, succeeds, after a whole year's labour, in
producing a bow, arrows, and a net. He is rewarded for this by
being enabled, with the assistance of the new tools, to obtain
henceforward a yearly return of 150 units, by means of which he
finds time to repair the damage suffered by his little capital
through wear and tear, and to maintain it always in the same
condition. The total increase to his income per year amounts to
40 units, and this increase is a permanent one in spite of the
perishable nature of the capital, because not only is the capital
perishable, but it can also be, and is continually being,
reproduced. To what factor is this increase to be imputed?
Obviously to the capital. To its credit alone can the increase be
attributed. This will be seen, e.g., in the fact that every other
labourer will be inclined to hire the capital at a price which is
based on the calculation and ascription to it of this surplus
result. 
    Similar statements are given by other writers. They are,
indeed, well adapted to clear up our ideas concerning the
productivity of capital in its most general outlines, and to
persuade the reader to its acceptance. On the other hand, they
are misleading almost in every detail as regards our developed
conditions of production, and, in particular, they give a
thoroughly false impression as to the measure of productivity. 
    In such primitive conditions as those pictured by Thunen,
where capital emerges for the very first time, the return to
capital is calculated at the entire increase of income, which
labour assisted by capital obtains as against labour unassisted.
In other words, the whole "share dependent upon its co-operation"
(see p. 91) is imputed to capital as its "contribution." And
rightly so. In these most primitive conditions there is a
considerable supply of labour power; indeed, as compared with the
scant occasions for using it, almost too much; on the other hand,
capital is scarce and greatly in demand. Much labour must be
expended without aid from capital, and the comparison between
labour assisted by capital and labour unassisted, forces itself
naturally upon every one. This is no fact found out by subtle
economic investigation; it is seen practically in men having
constantly to choose between the two kinds of labour. 
    But this is very different from the conditions under which we
now live. Practically such a choice is never placed before any
one. It would never occur to any one but a theorising economist,
to measure the value of capital by estimating what would be the
amount of loss if capital should not co-operate at all in the
production, -- any more than it would occur to any one to measure
the value of labour by estimating the amount of loss that would
ensue should labour refuse its co-operation. All labour is judged
on the quite intelligible assumption that it is brought into
co-operation with capital; all capital under the assumption that
it is brought into co-operation with labour. Production has
become ever so much more complicated, and with it the art of
calculating production. The simple formulae of former times are
not now adequate, and examples based on them can only be
misleading. 
    How, then, are capital and labour under present conditions to
be distinguished? The answer is not doubtful. According to that
complicated formula, and according to all those rules which
obtain, as regards the imputation of return in general.
    The "contribution" of capital is to-day far from amounting to
the whole "share dependent upon its co-operation." While that
share is very much equal to the total return of production, the
"contribution" is merely one single quota alongside of the quotas
of land and labour. 
    Only in one connection has the frustration of Thunen anything
to teach us about the measure of the return to capital. It proves
dearly that, in any case, there is a net return to be imputed to
capital -- in so far as it is properly employed; a return which
can be permanently obtained in spite of the perishable nature of
the various items forming the capital, and in spite of their
continual transformation in consumption and reproduction.
Capital, rightly employed, does more than simply renew itself; it
yields beyond this a surplus which must be imputed to it. This
proposition is proved beyond a doubt, as regards primitive
economic conditions, by Thunen and others; and in these primitive
conditions the progress of economy generally is shown through the
discovery and development of forms of capital. But will any one
assert that what was the due of primitive capital is not also the
due of the developed modern capital? 

Chapter 19

The Imputation of Gross Return and of Net Return

    We have said that capital, rightly employed, shows itself
productive, inasmuch as it reproduces itself with a surplus. This
proposition, although undoubtedly correct as a conclusion,
requires one essential modification.     Do the arrows, bows, and
nets -- the capital of Thunen's illustration -- really reproduce
themselves in the strictest sense of the term? Certainly not.
They produce nothing but fish and the spoils of the chase; in
this they exhaust their direct and proximate activity. They do
not in the least degree themselves bring forth new arrows, bows,
and nets, nor do they give direct assistance in doing so. The
return which, in the first place, falls to be imputed to them is,
consequently, a gross return in foreign things; things, that is,
from among which they cannot replace themselves; things with
which they may possibly be compared in value but not in quantity,
and by means of which a physical net return cannot therefore be
represented. But we cannot stop short in our consideration at
this point: as a matter of fact the indirect efficiency of
capital goes much further. The bows, arrows, and nets once
obtained lighten the conditions of their reproduction, if they do
not actually co-operate in it. They lighten it by means of the
extraordinary increase in the gross return of fish and game, as
consequence of which immensely more labour than formerly is free
to be employed in the creation of capital. Therefore, in the
total result, a net return does come in the end to be imputed to
these concrete forms of capital, just as if they did directly
reproduce themselves with a surplus. 
    The same argument holds for capital in the developed economy,
only that here the conditions are much more complicated and the
process, consequently, more difficult to follow. No capital, even
in the most highly developed economy, directly reproduces itself;
each produces first a gross return in foreign things, in which,
physically, its productivity cannot be seen. The capital of a
baker produces bread, that of a miller, meal, that of a peasant,
grain. In order that the baker may replace his capital again, he
must turn to the miller, and to all the other persons who can
provide him with the necessary materials and apparatus for his
production. The gross return of every capital must be exchanged
against the gross returns of other capitals, -- indeed, against
those returns which are attributed to land and labour, -- in
order that the capital may be replied, and the net return become
physically cognisable. The only imputation that ever takes place
directly is an imputation of gross return, but from that follows,
as a final consequence, an imputation of net return, however
circuitous the route may be, -- so long, I mean, as the
efficiency of capital is considered undiminished, and so long as
it is suitably employed. It is just as though every capital did
directly reproduce itself with a surplus. 
    In most cases the return to all the capital invested in one
business or one undertaking is grouped in one estimate. It
requires no proof, however, that, from the total return, each
separate bit of capital (assuming suitable employment) will have
its share. Every bit of capital, rightly employed, produces
directly a gross return of goods different from itself, and
finally, after the necessary exchange between similar gross
returns, reproduces itself and yields a net return. In this sense
machines, tools, raw materials, auxiliary materials, in short,
all forms of concrete capital, the smallest and the most
perishable, even those from which, materially speaking, nothing
passes over into the product, replace themselves and yield a
surplus. From this point of view every piece of coal which is
burned for purposes of production creates, in the last resort,
another similar piece of coal, and, beyond that, a perishable net
return. And, inasmuch as the replied portions of capital are
employed again and yet again, each piece of capital -- the
smallest and most perishable -- becomes the source of a permanent
rent.(1*) 

NOTES:

1. In the exchanges necessary to procure the goods which are to
replace the capital, in lieu of the directly obtained goods which
form the gross return, goods are, of course, estimated according
to their value. Capital goods, are, therefore, estimated at their
capital value. To this extent it appears that the knowledge of
the value of capital and of the laws which regulate it, must
precede the imputation of net return. Only in such a simple
instance as that given by Thunen can an imputation of net return
be made without a previous knowledge of the value of capital, and
this destroys our proof that the imputation of net return is
fundamentally independent of the valuation of capital. It is, of
course, practically impossible to employ this fundamental
principle so soon as production becomes complicated. But whenever
production becomes complicated every new calculation must
practically be laid on the lines of the old ones; otherwise no
conclusion could be come to. Every new determination of value
practically presupposes old ones (compare Book III. chap. v. at
end). As little, then, as the conclusion can be drain from this,
that theory requires value in order to explain value, so little
can it be concluded that, theoretically, the value of capital
conditions the imputation of net return. 

