




Part V





Of the Influence of Custom and Fashion upon the Sentiments of


Moral Approbation and Disapprobation


Consisting of One Section





Chap. I





Of the Influence of Custom and Fashion upon our Notions of Beauty


and Deformity





    There are other principles besides those already enumerated,


which have a considerable influence upon the moral sentiments of


mankind, and are the chief causes of the many irregular and


discordant opinions which prevail in different ages and nations


concerning what is blameable or praise-worthy. These principles


are custom and fashion, principles which extend their dominion


over our judgments concerning beauty of every kind.


    When two objects have frequently been seen together, the


imagination acquires a habit of passing easily from the one to


the other. If the first appear, we lay our account that the


second is to follow. Of their own accord they put us in mind of


one another, and the attention glides easily along them. Though,


independent of custom, there should be no real beauty in their


union, yet when custom has thus connected them together, we feel


an impropriety in their separation. The one we think is awkward


when it appears without its usual companion. We miss something


which we expected to find, and the habitual arrangement of our


ideas is disturbed by the disappointment. A suit of clothes, for


example, seems to want something if they are without the most


insignificant ornament which usually accompanies them, and we


find a meanness or awkwardness in the absence even of a haunch


button. When there is any natural propriety in the union, custom


increases our sense of it, and makes a different arrangement


appear still more disagreeable than it would otherwise seem to


be. Those who have been accustomed to see things in a good taste,


are more disgusted by whatever is clumsy or awkward. Where the


conjunction is improper, custom either diminishes, or takes away


altogether, our sense of the impropriety. Those who have been


accustomed to slovenly disorder lose all sense of neatness or


elegance. The modes of furniture or dress which seem ridiculous


to strangers, give no offence to the people who are used to them.


    Fashion is different from custom, or rather is a particular


species of it. That is not the fashion which every body wears,


but which those wear who are of a high rank, or character. The


graceful, the easy, and commanding manners of the great, joined


to the usual richness and magnificence of their dress, give a


grace to the very form which they happen to bestow upon it. As


long as they continue to use this form, it is connected in our


imaginations with the idea of something that is genteel and


magnificent, and though in itself it should be indifferent, it


seems, on account of this relation, to have something about it


that is genteel and magnificent too. As soon as they drop it, it


loses all the grace, which it had appeared to possess before, and


being now used only by the inferior ranks of people, seems to


have something of their meanness and awkwardness.


    Dress and furniture are allowed by all the world to be


entirely under the dominion of custom and fashion. The influence


of those principles, however, is by no means confined to so


narrow a sphere, but extends itself to whatever is in any respect


the object of taste, to music, to poetry, to architecture. The


modes of dress and furniture are continually changing, and that


fashion appearing ridiculous to-day which was admired five years


ago, we are experimentally convinced that it owed its vogue


chiefly or entirely to custom and fashion. Clothes and furniture


are not made of very durable materials. A well-fancied coat is


done in a twelve-month, and cannot continue longer to propagate,


as the fashion, that form according to which it was made. The


modes of furniture change less rapidly than those of dress;


because furniture is commonly more durable. In five or six years,


however, it generally undergoes an entire revolution, and every


man in his own time sees the fashion in this respect change many


different ways. The productions of the other arts are much more


lasting, and, when happily imagined, may continue to propagate


the fashion of their make for a much longer time. A


well-contrived building may endure many centuries: a beautiful


air may be delivered down by a sort of tradition, through many


successive generations: a well-written poem may last as long as


the world; and all of them continue for ages together, to give


the vogue to that particular style, to that particular taste or


manner, according to which each of them was composed. Few men


have an opportunity of seeing in their own times the fashion in


any of these arts change very considerably. Few men have so much


experience and acquaintance with the different modes which have


obtained in remote ages and nations, as to be thoroughly


reconciled to them, or to judge with impartiality between them,


and what takes place in their own age and country. Few men


therefore are willing to allow, that custom or fashion have much


influence upon their judgments concerning what is beautiful, or


otherwise, in the productions of any of those arts; but imagine,


that all the rules, which they think ought to be observed in each


of them, are founded upon reason and nature, not upon habit or


prejudice. A very little attention, however, may convince them of


the contrary, and satisfy them, that the influence of custom and


fashion over dress and furniture, is not more absolute than over


architecture, poetry, and music.


    Can any reason, for example, be assigned why the Doric


capital should be appropriated to a pillar, whose height is equal


to eight diameters; the Ionic volute to one of nine; and the


Corinthian foliage to one of ten? The propriety of each of those


appropriations can be founded upon nothing but habit and custom.


The eye having been used to see a particular proportion connected


with a particular ornament, would be offended if they were not


joined together. Each of the five orders has its peculiar


ornaments, which cannot be changed for any other, without giving


offence to all those who know any thing of the rules of


architecture. According to some architects, indeed, such is the


exquisite judgment with which the ancients have assigned to each


order its proper ornaments, that no others can be found which are


equally suitable. It seems, however, a little difficult to be


conceived that these forms, though, no doubt, extremely


agreeable, should be the only forms which can suit those


proportions, or that there should not be five hundred others


which, antecedent to established custom, would have fitted them


equally well. When custom, however, has established particular


rules of building, provided they are not absolutely unreasonable,


it is absurd to think of altering them for others which are only


equally good, or even for others which, in point of elegance and


beauty, have naturally some little advantage over them. A man


would be ridiculous who should appear in public with a suit of


clothes quite different from those which are commonly worn,


though the new dress should in itself be ever so graceful or


convenient. And there seems to be an absurdity of the same kind


in ornamenting a house after a quite different manner from that


which custom and fashion have prescribed; though the new


ornaments should in themselves be somewhat superior to the common


ones.


    According to the ancient rhetoricians, a certain measure of


verse was by nature appropriated to each particular species of


writing, as being naturally expressive of that character,


sentiment, or passion, which ought to predominate in it. One


verse, they said, was fit for grave and another for gay works,


which could not, they thought, be interchanged without the


greatest impropriety. The experience of modern times, however,


seems to contradict this principle, though in itself it would


appear to be extremely probable. What is the burlesque verse in


English, is the heroic verse in French. The tragedies of Racine


and the Henriad of Voltaire, are nearly in the same verse with,





     Let me have your advice in a weighty affair.





The burlesque verse in French, on the contrary, is pretty much


the same with the heroic verse of ten syllables in English.


Custom has made the one nation associate the ideas of gravity,


sublimity, and seriousness, to that measure which the other has


connected with whatever is gay, flippant, and ludicrous. Nothing


would appear more absurd in English, than a tragedy written in


the Alexandrine verses of the French; or in French, than a work


of the same kind in verses of ten syllables.


    An eminent artist will bring about a considerable change in


the established modes of each of those arts, and introduce a new


fashion of writing, music, or architecture. As the dress of an


agreeable man of high rank recommends itself, and how peculiar


and fantastical soever, comes soon to be admired and imitated; so


the excellencies of an eminent master recommend his


peculiarities, and his manner becomes the fashionable style in


the art which he practises. The taste of the Italians in music


and architecture has, within these fifty years, undergone a


considerable change, from imitating the peculiarities of some


eminent masters in each of those arts. Seneca is accused by


Quintilian of having corrupted the taste of the Romans, and of


having introduced a frivolous prettiness in the room of majestic


reason and masculine eloquence. Sallust and Tacitus have by


others been charged with the same accusation, though in a


different manner. They gave reputation, it is pretended, to a


style, which though in the highest degree concise, elegant,


expressive, and even poetical, wanted, however, ease, simplicity,


and nature, and was evidently the production of the most laboured


and studied affectation. How many great qualities must that


writer possess, who can thus render his very faults agreeable?


After the praise of refining the taste of a nation, the highest


eulogy, perhaps, which can be bestowed upon any author, is to


say, that he corrupted it. In our own language, Mr Pope and Dr


Swift have each of them introduced a manner different from what


was practised before, into all works that are written in rhyme,


the one in long verses, the other in short. The quaintness of


Butler has given place to the plainness of Swift. The rambling


freedom of Dryden, and the correct but often tedious and prosaic


languor of Addison, are no longer the objects of imitation, but


all long verses are now written after the manner of the nervous


precision of Mr Pope.


    Neither is it only over the productions of the arts, that


custom and fashion exert their dominion. They influence our


judgments, in the same manner, with regard to the beauty of


natural objects. What various and opposite forms are deemed


beautiful in different species of things ? The proportions which


are admired in one animal, are altogether different from those


which are esteemed in another. Every class of things has its own


peculiar conformation, which is approved of, and has a beauty of


its own, distinct from that of every other species. It is upon


this account that a learned Jesuit, father Buffier, has


determined that the beauty of every object consists in that form


and colour, which is most usual among things of that particular


sort to which it belongs. Thus, in the human form, the beauty of


each feature lies in a certain middle, equally removed from a


variety of other forms that are ugly. A beautiful nose, for


example, is one that is neither very long, nor very short,


neither very straight, nor very crooked, but a sort of middle


among all these extremes, and less different from any one of


them, than all of them are from one another. It is the form which


Nature seems to have aimed at in them all, which, however, she


deviates from in a great variety of ways, and very seldom hits


exactly; but to which all those deviations still bear a very


strong resemblance. When a number of drawings are made after one


pattern, though they may all miss it in some respects, yet they


will all resemble it more than they resemble one another; the


general character of the pattern will run through them all; the


most singular and odd will be those which are most wide of it;


and though very few will copy it exactly, yet the most accurate


delineations will bear a greater resemblance to the most


careless, than the careless ones will bear to one another. In the


same manner, in each species of creatures, what is most beautiful


bears the strongest characters of the general fabric of the


species, and has the strongest resemblance to the greater part of


the individuals with which it is classed. Monsters, on the


contrary, or what is perfectly deformed, are always most singular


and odd, and have the least resemblance to the generality of that


species to which they belong. And thus the beauty of each


species, though in one sense the rarest of all things, because


few individuals hit this middle form exactly, yet in another, is


the most common, because all the deviations from it resemble it


more than they resemble one another. The most customary form,


therefore, is in each species of things, according to him, the


most beautiful. And hence it is that a certain practice and


experience in contemplating each species of objects is requisite,


before we can judge of its beauty, or know wherein the middle and


most usual form consists. The nicest judgment concerning the


beauty of the human species, will not help us to judge of that of


flowers, or horses, or any other species of things. It is for the


same reason that in different climates, and where different


customs and ways of living take place, as the generality of any


species receives a different conformation from those


circumstances, so different ideas of its beauty prevail. The


beauty of a Moorish is not exactly the same with that of an


English horse. What different ideas are formed in different


nations concerning the beauty of the human shape and countenance


? A fair complexion is a shocking deformity upon the coast of


Guinea. Thick lips and a flat nose are a beauty. In some nations


long ears that hang down upon the shoulders are the objects of


universal admiration. In China if a lady's foot is so large as to


be fit to walk upon, she is regarded as a monster of ugliness.


Some of the savage nations in North-America tie four boards round


the heads of their children, and thus squeeze them, while the


bones are tender and gristly, into a form that is almost


perfectly square. Europeans are astonished at the absurd


barbarity of this practice, to which some missionaries have


imputed the singular stupidity of those nations among whom it


prevails. But when they condemn those savages, they do not


reflect that the ladies in Europe had, till within these very few


years, been endeavouring, for near a century past, to squeeze the


beautiful roundness of their natural shape into a square form of


the same kind. And that, notwithstanding the many distortions and


diseases which this practice was known to occasion, custom had


rendered it agreeable among some of the most civilized nations


which, perhaps, the world ever beheld.


    Such is the system of this learned and ingenious Father,


concerning the nature of beauty; of which the whole charm,


according to him, would thus seem to arise from its falling in


with the habits which custom had impressed upon the imagination,


with regard to things of each particular kind. I cannot, however,


be induced to believe that our sense even of external beauty is


founded altogether on custom. The utility of any form, its


fitness for the useful purposes for which it was intended,


evidently recommends it, and renders it agreeable to us,


independent of custom. Certain colours are more agreeable than


others, and give more delight to the eye the first time it ever


beholds them. A smooth surface is more agreeable than a rough


one. Variety is more pleasing than a tedious undiversified


uniformity. Connected variety, in which each new appearance seems


to be introduced by what went before it, and in which all the


adjoining parts seem to have some natural relation to one


another, is more agreeable than a disjointed and disorderly


assemblage of unconnected objects. But though I cannot admit that


custom is the sole principle of beauty, yet I can so far allow


the truth of this ingenious system as to grant, that there is


scarce any one external form so beautiful as to please, if quite


contrary to custom and unlike whatever we have been used to in


that particular species of things: or so deformed as not to be


agreeable, if custom uniformly supports it, and habituates us to


see it in every single individual of the kind.





Chap. II





Of the Influence of Custom and Fashion upon Moral Sentiments





    Since our sentiments concerning beauty of every kind, are so


much influenced by custom and fashion, it cannot be expected,


that those, concerning the beauty of conduct, should be entirely


exempted from the dominion of those principles. Their influence


here, however, seems to be much less than it is every where else.


There is, perhaps, no form of external objects, how absurd and


fantastical soever, to which custom will not reconcile us, or


which fashion will not render even agreeable. But the characters


and conduct of a Nero, or a Claudius, are what no custom will


ever reconcile us to, what no fashion will ever render agreeable;


but the one will always be the object of dread and hatred; the


other of scorn and derision. The principles of the imagination,


upon which our sense of beauty depends, are of a very nice and


delicate nature, and may easily be altered by habit and


education: but the sentiments of moral approbation and


disapprobation, are founded on the strongest and most vigorous


passions of human nature; and though they may be somewhat warpt,


cannot be entirely perverted.


    But though the influence of custom and fashion upon moral


sentiments, is not altogether so great, it is however perfectly


similar to what it is every where else. When custom and fashion


coincide with the natural principles of right and wrong, they


heighten the delicacy of our sentiments, and increase our


abhorrence for every thing which approaches to evil. Those who


have been educated in what is really good company, not in what is


commonly called such, who have been accustomed to see nothing in


the persons whom they esteemed and lived with, but justice,


modesty, humanity, and good order., are more shocked with


whatever seems to be inconsistent with the rules which those


virtues prescribe. Those, on the contrary, who have had the


misfortune to be brought up amidst violence, licentiousness,


falsehood, and injustice; lose, though not all sense of the


impropriety of such conduct, yet all sense of its dreadful


enormity, or of the vengeance and punishment due to it. They have


been familiarized with it from their infancy, custom has rendered


it habitual to them, and they are very apt to regard it as, what


is called, the way of the world, something which either may, or


must be practised, to hinder us from being the dupes of our own


integrity.


    Fashion too will sometimes give reputation to a certain


degree of disorder, and, on the contrary, discountenance


qualities which deserve esteem. In the reign of Charles II. a


degree of licentiousness was deemed the characteristic of a


liberal education. It was connected, according to the notions of


those times, with generosity, sincerity, magnanimity, loyalty,


and proved that the person who acted in this manner, was a


gentleman, and not a puritan. Severity of manners, and regularity


of conduct, on the other hand, were altogether unfashionable, and


were connected, in the imagination of that age, with cant,


cunning, hypocrisy, and low manners. To superficial minds, the


vices of the great seem at all times agreeable. They connect


them, not only with the splendour of fortune, but with many


superior virtues, which they ascribe to their superiors; with the


spirit of freedom and independency, with frankness, generosity,


humanity, and politeness. The virtues of the inferior ranks of


people, on the contrary, their parsimonious frugality, their


painful industry, and rigid adherence to rules, seem to them mean


and disagreeable. They connect them, both with the meanness of


the station to which those qualities commonly belong, and with


many great vices, which, they suppose, usually accompany them;


such as an abject, cowardly, ill-natured, lying, pilfering


disposition.


    The objects with which men in the different professions and


states of life are conversant, being very different, and


habituating them to very different passions, naturally form in


them very different characters and manners. We expect in each


rank and profession, a degree of those manners, which, experience


has taught us, belong to it. But as in each species of things, we


are particularly pleased with the middle conformation, which, in


every part and feature, agrees most exactly with the general


standard which nature seems to have established for things of


that kind; so in each rank, or, if I may say so, in each species


of men, we are particularly pleased, if they have neither too


much, nor too little of the character which usually accompanies


their particular condition and situation. A man, we say, should


look like his trade and profession; yet the pedantry of every


profession is disagreeable. The different periods of life have,


for the same reason, different manners assigned to them. We


expect in old age, that gravity and sedateness which its


infirmities, its long experience, and its worn-out sensibility


seem to render both natural and respectable; and we lay our


account to find in youth that sensibility, that gaiety and


sprightly vivacity which experience teaches us to expect from the


lively impressions that all interesting objects are apt to make


upon the tender and unpractised senses of that early period of


life. Each of those two ages, however, may easily have too much


of the peculiarities which belong to it. The flirting levity of


youth, and the immovable insensibility of old age, are equally


disagreeable. The young, according to the common saying, are most


agreeable when in their behaviour there is something of the


manners of the old, and the old, when they retain something of


the gaiety of the young. Either of them, however, may easily have


too much of the manners of the other. The extreme coldness, and


dull formality, which are pardoned in old age, make youth


ridiculous. The levity, the carelessness, and the vanity, which


are indulged in youth, render old age contemptible.


    The peculiar character and manners which we are led by custom


to appropriate to each rank and profession, have sometimes


perhaps a propriety independent of custom; and are what we should


approve of for their own sakes, if we took into consideration all


the different circumstances which naturally affect those in each


different state of life. The propriety of a person's behaviour,


depends not upon its suitableness to any one circumstance of his


situation, but to all the circumstances, which, when we bring his


case home to ourselves, we feel, should naturally call upon his


attention. If he appears to be so much occupied by any one of


them, as entirely to neglect the rest, we disapprove of his


conduct, as something which we cannot entirely go along with,


because not properly adjusted to all the circumstances of his


situation: yet, perhaps, the emotion he expresses for the object


which principally interests him, does not exceed what we should


entirely sympathize with, and approve of, in one whose attention


was not required by any other thing. A parent in private life


might, upon the loss of an only son, express without blame a


degree of grief and tenderness, which would be unpardonable in a


general at the head of an army, when glory, and the public


safety, demanded so great a part of his attention. As different


objects ought, upon common occasions, to occupy the attention of


men of different professions, so different passions ought


naturally to become habitual to them; and when we bring home to


ourselves their situation in this particular respect, we must be


sensible, that every occurrence should naturally affect them more


or less, according as the emotion which it excites, coincides or


disagrees with the fixt habit and temper of their minds. We


cannot expect the same sensibility to the gay pleasures and


amusements of life in a clergyman, which we lay our account with


in an officer. The man whose peculiar occupation it is to keep


the world in mind of that awful futurity which awaits them, who


is to announce what may be the fatal consequences of every


deviation from the rules of duty, and who is himself to set the


example of the most exact conformity, seems to be the messenger


of tidings, which cannot, in propriety, be delivered either with


levity or indifference. His mind is supposed to be continually


occupied with what is too grand and solemn, to leave any room for


the impressions of those frivolous objects, which fill up the


attention of the dissipated and the gay . We readily feel


therefore, that, independent of custom, there is a propriety in


the manners which custom has allotted to this profession; and


that nothing can be more suitable to the character of a clergyman


than that grave, that austere and abstracted severity, which we


are habituated to expect in his behaviour. These reflections are


so very obvious, that there is scarce any man so inconsiderate,


as not, at some time, to have made them, and to have accounted to


himself in this manner for his approbation of the usual character


of this order.


    The foundation of the customary character of some other


professions is not so obvious, and our approbation of it is


founded entirely in habit, without being either confirmed, or


enlivened by any reflections of this kind. We are led by custom,


for example, to annex the character of gaiety, levity, and


sprightly freedom, as well as of some degree of dissipation, to


the military profession. Yet, if we were to consider what mood or


tone of temper would be most suitable to this situation, we


should be apt to determine, perhaps, that the most serious and


thoughtful turn of mind would best become those whose lives are


continually exposed to uncommon danger, and who should therefore


be more constantly occupied with the thoughts of death and its


consequences than other men. It is this very circumstance,


however, which is not improbably the occasion why the contrary


turn of mind prevails so much among men of this profession. It


requires so great an effort to conquer the fear of death, when we


survey it with steadiness and attention, that those who are


constantly exposed to it, find it easier to turn away their


thoughts from it altogether, to wrap themselves up in careless


security and indifference, and to plunge themselves, for this


purpose, into every sort of amusement and dissipation. A camp is


not the element of a thoughtful or a melancholy man: persons of


that cast, indeed, are often abundantly determined, and are


capable, by a great effort, of going on with inflexible


resolution to the most unavoidable death. But to be exposed to


continual, though less imminent danger, to be obliged to exert,


for a long time, a degree of this effort, exhausts and depresses


the mind, and renders it incapable of all happiness and


enjoyment. The gay and careless, who have occasion to make no


effort at all, who fairly resolve never to look before them, but


to lose in continual pleasures and amusements all anxiety about


their situation, more easily support such circumstances.


Whenever, by any peculiar circumstances, an officer has no reason


to lay his account with being exposed to any uncommon danger, he


is very apt to lose the gaiety and dissipated thoughtlessness of


his character. The captain of a city guard is commonly as sober,


careful, and penurious an animal as the rest of his


fellow-citizens. A long peace is, for the same reason, very apt


to diminish the difference between the civil and the military


character. The ordinary situation, however, of men of this


profession, renders gaiety, and a degree of dissipation, so much


their usual character; and custom has, in our imagination, so


strongly connected this character with this state of life, that


we are very apt to despise any man, whose peculiar humour or


situation, renders him incapable of acquiring it. We laugh at the


grave and careful faces of a city guard, which so little resemble


those of their profession. They themselves seem often to be


ashamed of the regularity of their own manners, and, not to be


out of the fashion of their trade, are fond of affecting that


levity, which is by no means natural to them. Whatever is the


deportment which we have been accustomed to see in a respectable


order of men, it comes to be so associated in our imagination


with that order, that whenever we see the one, we lay our account


that we are to meet with the other, and when disappointed, miss


something which we expected to find. We are embarrassed, and put


to a stand, and know not how to address ourselves to a character,


which plainly affects to be of a different species from those


with which we should have been disposed to class it.


    The different situations of different ages and countries are


apt, in the same manner, to give different characters to the


generality of those who live in them, and their sentiments


concerning the particular degree of each quality, that is either


blamable or praise-worthy, vary, according to that degree which


is usual in their own country, and in their own times. That


degree of politeness, which would be highly esteemed, perhaps


would be thought effeminate adulation, in Russia, would be


regarded as rudeness and barbarism at the court of France. That


degree of order and frugality, which, in a Polish nobleman, would


be considered as excessive parsimony, would be regarded as


extravagance in a citizen of Amsterdam. Every age and country


look upon that degree of each quality, which is commonly to be


met with in those who are esteemed among themselves, as the


golden mean of that particular talent or virtue. And as this


varies, according as their different circumstances render


different qualities more or less habitual to them, their


sentiments concerning the exact propriety of character and


behaviour vary accordingly.


    Among civilized nations, the virtues which are founded upon


humanity, are more cultivated than those which are founded upon


self-denial and the command of the passions. Among rude and


barbarous nations, it is quite otherwise, the virtues of


self-denial are more cultivated than those of humanity. The


general security and happiness which prevail in ages of civility


and politeness, afford little exercise to the contempt of danger,


to patience in enduring labour, hunger, and pain. Poverty may


easily be avoided, and the contempt of it therefore almost ceases


to be a virtue. The abstinence from pleasure becomes less


necessary, and the mind is more at liberty to unbend itself, and


to indulge.its natural inclinations in all those particular


respects.


    Among savages and barbarians it is quite otherwise. Every


savage undergoes a sort of Spartan discipline, and by the


necessity of his situation is inured to every sort of hardship.


He is in continual danger: he is often exposed to the greatest


extremities of hunger, and frequently dies of pure want. His


circumstances not only habituate him to every sort of distress,


but teach him to give way to none of the passions which that


distress is apt to excite. He can expect from his countrymen no


sympathy or indulgence for such weakness. Before we can feel much


for others, we must in some measure be at ease ourselves. If our


own misery pinches us very severely, we have no leisure to attend


to that of our neighbour: and all savages are too much occupied


with their own wants and necessities, to give much attention to


those of another person. A savage, therefore, whatever be the


nature of his distress, expects no sympathy from those about him,


and disdains, upon that account, to expose himself, by allowing


the least weakness to escape him. His passions, how furious and


violent soever, are never permitted to disturb the serenity of


his countenance or the composure of his conduct and behaviour.


The savages in North America, we are told, assume upon all


occasions the greatest indifference, and would think themselves


degraded if they should ever appear in any respect to be


overcome, either by love, or grief, or resentment. Their


magnanimity and self-command, in this respect, are almost beyond


the conception of Europeans. In a country in which all men are


upon a level, with regard to rank and fortune, it might be


expected that the mutual inclinations of the two parties should


be the only thing considered in marriages, and should be indulged


without any sort of control. This, however, is the country in


which all marriages, without exception, are made up by the


parents, and in which a young man would think himself disgraced


for ever, if he shewed the least preference of one woman above


another, or did not express the most complete indifference, both


about the time when, and the person to whom, he was to be


married. The weakness of love, which is so much indulged in ages


of humanity and politeness, is regarded among savages as the most


unpardonable effeminacy. Even after the marriage, the two parties


seem to be ashamed of a connexion which is founded upon so sordid


a necessity. They do not live together. They see one another by


stealth only. They both continue to dwell in the houses of their


respective fathers, and the open cohabitation of the two sexes,


which is permitted without blame in all other countries, is here


considered as the most indecent and unmanly sensuality. Nor is it


only over this agreeable passion that they exert this absolute


self-command. They often bear, in the sight of all their


countrymen, with injuries, reproach, and the grossest insults,


with the appearance of the greatest insensibility, and without


expressing the smallest resentment. When a savage is made


prisoner of war, and receives, as is usual, the sentence of death


from his conquerors, he hears it without expressing any emotion,


and afterwards submits to the most dreadful torments, without


ever bemoaning himself, or discovering any other passion but


contempt of his enemies. While he is hung by the shoulders over a


slow fire, he derides his tormentors, and tells them with how


much more ingenuity he himself had tormented such of their


countrymen as had fallen into his hands. After he has been


scorched and burnt, and lacerated in all the most tender and


sensible parts of his body for several hours together, he is


often allowed, in order to prolong his misery, a short respite,


and is taken down from the stake: he employs this interval in


talking upon all indifferent subjects, inquires after the news of


the country, and seems indifferent about nothing but his own


situation. The spectators express the same insensibility; the


sight of so horrible an object seems to make no impression upon


them; they scarce look at the prisoner, except when they lend a


hand to torment him. At other times they smoke tobacco, and amuse


themselves with any common object, as if no such matter was going


on. Every savage is said to prepare himself from his earliest


youth for this dreadful end. He composes, for this purpose, what


they call the song of death, a song which he is to sing when he


has fallen into the hands of his enemies, and is expiring under


the tortures which they inflict upon him. It consists of insults


upon his tormentors, and expresses the highest contempt of death


and pain. He sings this song upon all extraordinary occasions,


when he goes out to war, when he meets his enemies in the field,


or whenever he has a mind to show that he has familiarised his


imagination to the most dreadful misfortunes, and that no human


event can daunt his resolution, or alter his purpose. The same


contempt of death and torture prevails among all other savage


nations. There is not a negro from the coast of Africa who does


not, in this respect, possess a degree of magnanimity which the


soul of his sordid master is too often scarce capable of


conceiving. Fortune never exerted more cruelly her empire over


mankind, than when she subjected those nations of heroes to the


refuse of the jails of Europe, to wretches who possess the


virtues neither of the countries which they come from, nor of


those which they go to, and whose levity, brutality, and


baseness, so justly expose them to the contempt of the


vanquished.


    This heroic and unconquerable firmness, which the custom and


education of his country demand of every savage, is not required


of those who are brought up to live in civilized societies. If


these last complain when they are in pain, if they grieve when


they are in distress, if they allow themselves either to be


overcome by love, or to be discomposed by anger, they are easily


pardoned. Such weaknesses are not apprehended to affect the


essential parts of their character. As long as they do not allow


themselves to be transported to do any thing contrary to justice


or humanity, they lose but little reputation, though the serenity


of their countenance, or the composure of their discourse and


behaviour, should be somewhat ruffled and disturbed. A humane and


polished people, who have more sensibility to the passions of


others, can more readily enter into an animated and passionate


behaviour, and can more easily pardon some little excess. The


person principally concerned is sensible of this; and being


assured of the equity of his judges, indulges himself in stronger


expressions of passion, and is less afraid of exposing himself to


their contempt by the violence of his emotions. We can venture to


express more emotion in the presence of a friend than in that of


a stranger, because we expect more indulgence from the one than


from the other. And in the same manner the rules of decorum among


civilized nations, admit of a more animated behaviour, than is


approved of among barbarians. The first converse together with


the openness of friends; the second with the reserve of


strangers. The emotion and vivacity with which the French and the


Italians, the two most polished nations upon the continent,


express themselves on occasions that are at all interesting,


surprise at first those strangers who happen to be travelling


among them, and who, having been educated among a people of


duller sensibility, cannot enter into this passionate behaviour,


of which they have never seen any example in their own country. A


young French nobleman will weep in the presence of the whole


court upon being refused a regiment. An Italian, says the abbot


D?Bos, expresses more emotion on being condemned in a fine of


twenty shillings, than an Englishman on receiving the sentence of


death. Cicero, in the times of the highest Roman politeness,


could, without degrading himself, weep with all the bitterness of


sorrow in the sight of the whole senate and the whole people; as


it is evident he must have done in the end of almost every


oration. The orators of the earlier and ruder ages of Rome could


not probably, consistent with the manners of the times, have


expressed themselves with so much emotion. It would have been


regarded, I suppose, as a violation of nature and propriety in


the Scipios, in the Leliuses, and in the elder Cato, to have


exposed so much tenderness to the view of the public. Those


ancient warriors could express themselves with order, gravity,


and good judgment; but are said to have been strangers to that


sublime and passionate eloquence which was first introduced into


Rome, not many years before the birth of Cicero, by the two


Gracchi, by Crassus, and by Sulpitius. This animated eloquence,


which has been long practised, with or without success, both in


France and Italy, is but just beginning to be introduced into


England. So wide is the difference between the degrees of


self-command which are required in civilized and in barbarous


nations, and by such different standards do they judge of the


propriety of behaviour.


    This difference gives occasion to many others that are not


less essential. A polished people being accustomed to give way,


in some measure, to the movements of nature, become frank, open,


and sincere. Barbarians, on the contrary, being obliged to


smother and conceal the appearance of every passion, necessarily


acquire the habits of falsehood and dissimulation. It is observed


by all those who have been conversant with savage nations,


whether in Asia, Africa, or America, that they are all equally


impenetrable, and that, when they have a mind to conceal the


truth, no examination is capable of drawing it from them. They


cannot be trepanned by the most artful questions. The torture


itself is incapable of making them confess any thing which they


have no mind to tell. The passions of a savage too, though they


never express themselves by any outward emotion, but lie


concealed in the breast of the sufferer, are, notwithstanding,


all mounted to the highest pitch of fury. Though he seldom shows


any symptoms of anger, yet his vengeance, when he comes to give


way to it, is always sanguinary and dreadful. The least affront


drives him to despair. His countenance and discourse indeed are


still sober and composed, and express nothing but the most


perfect tranquillity of mind: but his actions are often the most


furious and violent. Among the North-Americans it is not uncommon


for persons of the tenderest age and more fearful sex to drown


themselves upon receiving only a slight reprimand from their


mothers, and this too without expressing any passion, or saying


any thing, except, you shall no longer have a daughter. In


civilized nations the passions of men are not commonly so furious


or so desperate. They are often clamorous and noisy, but are


seldom very hurtful; and seem frequently to aim at no other


satisfaction, but that of convincing the spectator, that they are


in the right to be so much moved, and of procuring his sympathy


and approbation.


    All these effects of custom and fashion, however, upon the


moral sentiments of mankind, are inconsiderable, in comparison of


those which they give occasion to in some other cases; and it is


not concerning the general style of character and behaviour, that


those principles produce the greatest perversion of judgment, but


concerning the propriety or impropriety of particular usages.


    The different manners which custom teaches us to approve of


in the different professions and states of life, do not concern


things of the greatest importance. We expect truth and justice


from an old man as well as from a young, from a clergyman as well


as from an officer; and it is in matters of small moment only


that we look for the distinguishing marks of their respective


characters. With regard to these too, there is often some


unobserved circumstance which, if it was attended to, would show


us, that, independent of custom, there was a propriety in the


character which custom had taught us to allot to each profession.


We cannot complain, therefore, in this case, that the perversion


of natural sentiment is very great. Though the manners of


different nations require different degrees of the same quality,


in the character which they think worthy of esteem, yet the worst


that can be said to happen even here, is that the duties of one


virtue are sometimes extended so as to encroach a little upon the


precincts of some other. The rustic hospitality that is in


fashion among the Poles encroaches, perhaps, a little upon


oeconomy and good order; and the frugality that is esteemed in


Holland, upon generosity and good-fellowship. The hardiness


demanded of savages diminishes their humanity; and, perhaps, the


delicate sensibility required in civilized nations sometimes


destroys the masculine firmness of the character. In general, the


style of manners which takes place in any nation, may commonly


upon the whole be said to be that which is most suitable to its


situation. Hardiness is the character most suitable to the


circumstances of a savage; sensibility to those of one who lives


in a very civilized society. Even here, therefore, we cannot


complain that the moral sentiments of men are very grossly


perverted.


    It is not therefore in the general style of conduct or


behaviour that custom authorises the widest departure from what


is the natural propriety of action. With regard to particular


usages, its influence is often much more destructive of good


morals, and it is capable of establishing, as lawful and


blameless, particular actions, which shock the plainest


principles of right and wrong.


    Can there be greater barbarity for example, than to hurt an


infant? Its helplessness, its innocence, its amiableness, call


forth the compassion, even of an enemy, and not to spare that


tender age is regarded as the most furious effort of an enraged


and cruel conqueror. What then should we imagine must be the


heart of a parent who could injure that weakness which even a


furious enemy is afraid to violate ? Yet the exposition, that is,


the murder of new-born infants, was a practice allowed of in


almost all the states of Greece, even among the polite and


civilized Athenians; and whenever the circumstances of the parent


rendered it inconvenient to bring up the child, to abandon it to


hunger, or to wild beasts, was regarded without blame or censure.


This practice had probably begun in times of the most savage


barbarity. The imaginations of men had been first made familiar


with it in that earliest period of society, and the uniform


continuance of the custom had hindered them afterwards from


perceiving its enormity. We find, at this day, that this practice


prevails among all savage nations; and in that rudest and lowest


state of society it is undoubtedly more pardonable than in any


other. The extreme indigence of a savage is often such that he


himself is frequently exposed to the greatest extremity of


hunger, he often dies of pure want, and it is frequently


impossible for him to support both himself and his child. We


cannot wonder, therefore, that in this case he should abandon it.


One who, in flying from an enemy, whom it was impossible to


resist, should throw down his infant, because it retarded his


flight, would surely be excusable; since, by attempting to save


it, he could only hope for the consolation of dying with it. That


in this state of society, therefore, a parent should be allowed


to judge whether he can bring up his child, ought not to surprise


us so greatly. In the latter ages of Greece, however, the same


thing was permitted from views of remote interest or conveniency,


which could by no means excuse it. Uninterrupted custom had by


this time so thoroughly authorised the practice, that not only


the loose maxims of the world tolerated this barbarous


prerogative, but even the doctrine of philosophers, which ought


to have been more just and accurate, was led away by the


established custom, and upon this, as upon many other occasions,


instead of censuring, supported the horrible abuse, by


far-fetched considerations of public utility. Aristotle talks of


it as of what the magistrate ought upon many occasions to


encourage. The humane Plato is of the same opinion, and, with all


that love of mankind which seems to animate all his writings, no


where marks this practice with disapprobation. When custom can


give sanction to so dreadful a violation of humanity, we may well


imagine that there is scarce any particular practice so gross


which it cannot authorise. Such a thing, we hear men every day


saying, is commonly done, and they seem to think this a


sufficient apology for what, in itself, is the most unjust and


unreasonable conduct.


    There is an obvious reason why custom should never pervert


our sentiments with regard to the general style and character of


conduct and behaviour, in the same degree as with regard to the


propriety or unlawfulness of particular usages. There never can


be any such custom. No society could subsist a moment, in which


the usual strain of men's conduct and behaviour was of a piece


with the horrible practice I have just now mentioned.







