


Part II





Of Merit and Demerit; or, of the Objects of Reward and Punishment


Consisting of Three Parts





Section I





Of the Sense of Merit and Demerit





Introduction





    There is another set of qualities ascribed to the actions and


conduct of mankind, distinct from their propriety or impropriety,


their decency or ungracefulness, and which are the objects of a


distinct species of approbation and disapprobation. These are


Merit and Demerit, the qualities of deserving reward, and of


deserving punishment. 


    It has already been observed, that the sentiment or affection


of the heart, from which any action proceeds, and upon which its


whole virtue or vice depends, may be considered under two


different aspects, or in two different relations: first, in


relation to the cause or object which excites it; and, secondly,


in relation to the end which it proposes, or to the effect which


it tends to produce: that upon the suitableness or


unsuitableness, upon the proportion or disproportion, which the


affection seems to bear to the cause or object which excites it,


depends the propriety or impropriety, the decency or


ungracefulness of the consequent action; and that upon the


beneficial or hurtful effects which the affection proposes or


tends to produce, depends the merit or demerit, the good or ill


desert of the action to which it gives occasion. Wherein consists


our sense of the propriety or impropriety of actions, has been


explained in the former part of this discourse. We come now to


consider, wherein consists that of their good or ill desert. 





Chap. 1





That whatever appears to be the proper object of gratitude,


appears to deserve reward; and that, in the same manner, whatever


appears to be the proper object of resentment appears to deserve


punishment





    To us, therefore, that action must appear to deserve reward,


which appears to be the proper and approved object of that


sentiment, which most immediately and directly prompts us to


reward, or to do good to another. And in the same manner, that


action must appear to deserve punishment, which appears to be the


proper and approved object of that sentiment which most


immediately and directly prompts us to punish, or to inflict evil


upon another. 


    The sentiment which most immediately and directly prompts us


to reward, is gratitude; that which most immediately and directly


prompts us to punish, is resentment. 


    To us, therefore, that action must appear to deserve reward,


which appears to be the proper and approved object of gratitude;


as, on the other hand, that action must appear to deserve


punishment, which appears to be the proper and approved object of


resentment. 


    To reward, is to recompense, to remunerate, to return good


for good received. To punish, too, is to recompense, to


remunerate, though in a different manner; it is to return evil


for evil that has been done. 


    There are some other passions, besides gratitude and


resentment, which interest us in the happiness or misery of


others; but there are none which so directly excite us to be the


instruments of either. The love and esteem which grow upon


acquaintance and habitual approbation, necessarily lead us to be


pleased with the good fortune of the man who is the object of


such agreeable emotions, and consequently, to be willing to lend


a hand to promote it. Our love, however, is fully satisfied,


though his good fortune should be brought about without our


assistance. All that this passion desires is to see him happy,


without regarding who was the author of his prosperity. But


gratitude is not to be satisfied in this manner. If the person to


whom we owe many obligations, is made happy without our


assistance, though it pleases our love, it does not content our


gratitude. Till we have recompensed him, till we ourselves have


been instrumental in promoting his happiness, we feel ourselves


still loaded with that debt which his past services have laid


upon us. 


    The hatred and dislike, in the same manner, which grow upon


habitual disapprobation, would often lead us to take a malicious


pleasure in the misfortune of the man whose conduct and character


excite so painful a passion. But though dislike and hatred harden


us against all sympathy, and sometimes dispose us even to rejoice


at the distress of another, yet, if there is no resentment in the


case, if neither we nor our friends have received any great


personal provocation, these passions would not naturally lead us


to wish to be instrumental in bringing it about. Though we could


fear no punishment in consequence of our having had some hand in


it, we would rather that it should happen by other means. To one


under the dominion of violent hatred it would be agreeable,


perhaps, to hear, that the person whom he abhorred and detested


was killed by some accident. But if he had the least spark of


justice, which, though this passion is not very favourable to


virtue, he might still have, it would hurt him excessively to


have been himself, even without design, the occasion of this


misfortune. Much more would the very thought of voluntarily


contributing to it shock him beyond all measure. He would reject


with horror even the imagination of so execrable a design; and if


he could imagine himself capable of such an enormity, he would


begin to regard himself in the same odious light in which he had


considered the person who was the object of his dislike. But it


is quite otherwise with resentment: if the person who had done us


some great injury, who had murdered our father or our brother,


for example, should soon afterwards die of a fever, or even be


brought to the scaffold upon account of some other crime, though


it might sooth our hatred, it would not fully gratify our


resentment. Resentment would prompt us to desire, not only that


he should be punished, but that he should be punished by our


means, and upon account of that particular injury which he had


done to us. Resentment cannot be fully gratified, unless the


offender is not only made to grieve in his turn, but to grieve


for that particular wrong which we have suffered from him. He


must be made to repent and be sorry for this very action, that


others, through fear of the like punishment, may be terrified


from being guilty of the like offence. The natural gratification


of this passion tends, of its own accord, to produce all the


political ends of punishment; the correction of the criminal, and


the example to the public. 


    Gratitude and resentment, therefore, are the sentiments which


most immediately and directly prompt to reward and to punish. To


us, therefore, he must appear to deserve reward, who appears to


be the proper and approved object of gratitude; and he to deserve


punishment, who appears to be that of resentment. 





Chap. II





Of the proper objects of gratitude and resentment





    To be the proper and approved object either of gratitude or


resentment, can mean nothing but to be the object of that


gratitude, and of that resentment, which naturally seems proper,


and is approved of. 


    But these, as well as all the other passions of human nature,


seem proper and are approved of, when the heart of every


impartial spectator entirely sympathizes with them, when every


indifferent by-stander entirely enters into, and goes along with


them. 


    He, therefore, appears to deserve reward, who, to some person


or persons, is the natural object of a gratitude which every


human heart is disposed to beat time to, and thereby applaud: and


he, on the other hand, appears to deserve punishment, who in the


same manner is to some person or persons the natural object of a


resentment which the breast of every reasonable man is ready to


adopt and sympathize with. To us, surely, that action must appear


to deserve reward, which every body who knows of it would wish to


reward, and therefore delights to see rewarded: and that action


must as surely appear to deserve punishment, which every body who


hears of it is angry with, and upon that account rejoices to see


punished. 





    1. As we sympathize with the joy of our companions when in


prosperity, so we join with them in the complacency and


satisfaction with which they naturally regard whatever is the


cause of their good fortune. We enter into the love and affection


which they conceive for it, and begin to love it too. We should


be sorry for their sakes if it was destroyed, or even if it was


placed at too great a distance from them, and out of the reach of


their care and protection, though they should lose nothing by its


absence except the pleasure of seeing it. If it is man who has


thus been the fortunate instrument of the happiness of his


brethren, this is still more peculiarly the case. When we see one


man assisted, protected, relieved by another, our sympathy with


the joy of the person who receives the benefit serves only to


animate our fellow-feeling with his gratitude towards him who


bestows it. When we look upon the person who is the cause of his


pleasure with the eyes with which we imagine he must look upon


him, his benefactor seems to stand before us in the most engaging


and amiable light. We readily therefore sympathize with the


grateful affection which he conceives for a person to whom he has


been so much obliged; and consequently applaud the returns which


he is disposed to make for the good offices conferred upon him.


As we entirely enter into the affection from which these returns


proceed, they necessarily seem every way proper and suitable to


their object. 





    2. In the same manner, as we sympathize with the sorrow of


our fellow-creature whenever we see his distress, so we likewise


enter into his abhorrence and aversion for whatever has given


occasion to it. Our heart, as it adopts and beats time to his


grief, so is it likewise animated with that spirit by which he


endeavours to drive away or destroy the cause of it. The indolent


and passive fellow-feeling, by which we accompany him in his


sufferings, readily gives way to that more vigorous and active


sentiment by which we go along with him in the effort he makes,


either to repel them, or to gratify his aversion to what has


given occasion to them. This is still more peculiarly the case,


when it is man who has caused them. When we see one man oppressed


or injured by another, the sympathy which we feel with the


distress of the sufferer seems to serve only to animate our


fellow-feeling with his resentment against the offender. We are


rejoiced to see him attack his adversary in his turn, and are


eager and ready to assist him whenever he exerts himself for


defence, or even for vengeance within a certain degree. If the


injured should perish in the quarrel, we not only sympathize with


the real resentment of his friends and relations, but with the


imaginary resentment which in fancy we lend to the dead, who is


no longer capable of feeling that or any other human sentiment.


But as we put ourselves in his situation, as we enter, as it


were, into his body, and in our imaginations, in some measure,


animate anew the deformed and mangled carcass of the slain, when


we bring home in this manner his case to our own bosoms, we feel


upon this, as upon many other occasions, an emotion which the


person principally concerned is incapable of feeling, and which


yet we feel by an illusive sympathy with him. The sympathetic


tears which we shed for that immense and irretrievable loss,


which in our fancy he appears to have sustained, seem to be but a


small part of the duty which we owe him. The injury which he has


suffered demands, we think, a principal part of our attention. We


feel that resentment which we imagine he ought to feel, and which


he would feel, if in his cold and lifeless body there remained


any consciousness of what passes upon earth. His blood, we think,


calls aloud for vengeance. The very ashes of the dead seem to be


disturbed at the thought that his injuries are to pass


unrevenged. The horrors which are supposed to haunt the bed of


the murderer, the ghosts which, superstition imagines, rise from


their graves to demand vengeance upon those who brought them to


an untimely end, all take their origin from this natural sympathy


with the imaginary resentment of the slain. And with regard, at


least, to this most dreadful of all crimes, Nature, antecedent to


all reflections upon the utility of punishment, has in this


manner stamped upon the human heart, in the strongest and most


indelible characters, an immediate and instinctive approbation of


the sacred and necessary law of retaliation. 





Chap. III





That where there is no approbation of the conduct of the person


who confers the benefit, there is little sympathy with the


gratitude of him who receives it: and that, on the contrary,


where there is no disapprobation of the motives of the person who


does the mischief, there is no sort of sympathy with the


resentment of him who suffers it





    It is to be observed, however, that, how beneficial soever on


the one hand, or how hurtful soever on the other, the actions or


intentions of the person who acts may have been to the person who


is, if I may say so, acted upon, yet if in the one case there


appears to have been no propriety in the motives of the agent, if


we cannot enter into the affections which influenced his conduct,


we have little sympathy with the gratitude of the person who


receives the benefit: or if, in the other case, there appears to


have been no impropriety in the motives of the agent, if, on the


contrary, the affections which influenced his conduct are such as


we must necessarily enter into, we can have no sort of sympathy


with the resentment of the person who suffers. Little gratitude


seems due in the one case, and all sort of resentment seems


unjust in the other. The one action seems to merit little reward,


the other to deserve no punishment. 





    1. First, I say, That wherever we cannot sympathize with the


affections of the agent, wherever there seems to be no propriety


in the motives which influenced his conduct, we are less disposed


to enter into the gratitude of the person who received the


benefit of his actions. A very small return seems due to that


foolish and profuse generosity which confers the greatest


benefits from the most trivial motives, and gives an estate to a


man merely because his name and sirname happen to be the same


with those of the giver. Such services do not seem to demand any


proportionable recompense. Our contempt for the folly of the


agent hinders us from thoroughly entering into the gratitude of


the person to whom the good office has been done. His benefactor


seems unworthy of it. As when we place ourselves in the situation


of the person obliged, we feel that we could conceive no great


reverence for such a benefactor, we easily absolve him from a


great deal of that submissive veneration and esteem which we


should think due to a more respectable character; and provided he


always treats his weak friend with kindness and humanity, we are


willing to excuse him from many attentions and regards which we


should demand to a worthier patron. Those Princes, who have


heaped, with the greatest profusion, wealth, power, and honours,


upon their favourites, have seldom excited that degree of


attachment to their persons which has often been experienced by


those who were more frugal of their favours. The well-natured,


but injudicious prodigality of James the First of Great Britain


seems to have attached nobody to his person; and that Prince,


notwithstanding his social and harmless disposition, appears to


have lived and died without a friend. The whole gentry and


nobility of England exposed their lives and fortunes in the cause


of his more frugal and distinguishing son, notwithstanding the


coldness and distant severity of his ordinary deportment. 





    2. Secondly, I say, That wherever the conduct of the agent


appears to have been entirely directed by motives and affections


which we thoroughly enter into and approve of, we can have no


sort of sympathy with the resentment of the sufferer, how great


soever the mischief which may have been done to him. When two


people quarrel, if we take part with, and entirely adopt the


resentment of one of them, it is impossible that we should enter


into that of the other. Our sympathy with the person whose


motives we go along with, and whom therefore we look upon as in


the right, cannot but harden us against all fellow-feeling with


the other, whom we necessarily regard as in the wrong. Whatever


this last, therefore, may have suffered, while it is no more than


what we ourselves should have wished him to suffer, while it is


no more than what our own sympathetic indignation would have


prompted us to inflict upon him, it cannot either displease or


provoke us. When an inhuman murderer is brought to the scaffold,


though we have some compassion for his misery, we can have no


sort of fellow-feeling with his resentment, if he should be so


absurd as to express any against either his prosecutor or his


judge. The natural tendency of their just indignation against so


vile a criminal is indeed the most fatal and ruinous to him. But


it is impossible that we should be displeased with the tendency


of a sentiment, which, when we bring the case home to ourselves,


we feel that we cannot avoid adopting. 





Chap. IV





Recapitulation of the foregoing chapters





    1. We do not, therefore, thoroughly and heartily sympathize


with the gratitude of one man towards another, merely because


this other has been the cause of his good fortune, unless he has


been the cause of it from motives which we entirely go along


with. Our heart must adopt the principles of the agent, and go


along with all the affections which influenced his conduct,


before it can entirely sympathize with, and beat time to, the


gratitude of the person who has been benefited by his actions. If


in the conduct of the benefactor there appears to have been no


propriety, how beneficial soever its effects, it does not seem to


demand, or necessarily to require, any proportionable recompense.





    But when to the beneficent tendency of the action is joined


the propriety of the affection from which it proceeds, when we


entirely sympathize and go along with the motives of the agent,


the love which we conceive for him upon his own account, enhances


and enlivens our fellow-feeling with the gratitude of those who


owe their prosperity to his good conduct. His actions seem then


to demand, and, if I may say so, to call aloud for a


proportionable recompense. We then entirely enter into that


gratitude which prompts to bestow it. The benefactor seems then


to be the proper object of reward, when we thus entirely


sympathize with, and approve of, that sentiment which prompts to


reward him. When we approve of, and go along with, the affection


from which the action proceeds, we must necessarily approve of


the action, and regard the person towards whom it is directed, as


its proper and suitable object. 





    2. In the same manner, we cannot at all sympathize with the


resentment of one man against another, merely because this other


has been the cause of his misfortune, unless he has been the


cause of it from motives which we cannot enter into. Before we


can adopt the resentment of the sufferer, we must disapprove of


the motives of the agent, and feel that our heart renounces all


sympathy with the affections which influenced his conduct. If


there appears to have been no impropriety in these, how fatal


soever the tendency of the action which proceeds from them to


those against whom it is directed, it does not seem to deserve


any punishment, or to be the proper object of any resentment. 


    But when to the hurtfulness of the action is joined the


impropriety of the affection from whence it proceeds, when our


heart rejects with abhorrence all fellow-feeling with the motives


of the agent, we then heartily and entirely sympathize with the


resentment of the sufferer. Such actions seem then to deserve,


and, if I may say so, to call aloud for, a proportionable


punishment; and we entirely enter into, and thereby approve of,


that resentment which prompts to inflict it. The offender


necessarily seems then to be the proper object of punishment,


when we thus entirely sympathize with, and thereby approve of,


that sentiment which prompts to punish. In this case too, when we


approve, and go along with, the affection from which the action


proceeds, we must necessarily approve of the action, and regard


the person against whom it is directed, as its proper and


suitable object. 





Chap. V





The analysis of the sense of Merit and Demerit





    1. As our sense, therefore, of the propriety of conduct


arises from what I shall call a direct sympathy with the


affections and motives of the person who acts, so our sense of


its merit arises from what I shall call an indirect sympathy with


the gratitude of the person who is, if I may say so, acted upon. 


    As we cannot indeed enter thoroughly into the gratitude of


the person who receives the benefit, unless we beforehand approve


of the motives of the benefactor, so, upon this account, the


sense of merit seems to be a compounded sentiment, and to be made


up of two distinct emotions; a direct sympathy with the


sentiments of the agent, and an indirect sympathy with the


gratitude of those who receive the benefit of his actions. 


    We may, upon many different occasions, plainly distinguish


those two different emotions combining and uniting together in


our sense of the good desert of a particular character or action.


When we read in history concerning actions of proper and


beneficent greatness of mind, how eagerly do we enter into such


designs? How much are we animated by that high-spirited


generosity which directs them? How keen are we for their success?


How grieved at their disappointment? In imagination we become the


very person whose actions are represented to us: we transport


ourselves in fancy to the scenes of those distant and forgotten


adventures, and imagine ourselves acting the part of a Scipio or


a Camillus, a Timoleon or an Aristides. So far our sentiments are


founded upon the direct sympathy with the person who acts. Nor is


the indirect sympathy with those who receive the benefit of such


actions less sensibly felt. Whenever we place ourselves in the


situation of these last, with what warm and affectionate


fellow-feeling do we enter into their gratitude towards those who


served them so essentially? We embrace, as it were, their


benefactor along with them. Our heart readily sympathizes with


the highest transports of their grateful affection. No honours,


no rewards, we think, can be too great for them to bestow upon


him. When they make this proper return for his services, we


heartily applaud and go along with them; but are shocked beyond


all measure, if by their conduct they appear to have little sense


of the obligations conferred upon them. Our whole sense, in


short, of the merit and good desert of such actions, of the


propriety and fitness of recompensing them, and making the person


who performed them rejoice in his turn, arises from the


sympathetic emotions of gratitude and love, with which, when we


bring home to our own breast the situation of those principally


concerned, we feel ourselves naturally transported towards the


man who could act with such proper and noble beneficence. 





    2. In the same manner as our sense of the impropriety of


conduct arises from a want of sympathy, or from a direct


antipathy to the affections and motives of the agent, so our


sense of its demerit arises from what I shall here too call an


indirect sympathy with the resentment of the sufferer. 


    As we cannot indeed enter into the resentment of the


sufferer, unless our heart beforehand disapproves the motives of


the agent, and renounces all fellow-feeling with them; so upon


this account the sense of demerit, as well as that of merit,


seems to be a compounded sentiment, and to be made up of two


distinct emotions; a direct antipathy to the sentiments of the


agent, and an indirect sympathy with the resentment of the


sufferer. 


    We may here too, upon many different occasions, plainly


distinguish those two different emotions combining and uniting


together in our sense of the ill desert of a particular character


or action. When we read in history concerning the perfidy and


cruelty of a Borgia or a Nero, our heart rises up against the


detestable sentiments which influenced their conduct, and


renounces with horror and abomination all fellow-feeling with


such execrable motives. So far our sentiments are founded upon


the direct antipathy to the affections of the agent: and the


indirect sympathy with the resentment of the sufferers is still


more sensibly felt. When we bring home to ourselves the situation


of the persons whom those scourges of mankind insulted, murdered,


or betrayed, what indignation do we not feel against such


insolent and inhuman oppressors of the earth? Our sympathy with


the unavoidable distress of the innocent sufferers is not more


real nor more lively, than our fellow-feeling with their just and


natural resentment: The former sentiment only heightens the


latter, and the idea of their distress serves only to inflame and


blow up our animosity against those who occasioned it. When we


think of the anguish of the sufferers, we take part with them


more earnestly against their oppressors; we enter with more


eagerness into all their schemes of vengeance, and feel ourselves


every moment wreaking, in imagination, upon such violators of the


laws of society, that punishment which our sympathetic


indignation tells us is due to their crimes. Our sense of the


horror and dreadful atrocity of such conduct, the delight which


we take in hearing that it was properly punished, the indignation


which we feel when it escapes this due retaliation, our whole


sense and feeling, in short, of its ill desert, of the propriety


and fitness of inflicting evil upon the person who is guilty of


it, and of making him grieve in his turn, arises from the


sympathetic indignation which naturally boils up in the breast of


the spectator, whenever he thoroughly brings home to himself the


case of the sufferer.(1*)





Section II





Of Justice and Beneficence





Chap. I





Comparison of those two virtues





    Actions of a beneficent tendency, which proceed from proper


motives, seem alone to require reward. because such alone are the


approved objects of gratitude, or excite the sympathetic


gratitude of the spectator. 


    Actions of a hurtful tendency, which proceed from improper


motives, seem alone to deserve punishment; because such alone are


the approved objects of resentment, or excite the sympathetic


resentment of the spectator. 


    Beneficence is always free, it cannot be extorted by force,


the mere want of it exposes to no punishment; because the mere


want of beneficence tends to do no real positive evil. It may


disappoint of the good which might reasonably have been expected,


and upon that account it may justly excite dislike and


disapprobation: it cannot, however, provoke any resentment which


mankind will go along with. The man who does not recompense his


benefactor when he has it in his power, and when his benefactor


needs his assistance, is, no doubt, guilty of the blackest


ingratitude. The heart of every impartial spectator rejects all


fellow-feeling with the selfishness of his motives, and he is the


proper object of the highest disapprobation. But still he does no


positive hurt to any body. He only does not do that good which in


propriety he ought to have done. He is the object of hatred, a


passion which is naturally excited by impropriety of sentiment


and behaviour. not of resentment, a passion which is never


properly called forth but by actions which tend to do real and


positive hurt to some particular persons. His want of gratitude,


therefore, cannot be punished. To oblige him by force to perform


what in gratitude he ought to perform, and what every impartial


spectator would approve of him for performing, would, if


possible, be still more improper than his neglecting to perform


it. His benefactor would dishonour himself if he attempted by


violence to constrain him to gratitude, and it would be


impertinent for any third person, who was not the superior of


either, to intermeddle. But of all the duties of beneficence,


those which gratitude recommends to us approach nearest to what


is called a perfect and complete obligation. What friendship,


what generosity, what charity, would prompt us to do with


universal approbation, is still more free, and can still less be


extorted by force than the duties of gratitude. We talk of the


debt of gratitude, not of charity, or generosity, nor even of


friendship, when friendship is mere esteem, and has not been


enhanced and complicated with gratitude for good offices. 


    Resentment seems to have been given us by nature for defence,


and for defence only. It is the safeguard of justice and the


security of innocence. It prompts us to beat off the mischief


which is attempted to be done to us, and to retaliate that which


is already done; that the offender may be made to repent of his


injustice, and that others, through fear of the like punishment,


may be terrified from being guilty of the like offence. It must


be reserved therefore for these purposes, nor can the spectator


ever go along with it when it is exerted for any other. But the


mere want of the beneficent virtues, though it may disappoint us


of the good which might reasonably be expected, neither does, not


attempts to do, any mischief from which we can have occasion to


defend ourselves. 


    There is, however, another virtue, of which the observance is


not left to the freedom of our own wills, which may be extorted


by force, and of which the violation exposes to resentment, and


consequently to punishment. This virtue is justice: the violation


of justice is injury: it does real and positive hurt to some


particular persons, from motives which are naturally disapproved


of. It is, therefore, the proper object of resentment, and of


punishment, which is the natural consequence of resentment. As


mankind go along with, and approve of the violence employed to


avenge the hurt which is done by injustice, so they much more go


along with, and approve of, that which is employed to prevent and


beat off the injury, and to restrain the offender from hurting


his neighbours. The person himself who meditates an injustice is


sensible of this, and feels that force may, with the utmost


propriety, be made use of, both by the person whom he is about to


injure, and by others, either to obstruct the execution of his


crime, or to punish him when he has executed it. And upon this is


founded that remarkable distinction between justice and all the


other social virtues, which has of late been particularly


insisted upon by an author of very great and original genius,


that we feel ourselves to be under a stricter obligation to act


according to justice, than agreeably to friendship, charity, or


generosity; that the practice of these last mentioned virtues


seems to be left in some measure to our own choice, but that,


somehow or other, we feel ourselves to be in a peculiar manner


tied, bound, and obliged to the observation of justice. We feel,


that is to say, that force may, with the utmost propriety, and


with the approbation of all mankind, be made use of to constrain


us to observe the rules of the one, but not to follow the


precepts of the other. 


    We must always, however, carefully distinguish what is only


blamable, or the proper object of disapprobation, from what force


may be employed either to punish or to prevent. That seems


blamable which falls short of that ordinary degree of proper


beneficence which experience teaches us to expect of every body;


and on the contrary, that seems praise-worthy which goes beyond


it. The ordinary degree itself seems neither blamable nor


praise-worthy. A father, a son, a brother, who behaves to the


correspondent relation neither better nor worse than the greater


part of men commonly do, seems properly to deserve neither praise


nor blame. He who surprises us by extraordinary and unexpected,


though still proper and suitable kindness, or on the contrary by


extraordinary and unexpected, as well as unsuitable unkindness,


seems praise-worthy in the one case, and blamable in the other. 


    Even the most ordinary degree of kindness or beneficence,


however, cannot, among equals, be extorted by force. Among equals


each individual is naturally, and antecedent to the institution


of civil government, regarded as having a right both to defend


himself from injuries, and to exact a certain degree of


punishment for those which have been done to him. Every generous


spectator not only approves of his conduct when he does this, but


enters so far into his sentiments as often to be willing to


assist him. When one man attacks, or robs, or attempts to murder


another, all the neighbours take the alarm, and think that they


do right when they run, either to revenge the person who has been


injured, or to defend him who is in danger of being so. But when


a father fails in the ordinary degree of parental affection


towards a son; when a son seems to want that filial reverence


which might be expected to his father; when brothers are without


the usual degree of brotherly affection; when a man shuts his


breast against compassion, and refuses to relieve the misery of


his fellow-creatures, when he can with the greatest ease; in all


these cases, though every body blames the conduct, nobody


imagines that those who might have reason, perhaps, to expect


more kindness, have any right to extort it by force. The sufferer


can only complain, and the spectator can intermeddle no other way


than by advice and persuasion. Upon all such occasions, for


equals to use force against one another, would be thought the


highest degree of insolence and presumption. 


    A superior may, indeed, sometimes, with universal


approbation, oblige those under his jurisdiction to behave, in


this respect, with a certain degree of propriety to one another.


The laws of all civilized nations oblige parents to maintain


their children, and children to maintain their parents, and


impose upon men many other duties of beneficence. The civil


magistrate is entrusted with the power not only of preserving the


public peace by restraining injustice, but of promoting the


prosperity of the commonwealth, by establishing good discipline,


and by discouraging every sort of vice and impropriety; he may


prescribe rules, therefore, which not only prohibit mutual


injuries among fellow-citizens, but command mutual good offices


to a certain degree. When the sovereign commands what is merely


indifferent, and what, antecedent to his orders, might have been


omitted without any blame, it becomes not only blamable but


punishable to disobey him. When he commands, therefore, what,


antecedent to any such order, could not have been omitted without


the greatest blame, it surely becomes much more punishable to be


wanting in obedience. Of all the duties of a law-giver, however,


this, perhaps, is that which it requires the greatest delicacy


and reserve to execute with propriety and judgment. To neglect it


altogether exposes the commonwealth to many gross disorders and


shocking enormities, and to push it too far is destructive of all


liberty, security, and justice. 


    Though the mere want of beneficence seems to merit no


punishment from equals, the greater exertions of that virtue


appear to deserve the highest reward. By being productive of the


greatest good, they are the natural and approved objects of the


liveliest gratitude. Though the breach of justice, on the


contrary, exposes to punishment, the observance of the rules of


that virtue seems scarce to deserve any reward. There is, no


doubt, a propriety in the practice of justice, and it merits,


upon that account, all the approbation which is due to propriety.


But as it does no real positive good, it is entitled to very


little gratitude. Mere justice is, upon most occasions, but a


negative virtue, and only hinders us from hurting our neighbour.


The man who barely abstains from violating either the person, or


the estate, or the reputation of his neighbours, has surely very


little positive merit. He fulfils, however, all the rules of what


is peculiarly called justice, and does every thing which his


equals can with propriety force him to do, or which they can


punish him for not doing. We may often fulfil all the rules of


justice by sitting still and doing nothing.


    As every man doth, so shall it be done to him, and


retaliation seems to be the great law which is dictated to us by


Nature. Beneficence and generosity we think due to the generous


and beneficent. Those whose hearts never open to the feelings of


humanity, should, we think, be shut out, in the same manner, from


the affections of all their fellow-creatures, and be allowed to


live in the midst of society, as in a great desert where there is


nobody to care for them, or to inquire after them. The violator


of the laws of justice ought to be made to feel himself that evil


which he has done to another; and since no regard to the


sufferings of his brethren is capable of restraining him, he


ought to be over-awed by the fear of his own. The man who is


barely innocent, who only observes the laws of justice with


regard to others, and merely abstains from hurting his


neighbours, can merit only that his neighbours in their turn


should respect his innocence, and that the same laws should be


religiously observed with regard to him.





Chap. II





Of the sense of Justice, of Remorse, and of the consciousness of


Merit





    There can be no proper motive for hurting our neighbour,


there can be no incitement to do evil to another, which mankind


will go along with, except just indignation for evil which that


other has done to us. To disturb his happiness merely because it


stands in the way of our own, to take from him what is of real


use to him merely because it may be of equal or of more use to


us, or to indulge, in this manner, at the expence of other


people, the natural preference which every man has for his own


happiness above that of other people, is what no impartial


spectator can go along with. Every man is, no doubt, by nature,


first and principally recommended to his own care; and as he is


fitter to take care of himself than of any other person, it is


fit and right that it should be so. Every man, therefore, is much


more deeply interested in whatever immediately concerns himself,


than in what concerns any other man: and to hear, perhaps, of the


death of another person, with whom we have no particular


connexion, will give us less concern, will spoil our stomach, or


break our rest much less than a very insignificant disaster which


has befallen ourselves. But though the ruin of our neighbour may


affect us much less than a very small misfortune of our own, we


must not ruin him to prevent that small misfortune, nor even to


prevent our own ruin. We must, here, as in all other cases, view


ourselves not so much according to that light in which we may


naturally appear to ourselves, as according to that in which we


naturally appear to others. Though every man may, according to


the proverb, be the whole world to himself, to the rest of


mankind he is a most insignificant part of it. Though his own


happiness may be of more importance to him than that of all the


world besides, to every other person it is of no more consequence


than that of any other man. Though it may be true, therefore,


that every individual, in his own breast, naturally prefers


himself to all mankind, yet he dares not look mankind in the


face, and avow that he acts according to this principle. He feels


that in this preference they can never go along with him, and


that how natural soever it may be to him, it must always appear


excessive and extravagant to them. When he views himself in the


light in which he is conscious that others will view him, he sees


that to them he is but one of the multitude in no respect better


than any other in it. If he would act so as that the impartial


spectator may enter into the principles of his conduct, which is


what of all things he has the greatest desire to do, he must,


upon this, as upon all other occasions, humble the arrogance of


his self-love, and bring it down to something which other men can


go along with. They will indulge it so far as to allow him to be


more anxious about, and to pursue with more earnest assiduity,


his own happiness than that of any other person. Thus far,


whenever they place themselves in his situation, they will


readily go along with him. In the race for wealth, and honours,


and preferments, he may run as hard as he can, and strain every


nerve and every muscle, in order to outstrip all his competitors.


But if he should justle, or throw down any of them, the


indulgence of the spectators is entirely at an end. It is a


violation of fair play, which they cannot admit of. This man is


to them, in every respect, as good as he: they do not enter into


that self-love by which he prefers himself so much to this other,


and cannot go along with the motive from which he hurt him. They


readily, therefore, sympathize with the natural resentment of the


injured, and the offender becomes the object of their hatred and


indignation. He is sensible that he becomes so, and feels that


those sentiments are ready to burst out from all sides against


him.


    As the greater and more irreparable the evil that is done,


the resentment of the sufferer runs naturally the higher; so does


likewise the sympathetic indignation of the spectator, as well as


the sense of guilt in the agent. Death is the greatest evil which


one man can inflict upon another, and excites the highest degree


of resentment in those who are immediately connected with the


slain. Murder, therefore, is the most atrocious of all crimes


which affect individuals only, in the sight both of mankind, and


of the person who has committed it. To be deprived of that which


we are possessed of, is a greater evil than to be disappointed of


what we have only the expectation. Breach of property, therefore,


theft and robbery, which take from us what we are possessed of,


are greater crimes than breach of contract, which only


disappoints us of what we expected. The most sacred laws of


justice, therefore, those whose violation seems to call loudest


for vengeance and punishment, are the laws which guard the life


and person of our neighbour; the next are those which guard his


property and possessions; and last of all come those which guard


what are called his personal rights, or what is due to him from


the promises of others.


    The violator of the more sacred laws of justice can never


reflect on the sentiments which mankind must entertain with


regard to him, without feeling all the agonies of shame, and


horror, and consternation. When his passion is gratified, and he


begins coolly to reflect on his past conduct, he can enter into


none of the motives which influenced it. They appear now as


detestable to him as they did always to other people. By


sympathizing with the hatred and abhorrence which other men must


entertain for him, he becomes in some measure the object of his


own hatred and abhorrence. The situation of the person, who


suffered by his injustice, now calls upon his pity. He is grieved


at the thought of it; regrets the unhappy effects of his own


conduct, and feels at the same time that they have rendered him


the proper object of the resentment and indignation of mankind,


and of what is the natural consequence of resentment, vengeance


and punishment. The thought of this perpetually haunts him, and


fills him with terror and amazement. He dares no longer look


society in the face, but imagines himself as it were rejected,


and thrown out from the affections of all mankind. He cannot hope


for the consolation of sympathy in this his greatest and most


dreadful distress. The remembrance of his crimes has shut out all


fellow-feeling with him from the hearts of his fellow-creatures.


The sentiments which they entertain with regard to him, are the


very thing which he is most afraid of. Every thing seems hostile,


and he would be glad to fly to some inhospitable desert, where he


might never more behold the face of a human creature, nor read in


the countenance of mankind the condemnation of his crimes. But


solitude is still more dreadful than society. His own thoughts


can present him with nothing but what is black, unfortunate, and


disastrous, the melancholy forebodings of incomprehensible misery


and ruin. The horror of solitude drives him back into society,


and he comes again into the presence of mankind, astonished to


appear before them, loaded with shame and distracted with fear,


in order to supplicate some little protection from the


countenance of those very judges, who he knows have already all


unanimously condemned him. Such is the nature of that sentiment,


which is properly called remorse; of all the sentiments which can


enter the human breast the most dreadful. It is made up of shame


from the sense of the impropriety of past conduct; of grief for


the effects of it; of pity for those who suffer by it; and of the


dread and terror of punishment from the consciousness of the


justly provoked resentment of all rational creatures.


    The opposite behaviour naturally inspires the opposite


sentiment. The man who, not from frivolous fancy, but from proper


motives, has performed a generous action, when he looks forward


to those whom he has served, feels himself to be the natural


object of their love and gratitude, and, by sympathy with them,


of the esteem and approbation of all mankind. And when he looks


backward to the motive from which he acted, and surveys it in the


light in which the indifferent spectator will survey it, he still


continues to enter into it, and applauds himself by sympathy with


the approbation of this supposed impartial judge. In both these


points of view his own conduct appears to him every way


agreeable. His mind, at the thought of it, is filled with


cheerfulness, serenity, and composure. He is in friendship and


harmony with all mankind, and looks upon his fellow-creatures


with confidence and benevolent satisfaction, secure that he has


rendered himself worthy of their most favourable regards. In the


combination of all these sentiments consists the consciousness of


merit, or of deserved reward. 





Chap. III





Of the utility of this constitution of Nature





    It is thus that man, who can subsist only in society, was


fitted by nature to that situation for which he was made. All the


members of human society stand in need of each others assistance,


and are likewise exposed to mutual injuries. Where the necessary


assistance is reciprocally afforded from love, from gratitude,


from friendship, and esteem, the society flourishes and is happy.


All the different members of it are bound together by the


agreeable bands of love and affection, and are, as it were, drawn


to one common centre of mutual good offices.


    But though the necessary assistance should not be afforded


from such generous and disinterested motives, though among the


different members of the society there should be no mutual love


and affection, the society, though less happy and agreeable, will


not necessarily be dissolved. Society may subsist among different


men, as among different merchants, from a sense of its utility,


without any mutual love or affection; and though no man in it


should owe any obligation, or be bound in gratitude to any other,


it may still be upheld by a mercenary exchange of good offices


according to an agreed valuation.


    Society, however, cannot subsist among those who are at all


times ready to hurt and injure one another. The moment that


injury begins, the moment that mutual resentment and animosity


take place, all the bands of it are broke asunder, and the


different members of which it consisted are, as it were,


dissipated and scattered abroad by the violence and opposition of


their discordant affections. If there is any society among


robbers and murderers, they must at least, according to the trite


observation, abstain from robbing and murdering one another.


Beneficence, therefore, is less essential to the existence of


society than justice. Society may subsist, though not in the most


comfortable state, without beneficence; hut the prevalence of


injustice must utterly destroy it.


    Though Nature, therefore, exhorts mankind to acts of


beneficence, by the pleasing consciousness of deserved reward,


she has not thought it necessary to guard and enforce the


practice of it by the terrors of merited punishment in case it


should be neglected. It is the ornament which embellishes, not


the foundation which supports the building, and which it was,


therefore, sufficient to recommend, but by no means necessary to


impose. Justice, on the contrary, is the main pillar that upholds


the whole edifice. If it is removed, the great, the immense


fabric of human society, that fabric which to raise and support


seems in this world, if I may say so, to have been the peculiar


and darling care of Nature, must in a moment crumble into atoms.


In order to enforce the observation of justice, therefore, Nature


has implanted in the human breast that consciousness of


ill-desert, those terrors of merited punishment which attend upon


its violation, as the great safe-guards of the association of


mankind, to protect the weak, to curb the violent, and to


chastise the guilty. Men, though naturally sympathetic, feel so


little for another, with whom they have no particular connexion,


in comparison of what they feel for themselves; the misery of


one, who is merely their fellow-creature, is of so little


importance to them in comparison even of a small conveniency of


their own; they have it so much in their power to hurt him, and


may have so many temptations to do so, that if this principle did


not stand up within them in his defence, and overawe them into a


respect for his innocence, they would, like wild beasts, be at


all times ready to fly upon him; and a man would enter an


assembly of men as he enters a den of lions.


    In every part of the universe we observe means adjusted with


the nicest artifice to the ends which they are intended to


produce; and in the mechanism of a plant, or animal body, admire


how every thing is contrived for advancing the two great purposes


of nature, the support of the individual, and the propagation of


the species. But in these, and in all such objects, we still


distinguish the efficient from the final cause of their several


motions and organizations. The digestion of the food, the


circulation of the blood, and the secretion of the several juices


which are drawn from it, are operations all of them necessary for


the great purposes of animal life. Yet we never endeavour to


account for them from those purposes as from their efficient


causes, nor imagine that the blood circulates, or that the food


digests of its own accord, and with a view or intention to the


purposes of circulation or digestion. The wheels of the watch are


all admirably adjusted to the end for which it was made, the


pointing of the hour. All their various motions conspire in the


nicest manner to produce this effect. If they were endowed with a


desire and intention to produce it, they could not do it better.


Yet we never ascribe any such desire or intention to them, but to


the watch-maker, and we know that they are put into motion by a


spring, which intends the effect it produces as little as they


do. But though, in accounting for the operations of bodies, we


never fail to distinguish in this manner the efficient from the


final cause, in accounting for those of the mind we are very apt


to confound these two different things with one another. When by


natural principles we are led to advance those ends, which a


refined and enlightened reason would recommend to us, we are very


apt to impute to that reason, as to their efficient cause, the


sentiments and actions by which we advance those ends, and to


imagine that to be the wisdom of man, which in reality is the


wisdom of God. Upon a superficial view, this cause seems


sufficient to produce the effects which are ascribed to it; and


the system of human nature seems to be more simple and agreeable


when all its different operations are in this manner deduced from


a single principle.


    As society cannot subsist unless the laws of justice are


tolerably observed, as no social intercourse can take place among


men who do not generally abstain from injuring one another; the


consideration of this necessity, it has been thought, was the


ground upon which we approved of the enforcement of the laws of


justice by the punishment of those who violated them. Man, it has


been said, has a natural love for society, and desires that the


union of mankind should be preserved for its own sake, and though


he himself was to derive no benefit from it. The orderly and


flourishing state of society is agreeable to him, and he takes


delight in contemplating it. Its disorder and confusion, on the


contrary, is the object of his aversion, and he is chagrined at


whatever tends to produce it. He is sensible too that his own


interest is connected with the prosperity of society, and that


the happiness, perhaps the preservation of his existence, depends


upon its preservation. Upon every account, therefore, he has an


abhorrence at whatever can tend to destroy society, and is


willing to make use of every means, which can hinder so hated and


so dreadful an event. Injustice necessarily tends to destroy it.


Every appearance of injustice, therefore, alarms him, and he


runs, if I may say so, to stop the progress of what, if allowed


to go on, would quickly put an end to every thing that is dear to


him. If he cannot restrain it by gentle and fair means, he must


beat it down by force and violence, and at any rate must put a


stop to its further progress. Hence it is, they say, that he


often approves of the enforcement of the laws of justice even by


the capital punishment of those who violate them. The disturber


of the public peace is hereby removed out of the world, and


others are terrified by his fate from imitating his example.


    Such is the account commonly given of our approbation of the


punishment of injustice. And so far this account is undoubtedly


true, that we frequently have occasion to confirm our natural


sense of the propriety and fitness of punishment, by reflecting


how necessary it is for preserving the order of society. When the


guilty is about to suffer that just retaliation, which the


natural indignation of mankind tells them is due to his crimes;


when the insolence of his injustice is broken and humbled by the


terror of his approaching punishment; when he ceases to be an


object of fear, with the generous and humane he begins to be an


object of pity. The thought of what he is about to suffer


extinguishes their resentment for the sufferings of others to


which he has given occasion. They are disposed to pardon and


forgive him, and to save him from that punishment, which in all


their cool hours they had considered as the retribution due to


such crimes. Here, therefore, they have occasion to call to their


assistance the consideration of the general interest of society.


They counterbalance the impulse of this weak and partial humanity


by the dictates of a humanity that is more generous and


comprehensive. They reflect that mercy to the guilty is cruelty


to the innocent, and oppose to the emotions of compassion which


they feel for a particular person, a more enlarged compassion


which they feel for mankind. 


    Sometimes too we have occasion to defend the propriety of


observing the general rules of justice by the consideration of


their necessity to the support of society. We frequently hear the


young and the licentious ridiculing the most sacred rules of


morality, and professing, sometimes from the corruption, but more


frequently from the vanity of their hearts, the most abominable


maxims of conduct. Our indignation rouses, and we are eager to


refute and expose such detestable principles. But though it is


their intrinsic hatefulness and detestableness, which originally


inflames us against them, we are unwilling to assign this as the


sole reason why we condemn them, or to pretend that it is merely


because we ourselves hate and detest them. The reason, we think,


would not appear to be conclusive. Yet why should it not; if we


hate and detest them because they are the natural and proper


objects of hatred and detestation? But when we are asked why we


should not act in such or such a manner, the very question seems


to suppose that, to those who ask it, this manner of acting does


not appear to be for its own sake the natural and proper object


of those sentiments. We must show them, therefore, that it ought


to be so for the sake of something else. Upon this account we


generally cast about for other arguments, and the consideration


which first occurs to us, is the disorder and confusion of


society which would result from the universal prevalence of such


practices. We seldom fail, therefore, to insist upon this topic.


    But though it commonly requires no great discernment to see


the destructive tendency of all licentious practices to the


welfare of society, it is seldom this consideration which first


animates us against them. All men, even the most stupid and


unthinking, abhor fraud, perfidy, and injustice, and delight to


see them punished. But few men have reflected upon the necessity


of justice to the existence of society, how obvious soever that


necessity may appear to be.


    That it is not a regard to the preservation of society, which


originally interests us in the punishment of crimes committed


against individuals, may be demonstrated by many obvious


considerations. The concern which we take in the fortune and


happiness of individuals does not, in common cases, arise from


that which we take in the fortune and happiness of society. We


are no more concerned for the destruction or loss of a single


man, because this man is a member or part of society, and because


we should be concerned for the destruction of society, than we


are concerned for the loss of a single guinea, because this


guinea is a part of a thousand guineas, and because we should be


concerned for the loss of the whole sum. In neither case does our


regard for the individuals arise from our regard for the


multitude: but in both cases our regard for the multitude is


compounded and made up of the particular regards which we feel


for the different individuals of which it is composed. As when a


small sum is unjustly taken from us, we do not so much prosecute


the injury from a regard to the preservation of our whole


fortune, as from a regard to that particular sum which we have


lost; so when a single man is injured, or destroyed, we demand


the punishment of the wrong that has been done to him, not so


much from a concern for the general interest of society, as from


a concern for that very individual who has been injured. It is to


be observed, however, that this concern does not necessarily


include in it any degree of those exquisite sentiments which are


commonly called love, esteem, and affection, and by which we


distinguish our particular friends and acquaintance. The concern


which is requisite for this, is no more than the general


fellow-feeling which we have with every man merely because he is


our fellow-creature. We enter into the resentment even of an


odious person, when he is injured by those to whom he has given


no provocation. Our disapprobation of his ordinary character and


conduct does not in this case altogether prevent our


fellow-feeling with his natural indignation; though with those


who are not either extremely candid, or who have not been


accustomed to correct and regulate their natural sentiments by


general rules, it is very apt to damp it.


    Upon some occasions, indeed, we both punish and approve of


punishment, merely from a view to the general interest of


society, which, we imagine, cannot otherwise be secured. Of this


kind are all the punishments inflicted for breaches of what is


called either civil police, or military discipline. Such crimes


do not immediately or directly hurt any particular person; but


their remote consequences, it is supposed, do produce, or might


produce, either a considerable inconveniency, or a great disorder


in the society. A centinel, for example, who falls asleep upon


his watch, suffers death by the laws of war, because such


carelessness might endanger the whole army. This severity may,


upon many occasions, appear necessary, and, for that reason, just


and proper. When the preservation of an individual is


inconsistent with the safety of a multitude, nothing can be more


just than that the many should be preferred to the one. Yet this


punishment, how necessary soever, always appears to be


excessively severe. The natural atrocity of the crime seems to be


so little, and the punishment so great, that it is with great


difficulty that our heart can reconcile itself to it. Though such


carelessness appears very blamable, yet the thought of this crime


does not naturally excite any such resentment, as would prompt us


to take such dreadful revenge. A man of humanity must recollect


himself, must make an effort, and exert his whole firmness and


resolution, before he can bring himself either to inflict it, or


to go along with it when it is inflicted by others. It is not,


however, in this manner, that he looks upon the just punishment


of an ungrateful murderer or parricide. His heart, in this case,


applauds with ardour, and even with transport, the just


retaliation which seems due to such detestable crimes, and which,


if, by any accident, they should happen to escape, he would be


highly enraged and disappointed. The very different sentiments


with which the spectator views those different punishments, is a


proof that his approbation of the one is far from being founded


upon the same principles with that of the other. He looks upon


the centinel as an unfortunate victim, who, indeed, must, and


ought to be, devoted to the safety of numbers, but whom still, in


his heart, he would be glad to save; and he is only sorry, that


the interest of the many should oppose it. But if the murderer


should escape from punishment, it would excite his highest


indignation, and he would call upon God to avenge, in another


world, that crime which the injustice of mankind had neglected to


chastise upon earth.


    For it well deserves to be taken notice of, that we are so


far from imagining that injustice ought to be punished in this


life, merely on account of the order of society, which cannot


otherwise be maintained, that Nature teaches us to hope, and


religion, we suppose, authorises us to expect, that it will be


punished, even in a life to come. Our sense of its ill desert


pursues it, if I may say so, even beyond the grave, though the


example of its punishment there cannot serve to deter the rest of


mankind, who see it not, who know it not, from being guilty of


the like practices here. The justice of God, however, we think,


still requires, that he should hereafter avenge the injuries of


the widow and the fatherless, who are here so often insulted with


impunity. In every religion, and in every superstition that the


world has ever beheld, accordingly, there has been a Tartarus as


well as an Elysium; a place provided for the punishment of the


wicked, as well as one for the reward of the just. 





Section III





Of the Influence of Fortune upon the Sentiments of Mankind, with


regard to the Merit or Demerit of Actions





    Whatever praise or blame can be due to any action, must


belong either, first, to the intention or affection of the heart,


from which it proceeds; or, secondly, to the external action or


movement of the body, which this affection gives occasion to; or,


lastly, to the good or bad consequences, which actually, and in


fact, proceed from it. These three different things constitute


the whole nature and circumstances of the action, and must be the


foundation of whatever quality can belong to it.


    That the two last of these three circumstances cannot be the


foundation of any praise or blame, is abundantly evident; nor has


the contrary ever been asserted by any body. The external action


or movement of the body is often the same in the most innocent


and in the most blameable actions. He who shoots a bird, and he


who shoots a man, both of them perform the same external


movement: each of them draws the trigger of a gun. The


consequences which actually, and in fact, happen to proceed from


any action, are, if possible, still more indifferent either to


praise or blame, than even the external movement of the body. As


they depend, not upon the agent, but upon fortune, they cannot be


the proper foundation for any sentiment, of which his character


and conduct are the objects.


    The only consequences for which he can be answerable, or by


which he can deserve either approbation or disapprobation of any


kind, are those which were someway or other intended, or those


which, at least, show some agreeable or disagreeable quality in


the intention of the heart, from which he acted. To the intention


or affection of the heart, therefore, to the propriety or


impropriety, to the beneficence or hurtfulness of the design, all


praise or blame, all approbation or disapprobation, of any kind,


which can justly be bestowed upon any action, must ultimately


belong.


    When this maxim is thus proposed, in abstract and general


terms, there is nobody who does not agree to it. Its self-evident


justice is acknowledged by all the world, and there is not a


dissenting voice among all mankind. Every body allows, that how


different soever the accidental, the unintended and unforeseen


consequences of different actions, yet, if the intentions or


affections from which they arose were, on the one hand, equally


proper and equally beneficent, or, on the other, equally improper


and equally malevolent, the merit or demerit of the actions is


still the same, and the agent is equally the suitable object


either of gratitude or of resentment.


    But how well soever we may seem to be persuaded of the truth


of this equitable maxim, when we consider it after this manner,


in abstract, yet when we come to particular cases, the actual


consequences which happen to proceed from any action, have a very


great effect upon our sentiments concerning its merit or demerit,


and almost always either enhance or diminish our sense of both.


Scarce, in any one instance, perhaps, will our sentiments be


found, after examination, to be entirely regulated by this rule,


which we all acknowledge ought entirely to regulate them.


    This irregularity of sentiment, which every body feels, which


scarce any body is sufficiently aware of, and which nobody is


willing to acknowledge, I proceed now to explain; and I shall


consider, first, the cause which gives occasion to it, or the


mechanism by which nature produces it; secondly, the extent of


its influence; and, last of all, the end which it answers, or the


purpose which the Author of nature seems to have intended by it. 





Chap. I





Of the Causes of this Influence of Fortune





    The causes of pain and pleasure, whatever they are, or


however they operate, seem to be the objects, which, in all


animals, immediately excite those two passions of gratitude and


resentment. They are excited by inanimated, as well as by


animated objects. We are angry, for a moment, even at the stone


that hurts us. A child beats it, a dog barks at it, a choleric


man is apt to curse it. The least reflection, indeed, corrects


this sentiment, and we soon become sensible, that what has no


feeling is a very improper object of revenge. When the mischief,


however, is very great, the object which caused it becomes


disagreeable to us ever after, and we take pleasure to burn or


destroy it. We should treat, in this manner, the instrument which


had accidentally been the cause of the death of a friend, and we


should often think ourselves guilty of a sort of inhumanity, if


we neglected to vent this absurd sort of vengeance upon it.


    We conceive, in the same manner, a sort of gratitude for


those inanimated objects, which have been the causes of great, or


frequent pleasure to us. The sailor, who, as soon as he got


ashore, should mend his fire with the plank upon which he had


just escaped from a shipwreck, would seem to be guilty of an


unnatural action. We should expect that he would rather preserve


it with care and affection, as a monument that was, in some


measure, dear to him. A man grows fond of a snuff-box, of a


pen-knife, of a staff which he has long made use of, and


conceives something like a real love and affection for them. If


he breaks or loses them, he is vexed out of all proportion to the


value of the damage. The house which we have long lived in, the


tree, whose verdure and shade we have long enjoyed, are both


looked upon with a sort of respect that seems due to such


benefactors. The decay of the one, or the ruin of the other,


affects us with a kind of melancholy, though we should sustain no


loss by it. The Dryads and the Lares of the ancients, a sort of


genii of trees and houses, were probably first suggested by this


sort of affection, which the authors of those superstitions felt


for such objects, and which seemed unreasonable, if there was


nothing animated about them.


    But, before any thing can be the proper object of gratitude


or resentment, it must not only be the cause of pleasure or pain,


it must likewise be capable of feeling them. Without this other


quality, those passions cannot vent themselves with any sort of


satisfaction upon it. As they are excited by the causes of


pleasure and pain, so their gratification consists in retaliating


those sensations upon what gave occasion to them; which it is to


no purpose to attempt upon what has no sensibility. Animals,


therefore, are less improper objects of gratitude and resentment


than inanimated objects. The dog that bites, the ox that gores,


are both of them punished. If they have been the causes of the


death of any person, neither the public, nor the relations of the


slain, can be satisfied, unless they are put to death in their


turn: nor is this merely for the security of the living, but, in


some measure, to revenge the injury of the dead. Those animals,


on the contrary, that have been remarkably serviceable to their


masters, become the objects of a very lively gratitude. We are


shocked at the brutality of that officer, mentioned in the


Turkish Spy, who stabbed the horse that had carried him across an


arm of the sea, lest that ani mal should afterwards distinguish


some other person by a similar adventure.


    But, though animals are not only the causes of pleasure and


pain, but are also capable of feeling those sensations, they are


still far from being complete and perfect objects, either of


gratitude or resentment; and those passions still feel, that


there is something wanting to their entire gratification. What


gratitude chiefly desires, is not only to make the benefactor


feel pleasure in his turn, but to make him conscious that he


meets with this reward on account of his past conduct, to make


him pleased with that conduct, and to satisfy him that the person


upon whom he bestowed his good offices was not unworthy of them.


What most of all charms us in our benefactor, is the concord


between his sentiments and our own, with regard to what interests


us so nearly as the worth of our own character, and the esteem


that is due to us. We are delighted to find a person who values


us as we value ourselves, and distinguishes us from the rest of


mankind, with an attention not unlike that with which we


distinguish ourselves. To maintain in him these agreeable and


flattering sentiments, is one of the chief ends proposed by the


returns we are disposed to make to him. A generous mind often


disdains the interested thought of extorting new favours from its


benefactor, by what may be called the importunities of its


gratitude. But to preserve and to increase his esteem, is an


interest which the greatest mind does not think unworthy of its


attention. And this is the foundation of what I formerly


observed, that when we cannot enter into the motives of our


benefactor, when his conduct and character appear unworthy of our


approbation, let his services have been ever so great, our


gratitude is always sensibly diminished. We are less flattered by


the distinction. and to preserve the esteem of so weak, or so


worthless a patron, seems to be an object which does not deserve


to be pursued for its own sake.


    The object, on the contrary, which resentment is chiefly


intent upon, is not so much to make our enemy feel pain in his


turn, as to make him conscious that he feels it upon account of


his past conduct, to make him repent of that conduct, and to make


him sensible, that the person whom he injured did not deserve to


be treated in that manner. What chiefly enrages us against the


man who injures or insults us, is the little account which he


seems to make of us, the unreasonable preference which he gives


to himself above us, and that absurd self-love, by which he seems


to imagine, that other people may be sacrificed at any time, to


his conveniency or his humour. The glaring impropriety of this


conduct, the gross insolence and injustice which it seems to


involve in it, often shock and exasperate us more than all the


mischief which we have suffered. To bring him back to a more just


sense of what is due to other people, to make him sensible of


what he owes us, and of the wrong that he has done to us, is


frequently the principal end proposed in our revenge, which is


always imperfect when it cannot accomplish this. When our enemy


appears to have done us no injury, when we are sensible that he


acted quite properly, that, in his situation, we should have done


the same thing, and that we deserved from him all the mischief we


met with; in that case, if we have the least spark either of


candour or justice, we can entertain no sort of resentment.


    Before any thing, therefore, can be the complete and proper


object, either of gratitude or resentment, it must possess three


different qualifications. First, it must be the cause of pleasure


in the one case, and of pain in the other. Secondly, it must be


capable of feeling those sensations. And, thirdly, it must not


only have produced those sensations, but it must in have produced


them from design, and from a design that is approved of the one


case, and disapproved of in the other. It is by the first


qualification, that any object is capable of exciting those


passions: it is by the second, that it is in any respect capable


of gratifying them: the third qualification is not only necessary


for their complete satisfaction, but as it gives a pleasure or


pain that is both exquisite and peculiar, it is likewise an


additional exciting cause of those passions.


    As what gives pleasure or pain, either in one way or another,


is the sole exciting cause of gratitude and resentment; though


the intentions of any person should be ever so proper and


beneficent on the one hand, or ever so improper and malevolent on


the other; yet, if he has failed in producing either the good or


the evil which he intended, as one of the exciting causes is


wanting in both cases, less gratitude seems due to him in the


one, and less resentment in the other. And, on the contrary,


though in the intentions of any person, there was either no


laudable degree of benevolence on the one hand, or no blameable


degree of malice on the other; yet, if his actions should produce


either great good or great evil, as one of the exciting causes


takes place upon both these occasions, some gratitude is apt to


arise towards him in the one, and some resentment in the other. A


shadow of merit seems to fall upon him in the first, a shadow of


demerit in the second. And, as the consequences of actions are


altogether under the empire of Fortune, hence arises her


influence upon the sentiments of mankind with regard to merit and


demerit. 





Chap. II





Of the extent of this Influence of Fortune





    The effect of this influence of fortune is, first, to


diminish our sense of the merit or demerit of those actions which


arose from the most laudable or blamable intentions, when they


fail of producing their proposed effects: and, secondly, to


increase our sense of the merit or demerit of actions, beyond


what is due to the motives or affections from which they proceed,


when they accidentally give occasion either to extraordinary


pleasure or pain. 





    1. First, I say, though the intentions of any person should


be ever so proper and beneficent, on the one hand, or ever so


improper and malevolent, on the other, yet, if they fail in


producing their effects, his merit seems imperfect in the one


case, and his demerit incomplete in the other. Nor is this


irregularity of sentiment felt only by those who are immediately


affected by the consequences of any action. It is felt, in some


measure, even by the impartial spectator. The man who solicits an


office for another, without obtaining it, is regarded as his


friend, and seems to deserve his love and affection. But the man


who not only solicits, but procures it, is more peculiarly


considered as his patron and benefactor, and is entitled to his


respect and gratitude. The person obliged, we are apt to think,


may, with some justice, imagine himself on a level with the


first: but we cannot enter into his sentiments, if he does not


feel himself inferior to the second. It is common indeed to say,


that we are equally obliged to the man who has endeavoured to


serve us, as to him who actually did so. It is the speech which


we constantly make upon every unsuccessful attempt of this kind;


but which, like all other fine speeches, must be understood with


a grain of allowance. The sentiments which a man of generosity


entertains for the friend who fails, may often indeed be nearly


the same with those which he conceives for him who succeeds: and


the more generous he is, the more nearly will those sentiments


approach to an exact level. With the truly generous, to be


beloved, to be esteemed by those whom they themselves think


worthy of esteem, gives more pleasure, and thereby excites more


gratitude, than all the advantages which they can ever expect


from those sentiments. When they lose those advantages therefore,


they seem to lose but a trifle, which is scarce worth regarding.


They still however lose something. Their pleasure therefore, and


consequently their gratitude, is not perfectly complete: and


accordingly if, between the friend who fails and the friend who


succeeds, all other circumstances are equal, there will, even in


the noblest and the best mind, be some little difference of


affection in favour of him who succeeds. Nay, so unjust are


mankind in this respect, that though the intended benefit should


be procured, yet if it is not procured by the means of a


particular benefactor, they are apt to think that less gratitude


is due to the man, who with the best intentions in the world


could do no more than help it a little forward. As their


gratitude is in this case divided among the different persons who


contributed to their pleasure, a smaller share of it seems due to


any one. Such a person, we hear men commonly say, intended no


doubt to serve us; and we really believe exerted himself to the


utmost of his abilities for that purpose. We are not, however,


obliged to him for this benefit; since, had it not been for the


concurrence of others, all that he could have done would never


have brought it about. This consideration, they imagine, should,


even in the eyes of the impartial spectator, diminish the debt


which they owe to him. The person himself who has unsuccessfully


endeavoured to confer a benefit, has by no means the same


dependency upon the gratitude of the man whom he meant to oblige,


nor the same sense of his own merit towards him, which he would


have had in the case of success.


    Even the merit of talents and abilities which some accident


has hindered from producing their effects, seems in some measure


imperfect, even to those who are fully convinced of their


capacity to produce them. The general who has been hindered by


the envy of ministers from gaining some great advantage over the


enemies of his country, regrets the loss of the opportunity for


ever after. Nor is it only upon account of the public that he


regrets it. He laments that he was hindered from performing an


action which would have added a new lustre to his character in


his own eyes, as well as in those of every other person. It


satisfies neither himself nor others to reflect that the plan or


design was all that depended on him, that no greater capacity was


required to execute it than what was necessary to concert it:


that he was allowed to be every way capable of executing it, and


that had he been permitted to go on, success was infallible. He


still did not execute it; and though he might deserve all the


approbation which is due to a magnanimous and great design, he


still wanted the actual merit of having performed a great action.


To take the management of any affair of public concern from the


man who has almost brought it to a conclusion, is regarded as the


most invidious injustice. As he had done so much, he should, we


think, have been allowed to acquire the complete merit of putting


an end to it. It was objected to Pompey, that he came in upon the


victories of Lucullus, and gathered those laurels which were due


to the fortune and valour of another. The glory of Lucullus, it


seems, was less complete even in the opinion of his own friends,


when he was not permitted to finish that conquest which his


conduct and courage had put in the power of almost any man to


finish. It mortifies an architect when his plans are either not


executed at all, or when they are so far altered as to spoil the


effect of the building. The plan, however, is all that depends


upon the architect. The whole of his genius is, to good judges,


as completely discovered in that as in the actual execution. But


a plan does not, even to the most intelligent, give the same


pleasure as a noble and magnificent building. They may discover


as much both of taste and genius in the one as in the other. But


their effects are still vastly different, and the amusement


derived from the first, never approaches to the wonder and


admiration which are sometimes excited by the second. We may


believe of many men, that their talents are superior to those of


Caesar and Alexander; and that in the same situations they would


perform still greater actions. In the mean time, however, we do


not behold them with that astonishment and admiration with which


those two heroes have been regarded in all ages and nations. The


calm judgments of the mind may approve of them more, but they


want the splendour of great actions to dazzle and transport it.


The superiority of virtues and talents has not, even upon those


who acknowledge that superiority, the same effect with the


superiority of atchievements.


    As the merit of an unsuccessful attempt to do good seems


thus, in the eyes of ungrateful mankind, to be diminished by the


miscarriage, so does likewise the demerit of an unsuccessful


attempt to do evil. The design to commit a crime, how clearly


soever it may be proved, is scarce ever punished with the same


severity as the actual commission of it. The case of treason is


perhaps the only exception. That crime immediately affecting the


being of the government itself, the government is naturally more


jealous of it than of any other. In the punishment of treason,


the sovereign resents the injuries which are immediately done to


himself: in the punishment of other crimes, he resents those


which are done to other men. It is his own resentment which he


indulges in the one case: it is that of his subjects which by


sympathy he enters into in the other. In the first case,


therefore, as he judges in his own cause, he is very apt to be


more violent and sanguinary in his punishments than the impartial


spectator can approve of. His resentment too rises here upon


smaller occasions, and does not always, as in other cases, wait


for the perpetration of the crime, or even for the attempt to


commit it. A treasonable concert, though nothing has been done,


or even attempted in consequence of it, nay, a treasonable


conversation, is in many countries punished in the same manner as


the actual commission of treason. With regard to all other


crimes, the mere design, upon which no attempt has followed, is


seldom punished at all, and is never punished severely. A


criminal design, and a criminal action, it may be said indeed, do


not necessarily suppose the same degree of depravity, and ought


not therefore to be subjected to the same punishment. We are


capable, it may be said, of resolving, and even of taking


measures to execute, many things which, when it comes to the


point, we feel ourselves altogether incapable of executing. But


this reason can have no place when the design has been carried


the length of the last attempt. The man, however, who fires a


pistol at his enemy but misses him, is punished with death by the


laws of scarce any country. By the old law of Scotland, though he


should wound him, yet, unless death ensues within a certain time,


the assassin is not liable to the last punishment. The resentment


of mankind, however, runs so high against this crime, their


terror for the man who shows himself capable of committing it, is


so great, that the mere attempt to commit it ought in all


countries to be capital. The attempt to commit smaller crimes is


almost always punished very lightly, and sometimes is not


punished at all. The thief, whose hand has been caught in his


neighbour's pocket before he had taken any thing out of it, is


punished with ignominy only. If he had got time to take away an


handkerchief, he would have been put to death. The house-breaker,


who has been found setting a ladder to his neighbour's window,


but had not got into it, is not exposed to the capital


punishment. The attempt to ravish is not punished as a rape. The


attempt to seduce a married woman is not punished at all, though


seduction is punished severely. Our resentment against the person


who only attempted to do a mischief, is seldom so strong as to


bear us out in inflicting the same punishment upon him, which we


should have thought due if he had actually done it. In the one


case, the joy of our deliverance alleviates our sense of the


atrocity of his conduct; in the other, the grief of our


misfortune increases it. His real demerit, however, is


undoubtedly the same in both cases, since his intentions were


equally criminal; and there is in this respect, therefore, an


irregularity in the sentiments of all men, and a consequent


relaxation of discipline in the laws of, I believe, all nations,


of the most civilized, as well as of the most barbarous. The


humanity of a civilized people disposes them either to dispense


with, or to mitigate punishments wherever their natural


indignation is not goaded on by the consequences of the crime.


Barbarians, on the other hand, when no actual consequence has


happened from any action, are not apt to be very delicate or


inquisitive about the motives.


    The person himself who either from passion, or from the


influence of bad company, has resolved, and perhaps taken


measures to perpetrate some crime, but who has fortunately been


prevented by an accident which put it out of his power, is sure,


if he has any remains of conscience, to regard this event all his


life after as a great and signal deliverance. He can never think


of it without returning thanks to Heaven for having been thus


graciously pleased to save him from the guilt in which he was


just ready to plunge himself, and to hinder him from rendering


all the rest of his life a scene of horror, remorse, and


repentance. But though his hands are innocent, he is conscious


that his heart is equally guilty as if he had actually executed


what he was so fully resolved upon. It gives great ease to his


conscience, however, to consider that the crime was not executed,


though he knows that the failure arose from no virtue in him. He


still considers himself as less deserving of punishment and


resentment; and this good fortune either diminishes, or takes


away altogether, all sense of guilt. To remember how much he was


resolved upon it, has no other effect than to make him regard his


escape as the greater and more miraculous: for he still fancies


that he has escaped, and he looks back upon the danger to which


his peace of mind was exposed, with that terror, with which one


who is in safety may sometimes remember the hazard he was in of


falling over a precipice, and shudder with horror at the thought.








    2. The second effect of this influence of fortune, is to


increase our sense of the merit or demerit of actions beyond what


is due to the motives or affection from which they proceed, when


they happen to give occasion to extraordinary pleasure or pain.


The agreeable or disagreeable effects of the action often throw a


shadow of merit or demerit upon the agent, though in his


intention there was nothing that deserved either praise or blame,


or at least that deserved them in the degree in which we are apt


to bestow them. Thus, even the messenger of bad news is


disagreeable to us, and, on the contrary, we feel a sort of


gratitude for the man who brings us good tidings. For a moment we


look upon them both as the authors, the one of our good, the


other of our bad fortune, and regard them in some measure as if


they had really brought about the events which they only give an


account of. The first author of our joy is naturally the object


of a transitory gratitude: we embrace him with warmth and


affection, and should be glad, during the instant of our


prosperity, to reward him as for some signal service. By the


custom of all courts, the officer, who brings the news of a


victory, is entitled to considerable preferments, and the general


always chuses one of his principal favourites to go upon so


agreeable an errand. The first author of our sorrow is, on the


contrary, just as naturally the object of a transitory


resentment. We can scarce avoid looking upon him with chagrin and


uneasiness; and the rude and brutal are apt to vent upon him that


spleen which his intelligence gives occasion to. Tigranes, king


of Armenia, struck off the head of the man who brought him the


first account of the approach of a formidable enemy. To punish in


this manner the author of bad tidings, seems barbarous and


inhuman: yet, to reward the messenger of good news, is not


disagreeable to us; we think it suitable to the bounty of kings.


But why do we make this difference, since, if there is no fault


in the one, neither is there any merit in the other? It is


because any sort of reason seems sufficient to authorize the


exertion of the social and benevolent affections. but it requires


the most solid and substantial to make us enter into that of the


unsocial and malevolent.


    But though in general we are averse to enter into the


unsocial and malevolent affections, though we lay it down for a


rule that we ought never to approve of their gratification,


unless so far as the malicious and unjust intention of the


person, against whom they are directed, renders him their proper


object; yet, upon some occasions, we relax of this severity. When


the negligence of one man has occasioned some unintended damage


to another, we generally enter so far into the resentment of the


sufferer, as to approve of his inflicting a punishment upon the


offender much beyond what the offence would have appeared to


deserve, had no such unlucky consequence followed from it.


    There is a degree of negligence, which would appear to


deserve some chastisement though it should occasion no damage to


any body. Thus, if a person should throw a large stone over a


wall into a public street without giving warning to those who


might be passing by, and without regarding where it was likely to


fall, he would undoubtedly deserve some chastisement. A very


accurate police would punish so absurd an action, even though it


had done no mischief. The person who has been guilty of it, shows


an insolent contempt of the happiness and safety of others. There


is real injustice in his conduct. He wantonly exposes his


neighbour to what no man in his senses would chuse to expose


himself, and evidently wants that sense of what is due to his


fellow-creatures which is the basis of justice and of society.


Gross negligence therefore is, in the law, said to be almost


equal to malicious design.(q*) When any unlucky consequences


happen from such carelessness, the person who has been guilty of


it is often punished as if he had really intended those


consequences; and his conduct, which was only thoughtless and


insolent, and what deserved some chastisement, is considered as


atrocious, and as liable to the severest punishment. Thus if, by


the imprudent action above-mentioned, he should accidentally kill


a man, he is, by the laws of many countries, particularly by the


old law of Scotland, liable to the last punishment. And though


this is no doubt excessively severe, it is not altogether


inconsistent with our natural sentiments. Our just indignation


against the folly and inhumanity of his conduct is exasperated by


our sympathy with the unfortunate sufferer. Nothing, however,


would appear more shocking to our natural sense of equity, than


to bring a man to the scaffold merely for having thrown a stone


carelessly into the street without hurting any body. The folly


and inhumanity of his conduct, however, would in this case be the


same; but still our sentiments would be very different. The


consideration of this difference may satisfy us how much the


indignation, even of the spectator, is apt to be animated by the


actual consequences of the action. In cases of this kind there


will, if I am not mistaken, be found a great degree of severity


in the laws of almost all nations; as I have already observed


that in those of an opposite kind there was a very general


relaxation of discipline.


    There is another degree of negligence which does not involve


in it any sort of injustice. The person who is guilty of it


treats his neighbours as he treats himself, means no harm to any


body, and is far from entertaining any insolent contempt for the


safety and happiness of others. He is not, however, so careful


and circumspect in his conduct as he ought to be, and deserves


upon this account some degree of blame and censure, but no sort


of punishment. Yet if by a negligence(3*) of this kind he should


occasion some damage to another person, he is by the laws of, I


believe, all countries, obliged to compensate it. And though this


is no doubt a real punishment, and what no mortal would have


thought of inflicting upon him, had it not been for the unlucky


accident which his conduct gave occasion to; yet this decision of


the law is approved of by the natural sentiments of all mankind.


Nothing, we think, can be more just than that one man should not


suffer by the carelessness of another; and that the damage


occasioned by blamable negligence, should be made up by the


person who was guilty of it.


    There is another species of negligence,(4*) which consists


merely in a want of the most anxious timidity and circumspection,


with regard to all the possible consequences of our actions. The


want of this painful attention, when no bad consequences follow


from it, is so far from being regarded as blamable, that the


contrary quality is rather considered as such. That timid


circumspection which is afraid of every thing, is never regarded


as a virtue, but as a quality which more than any other


incapacitates for action and business. Yet when, from a want of


this excessive care, a person happens to occasion some damage to


another, he is often by the law obliged to compensate it. Thus,


by the Aquilian law, the man, who not being able to manage a


horse that had accidentally taken fright, should happen to ride


down his neighbour' s slave, is obliged to compensate the damage.


When an accident of this kind happens, we are apt to think that


he ought not to have rode such a horse, and to regard his


attempting it as an unpardonable levity; though without this


accident we should not only have made no such reflection, but


should have regarded his refusing it as the effect of timid


weakness, and of an anxiety about merely possible events, which


it is to no purpose to be aware of. The person himself, who by an


accident even of this kind has involuntarily hurt another, seems


to have some sense of his own ill desert, with regard to him. He


naturally runs up to the sufferer to express his concern for what


has happened, and to make every acknowledgment in his power. If


he has any sensibility, he necessarily desires to compensate the


damage, and to do every thing he can to appease that animal


resentment, which he is sensible will be apt to arise in the


breast of the sufferer. To make no apology, to offer no


atonement, is regarded as the highest brutality. Yet why should


he make an apology more than any other person? Why should he,


since he was equally innocent with any other bystander, be thus


singled out from among all mankind, to make up for the bad


fortune of another? This task would surely never be imposed upon


him, did not even the impartial spectator feel some indulgence


for what may be regarded as the unjust resentment of that other. 





Chap. III





Of the final cause of this Irregularity of Sentiments





    Such is the effect of the good or bad consequences of actions


upon the sentiments both of the person who performs them, and of


others; and thus, Fortune, which governs the world, has some


influence where we should be least willing to allow her any, and


directs in some measure the sentiments of mankind, with regard to


the character and conduct both of themselves and others. That the


world judges by the event, and not by the design, has been in all


ages the complaint, and is the great discouragement of virtue.


Every body agrees to the general maxim, that as the event does


not depend on the agent, it ought to have no influence upon our


sentiments, with regard to the merit or propriety of his conduct.


But when we come to particulars, we find that our sentiments are


scarce in any one instance exactly conformable to what this


equitable maxim would direct. The happy or unprosperous event of


any action, is not only apt to give us a good or bad opinion of


the prudence with which it was conducted, but almost always too


animates our gratitude or resentment, our sense of the merit or


demerit of the design.


    Nature, however, when she implanted the seeds of this


irregularity in the human breast, seems, as upon all other


occasions, to have intended the happiness and perfection of the


species. If the hurtfulness of the design, if the malevolence of


the affection, were alone the causes which excited our


resentment, we should feel all the furies of that passion against


any person in whose breast we suspected or believed such designs


or affections were harboured, though they had never broke out


into any action. Sentiments, thoughts, intentions, would become


the objects of punishment; and if the indignation of mankind run


as high against them as against actions; if the baseness of the


thought which had given birth to no action, seemed in the eyes of


the world as much to call aloud for vengeance as the baseness of


the action, every court of judicature would become a real


inquisition. There would be no safety for the most innocent and


circumspect conduct. Bad wishes, bad views, bad designs, might


still be suspected; and while these excited the same indignation


with bad conduct, while bad intentions were as much resented as


bad actions, they would equally expose the person to punishment


and resentment. Actions, therefore, which either produce actual


evil, or attempt to produce it, and thereby put us in the


immediate fear of it, are by the Author of nature rendered the


only proper and approved objects of human punishment and


resentment. Sentiments, designs, affections, though it is from


these that according to cool reason human actions derive their


whole merit or demerit, are placed by the great Judge of hearts


beyond the limits of every human jurisdiction, and are reserved


for the cognizance of his own unerring tribunal. That necessary


rule of justice, therefore, that men in this life are liable to


punishment for their actions only, not for their designs and


intentions, is founded upon this salutary and useful irregularity


in human sentiments concerning merit or demerit, which at first


sight appears so absurd and unaccountable. But every part of


nature, when attentively surveyed, equally demonstrates the


providential care of its Author, and we may admire the wisdom and


goodness of God even in the weakness and folly of man.


    Nor is that irregularity of sentiments altogether without its


utility, by which the merit of an unsuccessful attempt to serve,


and much more that of mere good inclinations and kind wishes,


appears to be imperfect. Man was made for action, and to promote


by the exertion of his faculties such changes in the external


circumstances both of himself and others, as may seem most


favourable to the happiness of all. He must not be satisfied with


indolent benevolence, nor fancy himself the friend of mankind,


because in his heart he wishes well to the prosperity of the


world. That he may call forth the whole vigour of his soul, and


strain every nerve, in order to produce those ends which it is


the purpose of his being to advance, Nature has taught him, that


neither himself nor mankind can be fully satisfied with his


conduct, nor bestow upon it the full measure of applause, unless


he has actually produced them. He is made to know, that the


praise of good intentions, without the merit of good offices,


will be but of little avail to excite either the loudest


acclamations of the world, or even the highest degree of


self-applause. The man who has performed no single action of


importance, but whose whole conversation and deportment express


the justest, the noblest, and most generous sentiments, can be


entitled to demand no very high reward, even though his inutility


should be owing to nothing but the want of an opportunity to


serve. We can still refuse it him without blame. We can still ask


him, What have you done? What actual service can you produce, to


entitle you to so great a recompense? We esteem you, and love


you; but we owe you nothing. To reward indeed that latent virtue


which has been useless only for want of an opportunity to serve,


to bestow upon it those honours and preferments, which, though in


some measure it may be said to deserve them, it could not with


propriety have insisted upon, is the effect of the most divine


benevolence. To punish, on the contrary, for the affections of


the heart only, where no crime has been committed, is the most


insolent and barbarous tyranny. The benevolent affections seem to


deserve most praise, when they do not wait till it becomes almost


a crime for them not to exert themselves. The malevolent, on the


contrary, can scarce be too tardy, too slow, or deliberate.


    It is even of considerable importance, that the evil which is


done without design should be regarded as a misfortune to the


doer as well as to the sufferer. Man is thereby taught to


reverence the happiness of his brethren, to tremble lest he


should, even unknowingly, do any thing that can hurt them, and to


dread that animal resentment which, he feels, is ready to burst


out against him, if he should, without design, be the unhappy


instrument of their calamity. As, in the ancient heathen


religion, that holy ground which had been consecrated to some


god, was not to be trod upon but upon solemn and necessary


occasions, and the man who had even ignorantly violated it,


became piacular from that moment, and, until proper atonement


should be made, incurred the vengeance of that powerful and


invisible being to whom it had been set apart; so, by the wisdom


of Nature, the happiness of every innocent man is, in the same


manner, rendered holy, consecrated, and hedged round against the


approach of every other man; not to be wantonly trod upon, not


even to be, in any respect, ignorantly and involuntarily


violated, without requiring some expiation, some atonement in


proportion to the greatness of such undesigned violation. A man


of humanity, who accidentally, and without the smallest degree of


blamable negligence, has been the cause of the death of another


man, feels himself piacular, though not guilty. During his whole


life he considers this accident as one of the greatest


misfortunes that could have befallen him. If the family of the


slain is poor, and he himself in tolerable circumstances, he


immediately takes them under his protection, and, without any


other merit, thinks them entitled to every degree of favour and


kindness. If they are in better circumstances, he endeavours by


every submission, by every expression of sorrow, by rendering


them every good office which he can devise or they accept of, to


atone for what has happened, and to propitiate, as much as


possible, their, perhaps natural, though no doubt most unjust


resentment, for the great, though involuntary, offence which he


has given them.


    The distress which an innocent person feels, who, by some


accident, has been led to do something which, if it had been done


with knowledge and design, would have justly exposed him to the


deepest reproach, has given occasion to some of the finest and


most interesting scenes both of the ancient and of the modern


drama. It is this fallacious sense of guilt, if I may call it so,


which constitutes the whole distress of Oedipus and Jocasta upon


the Greek, of Monimia and Isabella upon the English, theatre.


They are all of them in the highest degree piacular, though not


one of them is in the smallest degree guilty.


    Notwithstanding, however, all these seeming irregularities of


sentiment, if man should unfortunately either give occasion to


those evils which he did not intend, or fail in producing that


good which he intended, Nature has not left his innocence


altogether without consolation, nor his virtue altogether without


reward. He then calls to his assistance that just and equitable


maxim, That those events which did not depend upon our conduct,


ought not to diminish the esteem that is due to us. He summons up


his whole magnanimity and firmness of soul, and strives to regard


himself, not in the light in which he at present appears, but in


that in which he ought to appear, in which he would have appeared


had his generous designs been crowned with success, and in which


he would still appear, notwithstanding their miscarriage, if the


sentiments of mankind were either altogether candid and


equitable, or even perfectly consistent with themselves. The more


candid and humane part of mankind entirely go along with the


effort which he thus makes to support himself in his own opinion.


They exert their whole generosity and greatness of mind, to


correct in themselves this irregularity of human nature, and


endeavour to regard his unfortunate magnanimity in the same light


in which, had it been successful, they would, without any such


generous exertion, have naturally been disposed to consider it.





NOTES:





1. To ascribe in this manner our natural sense of the ill desert


of human actions to a sympathy with the resentment of the


sufferer, may seem, to the greater part of people, to be a


degradation of that sentiment. Resentment is commonly regarded as


so odious a passion, that they will be apt to think it impossible


that so laudable a principle, as the sense of the ill desert of


vice, should in any respect be founded upon it. They will be more


willing, perhaps, to admit that our sense of the merit of good


actions is founded upon a sympathy with the gratitude of the


persons who receive the benefit of them; because gratitude, as


well as all the other benevolent passions, is regarded as an


amiable principle, which can take nothing from the worth of


whatever is founded upon it. Gratitude and resentment, however,


are in every respect, it is evident, counterparts to one another;


and if our sense of merit arises from a sympathy with the one,


our sense of demerit can scarce miss to proceed from a


fellow-feeling with the other. 


    Let it be considered too that resentment, though, in the


degrees in which we too often see it, the most odious, perhaps,


of all the passions, is not disapproved of when properly humbled


and entirely brought down to the level of the sympathetic


indignation of the spectator. When we, who are the bystanders,


feel that our own animosity entirely corresponds with that of the


sufferer, when the resentment of this last does not in any


respect go beyond our own, when no word, no gesture, escapes him


that denotes an emotion more violent than what we can keep time


to, and when he never aims at inflicting any punishment beyond


what we should rejoice to see inflicted, or what we ourselves


would upon this account even desire to be the instruments of


inflicting, it is impossible that we should not entirely approve


of his sentiments. Our own emotion in this case must, in our


eyes, undoubtedly justify his. And as experience teaches us how


much the greater part of mankind are incapable of this


moderation, and how great an effort must be made in order to


bring down the rude and undisciplined impulse of resentment to


this suitable temper, we cannot avoid conceiving a considerable


degree of esteem and admiration for one who appears capable of


exerting so much self-command over one of the most ungovernable


passions of his nature. When indeed the animosity of the sufferer


exceeds, as it almost always does, what we can go along with, as


we cannot enter into it, we necessarily disapprove of it. We even


disapprove of it more than we should of an equal excess of almost


any other passion derived from the imagination. And this too


violent resentment, instead of carrying us along with it, becomes


itself the object of our resentment and indignation. We enter


into the opposite resentment of the person who is the object of


this unjust emotion, and who is in danger of suffering from it.


Revenge, therefore, the excess of resentment, appears to be the


most detestable of all the passions, and is the object of the


horror and indignation of every body. And as in the way in which


this passion commonly discovers itself among mankind, it is


excessive a hundred times for once that it is moderate, we are


very apt to consider it as altogether odious and detestable,


because in its most ordinary appearances it is so. Nature,


however, even in the present depraved state of mankind, does not


seem to have dealt so unkindly with us, as to have endowed us


with any principle which is wholly and in every respect evil, or


which, in no degree and in no direction, can be the proper object


of praise and approbation. Upon some occasions we are sensible


that this passion, which is generally too strong, may likewise be


too weak. We sometimes complain that a particular person shows


too little spirit, and has too little sense of the injuries that


have been done to him; and we are as ready to despise him for the


defect, as to hate him for the excess of this passion. 


    The inspired writers would not surely have talked so


frequently or so strongly of the wrath and anger of God, if they


had regarded every degree of those passions as vicious and evil,


even in so weak and imperfect a creature as man. 


    Let it be considered too, that the present inquiry is not


concerning a matter of right, if I may say so, but concerning a


matter of fact. We are not at present examining upon what


principles a perfect being would approve of the punishment of bad


actions; but upon what principles so weak and imperfect a


creature as man actually and in fact approves of it. The


principles which I have just now mentioned, it is evident, have a


very great effect upon his sentiments; and it seems wisely


ordered that it should be so. The very existence of society


requires that unmerited and unprovoked malice should be


restrained by proper punishments; and consequently, that to


inflict those punishments should be regarded as a proper and


laudable action. Though man, therefore, be naturally endowed with


a desire of the welfare and preservation of society, yet the


Author of nature has not entrusted it to his reason to find out


that a certain application of punishments is the proper means of


attaining this end; but has endowed him with an immediate and


instinctive approbation of that very application which is most


proper to attain it. The oeconomy of nature is in this respect


exactly of a piece with what it is upon many other occasions.


With regard to all those ends which, upon account of their


peculiar importance, may be regarded, if such an expression is


allowable, as the favourite ends of nature, she has constantly in


this manner not only endowed mankind with an appetite for the end


which she proposes, but likewise with an appetite for the means


by which alone this end can be brought about, for their own


sakes, and independent of their tendency to produce it. Thus


self-preservation, and the propagation of the species, are the


great ends which Nature seems to have proposed in the formation


of all animals. Mankind are endowed with a desire of those ends,


and an aversion to the contrary; with a love of life, and a dread


of dissolution; with a desire of the continuance and perpetuity


of the species, and with an aversion to the thoughts of its


intire extinction. But though we are in this manner endowed with


a very strong desire of those ends, it has not been intrusted to


the slow and uncertain determinations of our reason, to find out


the proper means of bringing them about. Nature has directed us


to the greater part of these by original and immediate instincts.


Hunger, thirst, the passion which unites the two sexes, the love


of pleasure, and the dread of pain, prompt us to apply those


means for their own sakes, and without any consideration of their


tendency to those beneficent ends which the great Director of


nature intended to produce by them.


  Before I conclude this note, I must take notice of a difference


between the approbation of propriety and that of merit or


beneficence. Before we approve of the sentiments of any person as


proper and suitable to their objects, we must not only be


affected in the same manner as he is, but we must perceive this


harmony and correspondence of sentiments between him and


ourselves. Thus, though upon hearing of a misfortune that had


befallen my friend, I should conceive precisely that degree of


concern which he gives way to; yet till I am informed of the


manner in which he behaves, till I perceive the harmony between


his emotions and mine, I cannot be said to approve of the


sentiments which influence his behaviour. The approbation of


propriety therefore requires, not only that we should entirely


sympathize with the person who acts, but that we should perceive


this perfect concord between his sentiments and our own. On the


contrary, when I hear of a benefit that has been bestowed upon


another person, let him who has received it be affected in what


manner he pleases, if, by bringing his case home to myself, I


feel gratitude arise in my own breast, I necessarily approve of


the conduct of his benefactor, and regard it as meritorious, and


the proper object of reward. Whether the person who has received


the benefit conceives gratitude or not, cannot, it is evident, in


any degree alter our sentiments with regard to the merit of him


who has bestowed it. No actual correspondence of sentiments,


therefore, is here required. It is sufficient that if he was


grateful, they would correspond; and our sense of merit is often


founded upon one of those illusive sympathies, by which, when we


bring home to ourselves the case of another, we are often


affected in a manner in which the person principally concerned is


incapable of being affected. There is a similar difference


between our disapprobation of demerit, and that of impropriety.





2. Lata culpa prope dolum est.





3. Culpa levis.





4. Culpa levissima.




