






BOOK III







I



B.C. 403-402. Thus the civil strife at Athens had an end. At a

subsequent date Cyrus sent messengers to Lacedaemon, claiming requital

in kind for the service which he had lately rendered in the war with

Athens.[1] The demand seemed to the ephorate just and reasonable.

Accordingly they ordered Samius,[2] who was admiral at the time, to

put himself at the disposition of Cyrus for any service which he might

require. Samius himself needed no persuasion to carry out the wishes

of Cyrus. With his own fleet, accompanied by that of Cyrus, he sailed

round to Cilicia, and so made it impossible for Syennesis, the ruler

of that province, to oppose Cyrus by land in his advance against the

king his brother.



[1] Lit. "what Cyrus himself had been to the Lacedaemonians let the

    Lacedaemonians in their turn be to Cyrus."



[2] Samius (Diod. Sic. xiv. 19). But see "Anab." I. iv. 2, where

    Pythagoras is named as admiral. Possibly the one officer succeeded

    the other.



B.C. 401. The particulars of the expedition are to be found in the

pages of the Syracusan Themistogenes,[3] who describes the mustering

of the armament, and the advance of Cyrus at the head of his troops;

and then the battle, and death of Cyrus himself, and the consequent

retreat of the Hellenes while effecting their escape to the sea.[4]



[3] Lit. "as to how then Cyrus collected an army and with it went up

    against his brother, and how the battle was fought and how he

    died, and how in the sequal the Hellenes escaped to the sea (all

    this), is written by (or 'for,' or 'in honour of') Themistogenes

    the Syracusan." My impression is that Xenophon's "Anabasis," or a

    portion of the work so named, was edited originally by

    Themistogenes. See "Philol. Museum," vol. i. p. 489; L. Dindorf,

    {Xen. Ell.}, Ox. MDCCCLIII., node ad loc. {Themistogenei}. Cf.

    Diod. Sic. xiv. 19-31, 37, after Ephorus and Theopompus probably.



[4] At Trapezus, March 10, B.C. 400.



B.C. 400. It was in recognition of the service which he had rendered

in this affair, that Tissaphernes was despatched to Lower Asia by the

king his master. He came as satrap, not only of his own provinces, but

of those which had belonged to Cyrus; and he at once demanded the

absolute submission of the Ionic cities, without exception, to his

authority. These communities, partly from a desire to maintain their

freedom, and partly from fear of Tissaphernes himself, whom they had

rejected in favour of Cyrus during the lifetime of that prince, were

loth to admit the satrap within their gates. They thought it better to

send an embassy to the Lacedaemonians, calling upon them as

representatives and leaders[5] of the Hellenic world to look to the

interests of their petitioners, who were Hellenes also, albeit they

lived in Asia, and not to suffer their country to be ravaged and

themselves enslaved.



[5] {Prostatai}, "patrons and protectors."



In answer to this appeal, the Lacedaemonians sent out Thibron[6] as

governor, providing him with a body of troops, consisting of one

thousand neodamodes[7] (i.e. enfranchised helots) and four thousand

Peloponnesians. In addition to these, Thibron himself applied to the

Athenians for a detachment of three hundred horse, for whose service-

money he would hold himself responsible. The Athenians in answer sent

him some of the knights who had served under the Thirty,[8] thinking

that the people of Athens would be well rid of them if they went

abroad and perished there.



[6] "As harmost." See "Anab." ad fin.



[7] See "Hell." I. iii. 15; Thuc. vii. 58.



[8] See "Hell." II. iv. 2.



B.C. 400-399. On their arrival in Asia, Thibron further collected

contingents from the Hellenic cities on the continent; for at this

time the word of a Lacedaemonian was law. He had only to command, and

every city must needs obey.[9] But although he had this armament,

Thibron, when he saw the cavalry, had no mind to descend into the

plain. If he succeeded in protecting from pillage the particular

district in which he chanced to be, he was quite content. It was only

when the troops[10] who had taken part in the expedition of Cyrus had

joined him on their safe return, that he assumed a bolder attitude. He

was now ready to confront Tissaphernes, army against army, on the

level ground, and won over a number of cities. Pergamum came in of her

own accord. So did Teuthrania and Halisarna. These were under the

government of Eurysthenes and Procles,[11] the descendants of

Demaratus the Lacedaemonian, who in days of old had received this

territory as a gift from the Persian monarch in return for his share

in the campaign against Hellas. Gorgion and Gongylus, two brothers,

also gave in their adhesion; they were lords, the one of Gambreum and

Palae-Gambreum, the other of Myrina and Gryneum, four cities which,

like those above named, had originally been gifts from the king to an

earlier Gongylus--the sole Eretrian who "joined the Mede," and in

consequence was banished. Other cities which were too weak to resist,

Thibron took by force of arms. In the case of one he was not so

successful. This was the Egyptian[12] Larisa, as it is called, which

refused to capitulate, and was forthwith invested and subjected to a

regular siege. When all other attempts to take it failed, he set about

digging a tank or reservoir, and in connection with the tank an

underground channel, by means of which he proposed to draw off the

water supply of the inhabitants. In this he was baffled by frequent

sallies of the besieged, and a continual discharge of timber and

stones into the cutting. He retaliated by the construction of a wooden

tortoise which he erected over the tank; but once more the tortoise

was burnt to a cinder in a successful night attack on the part of the

men of Larisa. These ineffectual efforts induced the ephors to send a

despatch bidding Thibron give up Larisa and march upon Caria.



[9] See "Anab." VI. vi. 12.



[10] March B.C. 399. See the final sentence of the "Anabasis."



[11] See "Anab." VII. viii. 8-16.



[12] Seventy stades S.E. of Cyme in the Aeolid. See Strabo, xiii. 621.

    For the origin of the name cf. "Cyrop." VII. i. 45.



He had already reached Ephesus, and was on the point of marching into

Caria, when Dercylidas arrived to take command of his army. The new

general was a man whose genius for invention had won him the nickname

of Sisyphus. Thus it was that Thibron returned home, where on his

arrival he was fined and banished, the allies accusing him of allowing

his troops to plunder their friends.



Dercylidas was not slow to perceive and turn to account the jealousy

which subsisted between Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus. Coming to terms

with the former, he marched into the territory of the latter,

preferring, as he said, to be at war with one of the pair at a time,

rather than the two together. His hostility, indeed, to Pharnabazus

was an old story, dating back to a period during the naval command[13]

of Lysander, when he was himself governor in Abydos; where, thanks to

Pharnabazus, he had got into trouble with his superior officer, and

had been made to stand "with his shield on his arm"--a stigma on his

honour which no true Lacedaemonian would forgive, since this is the

punishment of insubordination.[14] For this reason, doubtless,

Dercylidas had the greater satisfaction in marching against

Pharnabazus. From the moment he assumed command there was a marked

difference for the better between his methods and those of his

predecessor. Thus he contrived to conduct his troops into that portion

of the Aeolid which belonged to Pharnabazus, through the heart of

friendly territory without injury to the allies.



[13] Technically "navarchy," in B.C. 408-407. "Hell." I. v. 1.



[14] See Plut. "Aristid." 23 (Clough, ii. p. 309).



This district of Aeolis belonged to Pharnabazus,[15] but had been held

as a satrapy under him by a Dardanian named Zenis whilst he was alive;

but when Zenis fell sick and died, Pharnabazus made preparation to

give the satrapy to another. Then Mania the wife of Zenis, herself

also a Dardanian, fitted out an expedition, and taking with her gifts

wherewith to make a present to Pharnabazus himself, and to gratify his

concubines and those whose power was greatest with Pharnabazus, set

forth on her journey. When she had obtained audience with him she

spoke as follows: "O Pharnabazus, thou knowest that thy servant my

husband was in all respects friendly to thee; moreover, he paid my

lord the tributes which were thy due, so that thou didst praise and

honour him. Now therefore, if I do thee service as faithfully as my

husband, why needest thou to appoint another satrap?--nay but, if in

any matter I please thee not, is it not in thy power to take from me

the government on that day, and to give it to another?" When he had

heard her words, Pharnabazus decided that the woman ought to be

satrap. She, as soon as she was mistress of the territory, never

ceased to render the tribute in due season, even as her husband before

her had done. Moreover, whenever she came to the court of Pharnabazus

she brought him gifts continually, and whenever Pharnabazus went down

to visit her provinces she welcomed him with all fair and courteous

entertainment beyond what his other viceroys were wont to do. The

cities also which had been left to her by her husband, she guarded

safely for him; while of those cities that owed her no allegiance, she

acquired, on the seaboard, Larisa and Hamaxitus and Colonae--attacking

their walls by aid of Hellenic mercenaries, whilst she herself sat in

her carriage and watched the spectacle. Nor was she sparing of her

gifts to those who won her admiration; and thus she furnished herself

with a mercenary force of exceptional splendour. She also went with

Pharnabazus on his campaigns, even when, on pretext of some injury

done to the king's territory, Mysians or Pisidians were the object of

attack. In requital, Pharnabazus paid her magnificent honour, and at

times invited her to assist him with her counsel.[16]



[15] I.e. as suzerain.



[16] Grote, "H. G." ix. 292; cf. Herod. viii. 69.



Now when Mania was more than forty years old, the husband of her own

daughter, Meidias--flustered by the suggestions of certain people who

said that it was monstrous a woman should rule and he remain a private

person[17]--found his way into her presence, as the story goes, and

strangled her. For Mania, albeit she carefully guarded herself against

all ordinary comers, as behoved her in the exercise of her "tyranny,"

trusted in Meidias, and, as a woman might her own son-in-law, was

ready to greet him at all times with open arms. He also murdered her

son, a youth of marvellous beauty, who was about seventeen years of

age. He next seized upon the strong cities of Scepsis and Gergithes,

in which lay for the most part the property and wealth of Mania. As

for the other cities of the satrapy, they would not receive the

usurper, their garrisons keeping them safely for Pharnabazus.

Thereupon Meidias sent gifts to Pharnabazus, and claimed to hold the

district even as Mania had held it; to whom the other answered, "Keep

your gifts and guard them safely until that day when I shall come in

person and take both you and them together"; adding, "What care I to

live longer if I avenge not myself for the murder of Mania!"



[17] Or, "his brains whimsied with insinuations."



Just at the critical moment Dercylidas arrived, and in a single day

received the adhesion of the three seaboard cities Larisa, Hamaxitus,

and Colonae--which threw open their gates to him. Then he sent

messengers to the cities of the Aeolid also, offering them freedom if

they would receive him within their walls and become allies.

Accordingly the men of Neandria and Ilium and Cocylium lent willing

ears; for since the death of Mania their Hellenic garrisons had been

treated but ill. But the commander of the garrison in Cebrene, a place

of some strength, bethinking him that if he should succeed in guarding

that city for Pharnabazus, he would receive honour at his hands,

refused to admit Dercylidas. Whereupon the latter, in a rage, prepared

to take the place by force; but when he came to sacrifice, on the

first day the victims would not yield good omens; on the second, and

again upon the third day, it was the same story. Thus for as many as

four days he persevered in sacrificing, cherishing wrath the while--

for he was in haste to become master of the whole Aeolid before

Pharnabazus came to the succour of the district.



Meanwhile a certain Sicyonian captain, Athenadas by name, said to

himself: "Dercylidas does but trifle to waste his time here, whilst I

with my own hand can draw off their water from the men of Cybrene";

wherewith he ran forward with his division and essayed to choke up the

spring which supplied the city. But the garrison sallied out and

covered the Sicyonian himself with wounds, besides killing two of his

men. Indeed, they plied their swords and missiles with such good

effect that the whole company was forced to beat a retreat. Dercylidas

was not a little annoyed, thinking that now the spirit of the

besiegers would certainly die away; but whilst he was in this mood,

behold! there arrived from the beleaguered fortress emissaries of the

Hellenes, who stated that the action taken by the commandant was not

to their taste; for themselves, they would far rather be joined in

bonds of fellowship with Hellenes than with barbarians. While the

matter was still under discussion there came a messenger also from the

commandant, to say that whatever the former deputation had proposed

he, on his side, was ready to endorse. Accordingly Dercylidas, who, it

so happened, had at length obtained favourable omens on that day,

marched his force without more ado up to the gates of the city, which

were flung open by those within; and so he entered.[18] Here, then, he

was content to appoint a garrison, and without further stay advanced

upon Scepsis and Gergithes.



[18] Grote ("H. G." ix. 294) says: "The reader will remark how

    Xenophon shapes the narrative in such a manner as to inculcate the

    pious duty in a general of obeying the warnings furnished by the

    sacrifice--either for action or for inaction. . . . Such an

    inference is never (I believe) to be found suggested in

    Thucydides." See Brietenbach, "Xen. Hell." I et II, praef. in

    alteram ed. p. xvii.



And now Meidias, partly expecting the hostile advance of Pharnabazus,

and partly mistrusting the citizens--for to such a pass things had

come--sent to Dercylidas, proposing to meet him in conference provided

he might take security of hostages. In answer to this suggestion the

other sent him one man from each of the cities of the allies, and bade

him take his pick of these, whichsoever and how many soever he chose,

as hostages for his own security. Meidias selected ten, and so went

out. In conversation with Dercylidas, he asked him on what terms he

would accept his alliance. The other answered: "The terms are that you

grant the citizens freedom and self-government." The words were

scarcely out of his mouth before he began marching upon Scepsis.

Whereupon Meidias, perceiving it was vain to hinder him in the teeth

of the citizens, suffered him to enter. That done, Dercylidas offered

sacrifice to Athena in the citadel of the Scepsians, turned out the

bodyguards of Meidias, and handed over the city to the citizens. And

so, having admonished them to regulate their civic life as Hellenes

and free men ought, he left the place and continued his advance

against Gergithes. On this last march he was escorted by many of the

Scepsians themselves; such was the honour they paid him and so great

their satisfaction at his exploits. Meidias also followed close at his

side, petitioning that he would hand over the city of Gergithians to

himself. To whom Dercylidas only made reply, that he should not fail

to obtain any of his just rights. And whilst the words were yet upon

his lips, he was drawing close to the gates, with Meidias at his side.

Behind him followed the troops, marching two and two in peaceful

fashion. The defenders of Gergithes from their towers--which were

extraordinarily high--espied Meidias in company of the Spartan, and

abstained from shooting. And Dercylidas said: "Bid them open the

gates, Meidias, when you shall lead the way, and I will enter the

temple along with you and do sacrifice to Athena." And Meidias, though

he shrank from opening the gates, yet in terror of finding himself on

a sudden seized, reluctantly gave the order to open the gates. As soon

as he was entered in, the Spartan, still taking Meidias with him,

marched up to the citadel and there ordered the main body of his

soliders to take up their position round the walls, whilst he with

those about him did sacrifice to Athena. When the sacrifice was ended

he ordered Meidias's bodyguard to pile arms[19] in the van of his

troops. Here for the future they would serve as mercenaries, since

Meidias their former master stood no longer in need of their

protection. The latter, being at his wits' end what to do, exclaimed:

"Look you, I will now leave you; I go to make preparation for my

guest." But the other replied: "Heaven forbid! Ill were it that I who

have offered sacrifice should be treated as a guest by you. I rather

should be the entertainer and you the guest. Pray stay with us, and

while the supper is preparing, you and I can consider our

obligations, and perform them."



[19] I.e. take up a position, or "to order arms," whilst he addressed

    them; not probably "to ground arms," as if likely to be mutinous.



When they were seated Dercylidas put certain questions: "Tell me,

Meidias, did your father leave you heir to his estates?" "Certainly he

did," answered the other. "And how many dwelling-houses have you? what

landed estates? how much pasturage?" The other began running off an

inventory, whilst some of the Scepsians who were present kept

interposing, "He is lying to you, Dercylidas." "Nay, you take too

minute a view of matters," replied the Spartan. When the inventory of

the paternal property was completed, he proceeded: "Tell me, Meidias,

to whom did Mania belong?" A chorus of voices rejoined, "To

Pharnabazus." "Then must her property have belonged to Pharnabazus

too." "Certainly," they answered. "Then it must now be ours," he

remarked, "by right of conquest, since Pharnabazus is at war with us.

Will some one of you escort me to the place where the property of

Mania and Pharnabazus lies?" So the rest led the way to the dwelling-

place of Mania which Meidias had taken from her, and Meidias followed

too. When he was entered, Dercylidas summoned the stewards, and

bidding his attendants seize them, gave them to understand that, if

detected stealing anything which belonged to Mania, they would lose

their heads on the spot. The stewards proceeded to point out the

treasures, and he, when he had looked through the whole store, bolted

and barred the doors, affixing his seal, and setting a watch. As he

went out he found at the doors certain of the generals[20] and

captains, and said to them: "Here, sirs, we have pay ready made for

the army--a year's pay nearly for eight thousand men--and if we can

win anything besides, there will be so much the more." This he said,

knowing that those who heard it would be all the more amenable to

discipline, and would yield him a more flattering obedience. Then

Meidias asked, "And where am I to live, Dercylidas?" "Where you have

the very best right to live," replied the other, "in your native town

of Scepsis, and in your father's house."



[20] Lit. "of the taxiarchs and lochagoi."







II



Such were the exploits of Dercylidas: nine cities taken in eight days.

Two considerations now began to occupy his mind: how was he to avoid

falling into the fatal error of Thibron and becoming a burthen to his

allies, whilst wintering in a friendly country? how, again, was he to

prevent Pharnabazus from overriding the Hellenic states in pure

contempt with his cavalry? Accordingly he sent to Pharnabazus and put

it to him point-blank: Which will you have, peace or war? Whereupon

Pharnabazus, who could not but perceive that the whole Aeolid had now

been converted practically into a fortified base of operations, which

threatened his own homestead of Phrygia, chose peace.



B.C. 399-398. This being so, Dercylidas advanced into Bithynian

Thrace, and there spent the winter; nor did Pharnabazus exhibit a

shadow of annoyance, since the Bithynians were perpetually at war with

himself. For the most part, Dercylidas continued to harry[1] Bithynia

in perfect security, and found provisions without stint. Presently he

was joined from the other side of the straits by some Odrysian allies

sent by Seuthes;[2] they numbered two hundred horse and three hundred

peltasts. These fellows pitched upon a site a little more than a

couple of miles[3] from the Hellenic force, where they entrenched

themselves; then having got from Dercylidas some heavy infantry

soldiers to act as guards of their encampment, they devoted themselves

to plundering, and succeeded in capturing an ample store of slaves and

other wealth. Presently their camp was full of prisoners, when one

morning the Bithynians, having ascertained the actual numbers of the

marauding parties as well as of the Hellenes left as guards behind,

collected in large masses of light troops and cavalry, and attacked

the garrison, who were not more than two hundred strong. As soon as

they came close enough, they began discharging spears and other

missiles on the little body, who on their side continued to be wounded

and shot down, but were quite unable to retaliate, cooped up as they

were within a palisading barely six feet high, until in desperation

they tore down their defences with their own hands, and dashed at the

enemy. These had nothing to do but to draw back from the point of

egress, and being light troops easily escaped beyond the grasp of

heavy-armed men, while ever and again, from one point of vantage or

another, they poured their shower of javelins, and at every sally laid

many a brave man low, till at length, like sheep penned in a fold, the

defenders were shot down almost to a man. A remnant, it is true, did

escape, consisting of some fifteen who, seeing the turn affairs were

taking, had already made off in the middle of the fighting. Slipping

through their assailants' fingers,[4] to the small concern of the

Bithynians, they reached the main Hellenic camp in safety. The

Bithynians, satisfied with their achievement, part of which consisted

in cutting down the tent guards of the Odrysian Thracians and

recovering all their prisoners, made off without delay; so that by the

time the Hellenes got wind of the affair and rallied to the rescue,

they found nothing left in the camp save only the stripped corpses of

the slain. When the Odrysians themselves returned, they fell to

burying their own dead, quaffing copious draughts of wine in their

honour and holding horse-races; but for the future they deemed it

advisable to camp along with the Hellenes. Thus they harried and

burned Bithynia the winter through.



[1] {Pheson kai agon}, i.e. "there was plenty of live stock to lift

    and chattels to make away with."



[2] For Seuthes see "Anab." VII. i. 5; and below, IV. viii. 26.



[3] Lit. "twenty stades."



[4] Or, "slipping through the enemy's fingers, who took no heed of

    them, they," etc.



B.C. 398. With the commencement of spring Dercylidas turned his back

upon the Bithynians and came to Lampsacus. Whilst at this place envoys

reached him from the home authorities. These were Aracus, Naubates,

and Antisthenes. They were sent to inquire generally into the

condition of affairs in Asia, and to inform Dercylidas of the

extension of his office for another year. They had been further

commissioned by the ephors to summon a meeting of the soldiers and

inform them that the ephors held them to blame for their former

doings, though for their present avoidance of evil conduct they must

needs praise them; and for the future they must understand that while

no repetition of misdoing would be tolerated, all just and upright

dealing by the allies would receive its meed of praise. The soldiers

were therefore summoned, and the envoys delivered their message, to

which the leader of the Cyreians answered: "Nay, men of Lacedaemon,

listen; we are the same to-day as we were last year; only our general

of to-day is different from our general in the past. If to-day we have

avoided our offence of yesterday, the cause is not far to seek; you

may discover it for youselves."



Aracus and the other envoys shared the hospitality of Dercylidas's

tent, and one of the party chanced to mention how they had left an

embassy from the men of Chersonese in Lacedaemon. According to their

statement, he added, it was impossible for them to till their land

nowadays, so perpetually were they robbed and plundered by the

Thracians; whereas the peninsula needed only to be walled across from

sea to sea, and there would be abundance of good land to cultivate--

enough for themselves and as many others from Lacedaemon as cared to

come. "So that it would not surprise us," continued the envoys, "if a

Lacedaemonian were actually sent out from Sparta with a force to carry

out the project." Dercylidas kept his ears open but his counsel close,

and so sent forward the commissioners to Ephesus.[5] It pleased him to

picture their progress through the Hellenic cities, and the spectacle

of peace and prosperity which would everywhere greet their eyes. When

he knew that his stay was to be prolonged, he sent again to

Pharnabazus and offered him once more as an alternative either the

prolongation of the winter truce or war. And once again Pharnabazus

chose truce. It was thus that Dercylidas was able to leave the cities

in the neighbourhood of the satrap[6] in peace and friendship.

Crossing the Hellespont himself he brought his army into Europe, and

marching through Thrace, which was also friendly, was entertained by

Seuthes,[7] and so reached the Chersonese.



[5] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 301.



[6] Or, reading after Cobet, {tas peri ekeina poleis}--"the cities of

    that neighbourhood."



[7] See "Anab." VII. vii. 51.



This district, he soon discovered, not only contained something like a

dozen cities,[8] but was singularly fertile. The soil was of the best,

but ruined by the ravages of the Thracians, precisely as he had been

told. Accordingly, having measured and found the breadth of the

isthmus barely four miles,[9] he no longer hesitated. Having offered

sacrifice, he commenced his line of wall, distributing the area to the

soldiers in detachments, and promising to award them prizes for their

industry--a first prize for the section first completed, and the rest

as each detachment of workers might deserve. By this means the whole

wall begun in spring was finished before autumn. Within these lines he

established eleven cities, with numerous harbours, abundance of good

arable land, and plenty of land under plantation, besides magnificent

grazing grounds for sheep and cattle of every kind.



[8] Lit. "eleven or twelve cities." For the natural productivity, see

    "Anab." V. vi. 25.



[9] Lit. "thirty-seven stades." Mod. Gallipoli. See Herod. vi. 36;

    Plut. "Pericl." xix.



Having finished the work, he crossed back again into Asia, and on a

tour of inspection, found the cities for the most part in a thriving

condition; but when he came to Atarneus he discovered that certain

exiles from Chios had got possession of the stronghold, which served

them as a convenient base for pillaging and plundering Ionia; and

this, in fact, was their means of livelihood. Being further informed

of the large supplies of grain which they had inside, he proceeded to

draw entrenchments around the place with a view to a regular

investment, and by this means he reduced it in eight months. Then

having appointed Draco of Pellene[10] commandant, he stocked the

fortress with an abundance of provisions of all sorts, to serve him as

a halting-place when he chanced to pass that way, and so withdrew to

Ephesus, which is three days' journey from Sardis.



[10] Cf. Isocr. "Panegyr." 70; Jebb. "Att. Or." ii. p. 161. Of Pellene

    (or Pellana) in Laconia, not Pellene in Achaia? though that is the

    opinion of Grote and Thirlwall.



B.C. 397. Up to this date peace had been maintained between

Tissaphernes and Dercylidas, as also between the Hellenes and the

barbarians in those parts. But the time came when an embassy arrived

at Lacedaemon from the Ionic cities, protesting that Tissaphernes

might, if he chose, leave the Hellenic cities independent. "Our idea,"

they added, "is, that if Caria, the home of Tissaphernes, felt the

pinch of war, the satrap would very soon agree to grant us

independence." The ephors, on hearing this, sent a despatch to

Dercylidas, and bade him cross the frontier with his army into Caria,

whilst Pharax the admiral coasted round with the fleet. These orders

were carried out. Meanwhile a visitor had reached Tissaphernes. This

was not less a person than Pharnabazus. His coming was partly owing to

the fact that Tissaphernes had been appointed general-in-chief, and

party in order to testify his readiness to make common cause with his

brother satrap in fighting and expelling the Hellenes from the king's

territory; for if his heart was stirred by jealousy on account of the

generalship bestowed upon his rival, he was not the less aggrieved at

finding himself robbed of the Aeolid. Tissaphernes, lending willing

ears to the proposal, had answered: "First cross over with me in

Caria, and then we will take counsel on these matters." But being

arrived in Caria, they determined to establish garrisons of some

strength in the various fortresses, and so crossed back again into

Ionia.



Hearing that the satraps had recrossed the Maeander, Dercylidas grew

apprehensive for the district which lay there unprotected. "If

Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus," he said to Pharax, "chose to make a

descent, they could harry the country right and left." In this mind he

followed suit, and recrossed the frontier too. And now as they marched

on, preserving no sort of battle order--on the supposition that the

enemy had got far ahead of them into the district of Ephesus--suddenly

they caught sight of his scouts perched on some monumental structures

facing them. To send up scouts into similar edifices and towers on

their own side was the work of a few moments, and before them lay

revealed the long lines of troops drawn up just where their road lay.

These were the Carians, with their white shields, and the whole

Persian troops there present, with all the Hellenic contingents

belonging to either satrap. Besides these there was a great cloud of

cavalry: on the right wing the squadrons of Tissaphernes, and on the

left those of Pharnabazus.



Seeing how matters lay, Dercylidas ordered the generals of brigade and

captains to form into line as quickly as possible, eight deep, placing

the light infantry on the fringe of battle, with the cavalry--such

cavalry, that is, and of such numerical strength, as he chanced to

have. Meanwhile, as general, he sacrificed.[11] During this interval

the troops from Peloponnese kept quiet in preparation as for battle.

Not so the troops from Priene and Achilleum, from the islands and the

Ionic cities, some of whom left their arms in the corn, which stood

thick and deep in the plain of the Maeander, and took to their heels;

while those who remained at their posts gave evident signs that their

steadiness would not last. Pharnabazus, it was reported, had given

orders to engage; but Tissaphernes, who recalled his experience of his

own exploits with the Cyreian army, and assumed that all other

Hellenes were of similar mettle, had no desire to engage, but sent to

Dercylidas saying, he should be glad to meet him in conference. So

Dercylidas, attended by the pick of his troops, horse and foot, in

personal attendance on himself,[12] went forward to meet the envoys.

He told them that for his own part he had made his preparations to

engage, as they themselves might see, but still, if the satraps were

minded to meet in conference, he had nothing to say against it--"Only,

in that case, there must be mutual exchange of hostages and other

pledges."



[11] I.e. according to custom on the eve of battle. See "Pol. Lac."

    xiii. 8.



[12] Lit. "they were splendid fellows to look at." See "Anab." II.

    iii. 3.



When this proposal had been agreed to and carried out, the two armies

retired for the night--the Asiatics to Tralles in Caria, the Hellenes

to Leucophrys, where was a temple[13] of Artemis of great sanctity,

and a sandy-bottomed lake more than a furlong in extent, fed by a

spring of ever-flowing water fit for drinking and warm. For the moment

so much was effected. On the next day they met at the place appointed,

and it was agreed that they should mutually ascertain the terms on

which either party was willing to make peace. On his side, Dercylidas

insisted that the king should grant independence to the Hellenic

cities; while Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus demanded the evacuation of

the country by the Hellenic army, and the withdrawal of the

Lacedaemonian governors from the cities. After this interchange of

ideas a truce was entered into, so as to allow time for the reports of

the proceedings to be sent by Dercylidas to Lacedaemon, and by

Tissaphernes to the king.



[13] Lately unearthed. See "Class. Rev." v. 8, p. 391.



B.C. 401 (?). Whilst such was the conduct of affairs in Asia under the

guidance of Dercylidas, the Lacedaemonians at home were at the same

time no less busily employed with other matters. They cherished a

long-standing embitterment against the Eleians, the grounds of which

were that the Eleians had once[14] contracted an alliance with the

Athenians, Argives, and Mantineans; moreover, on pretence of a

sentence registered against the Lacedaemonians, they had excluded them

from the horse-race and gymnastic contests. Nor was that the sum of

their offending. They had taken and scourged Lichas,[15] under the

following circumstances:--Being a Spartan, he had formally consigned

his chariot to the Thebans, and when the Thebans were proclaimed

victors he stepped forward to crown his charioteer; whereupon, in

spite of his grey hairs, the Eleians put those indignities upon him

and expelled him from the festival. Again, at a date subsequent to

that occurrence, Agis being sent to offer sacrifice to Olympian Zeus

in accordance with the bidding of an oracle, the Eleians would not

suffer him to offer prayer for victory in war, asserting that the

ancient law and custom[16] forbade Hellenes to consult the god for war

with Hellenes; and Agis was forced to go away without offering the

sacrifice.



[14] In 421 B.C. (see Thuc. v. 31); for the second charge, see Thuc.

    v. 49 foll.



[15] See "Mem." I. ii. 61; Thuc. v. 50; and Jowett, note ad loc. vol.

    ii. p. 314.



[16] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 311 note.



In consequence of all these annoyances the ephors and the Assembly

determined "to bring the men of Elis to their senses." Thereupon they

sent an embassy to that state, announcing that the authorities of

Lacedaemon deemed it just and right that they should leave the

country[17] townships in the territory of Elis free and independent.

This the Eleians flatly refused to do. The cities in question were

theirs by right of war. Thereupon the ephors called out the ban. The

leader of the expedition was Agis. He invaded Elis through Achaia[18]

by the Larisus; but the army had hardly set foot on the enemy's soil

and the work of devastation begun, when an earthquake took place, and

Agis, taking this as a sign from Heaven, marched back again out of the

country and disbanded his army. Thereat the men of Elis were much more

emboldened, and sent embassies to various cities which they knew to be

hostile to the Lacedaemonians.



[17] Lit. "perioecid."



[18] From the north. The Larisus is the frontier stream between Achaia

    and Elis. See Strabo, viii. 387.



The year had not completed its revolution[19] ere the ephors again

called out the ban against Elis, and the invading host of Agis was

this time swelled by the rest of the allies, including the Athenians;

the Boeotians and Corinthians alone excepted. The Spartan king now

entered through Aulon,[20] and the men of Lepreum[21] at once revolted

from the Eleians and gave in their adhesion to the Spartan, and

simultaneously with these the Macistians and their next-door

neighbours the Epitalians. As he crossed the river further adhesions

followed, on the part of the Letrinians, the Amphidolians, and the

Marganians.



[19] Al. "on the coming round of the next year." See Jowett (note to

    Thuc. i. 31), vol. ii. p. 33.



[20] On the south. For the history, see Busolt, "Die Laked." pp.

    146-200. "The river" is the Alpheus.



[21] See below, VI. v. 11; Paus. IV. xv. 8.



B.C. 400 (?). Upon this he pushed on into Olympian territory and did

sacrifice to Olympian Zeus. There was no attempt to stay his

proceedings now. After sacrifice he marched against the capital,[22]

devastating and burning the country as he went. Multitudes of cattle,

multitudes of slaves, were the fruits of conquest yielded, insomuch

that the fame thereof spread, and many more Arcadians and Achaeans

flocked to join the standard of the invader and to share in the

plunder. In fact, the expedition became one enormous foray. Here was

the chance to fill all the granaries of Peloponnese with corn. When he

had reached the capital, the beautiful suburbs and gymnasia became a

spoil to the troops; but the city itself, though it lay open before

him a defenceless and unwalled town, he kept aloof from. He would not,

rather than could not, take it. Such was the explanation given. Thus

the country was a prey to devastation, and the invaders massed round

Cyllene.



[22] I.e. Elis, of which Cyllene is the port town. For the wealth of

    the district, see Polyb. iv. 73; and below, VII. iv. 33.



Then the friends of a certain Xenias--a man of whom it was said that

he might measure the silver coin, inherited from his father, by the

bushel--wishing to be the leading instrument in bringing over the

state to Lacedaemon, rushed out of the house, sword in hand, and began

a work of butchery. Amongst other victims they killed a man who

strongly resembled the leader of the democratic party,

Thrasydaeus.[23] Everyone believed it was really Thrasydaeus who was

slain. The popular party were panic-stricken, and stirred neither hand

nor foot. On their side, the cut-throats poured their armed bands into

the market-place. But Thrasydaeus was laid asleep the while where the

fumes of wine had overpowered him. When the people came to discover

that their hero was not dead, they crowded round his house this side

and that,[24] like a swarm of bees clinging to their leader; and as

soon as Thrasydaeus had put himself in the van, with the people at his

back, a battle was fought, and the people won. And those who had laid

their hands to deeds of butchery went as exiles to the Lacedaemonians.



[23] See Paus. III. viii. 4. He was a friend of Lysias ("Vit. X. Orat.

    835).



[24] The house was filled to overflowing by the clustering close-

    packed crowd.



After a while Agis himself retired, recrossing the Alpheus; but he was

careful to leave a garrison in Epitalium near that river, with

Lysippus as governor, and the exiles from Elis along with him. Having

done so, he disbanded his army and returned home himself.



B.C. 400-399 (?).[25] During the rest of the summer and the ensuing

winter the territory of the Eleians was ravaged and ransacked by

Lysippus and his troops, until Thrasydaeus, the following summer, sent

to Lacedaemon and agreed to dismantle the walls of Phea and Cyllene,

and to grant autonomy to the Triphylian townships[26]--together with

Phrixa and Epitalium, the Letrinians, Amphidolians, and Marganians;

and besides these to the Acroreians and to Lasion, a place claimed by

the Arcadians. With regard to Epeium, a town midway between Heraea and

Macistus, the Eleians claimed the right to keep it, on the plea that

they had purchased the whole district from its then owners, for thirty

talents,[27] which sum they had actually paid. But the Lacedaemonians,

acting on the principle "that a purchase which forcibly deprives the

weaker party of his possession is no more justifiable than a seizure

by violence," compelled them to emancipate Epeium also. From the

presidency of the temple of Olympian Zeus, however, they did not oust

them; not that it belonged to Elis of ancient right, but because the

rival claimants,[28] it was felt, were "villagers," hardly equal to

the exercise of the presidency. After these concessions, peace and

alliance between the Eleians and the Lacedaemonians were established,

and the war between Elis and Sparta ceased.



[25] Grote ("H. G." ix. 316) discusses the date of this war between

    Elis and Sparta, which he thinks, reaches over three different

    years, 402-400 B.C. But Curtius (vol. iv. Eng. tr. p. 196)

    disagrees: "The Eleian war must have occurred in 401-400 B.C., and

    Grote rightly conjectures that the Eleians were anxious to bring

    it to a close before the celebration of the festival. But he errs

    in extending its duration over three years." See Diod. xiv. 17.

    24; Paus. III. viii. 2 foll.



[26] Grote remarks: "There is something perplexing in Xenophon's

    description of the Triphylian townships which the Eleians

    surrendered" ("H. G." ix. 315). I adopt Grote's emend. {kai

    Phrixan}. See Busolt, op. cit. p. 176.



[27] = 7,312 pounds: 10 shillings.



[28] I.e. the men of the Pisatid. See below, VII. iv. 28; Busolt, op.

    cit. p 156.







III



After this Agis came to Delphi and offered as a sacrifice a tenth of

the spoil. On his return journey he fell ill at Heraea--being by this

time an old man--and was carried back to Lacedaemon. He survived the

journey, but being there arrived, death speedily overtook him. He was

buried with a sepulchre transcending in solemnity the lot of ordinary

mortality.[1]



[1] See "Ages." xi. 16; "Pol. Lac." xv. 9.



When the holy days of mourning were accomplished, and it was necessary

to choose another king, there were rival claimants to the throne.

Leotychides claimed it as the son, Agesilaus as the brother, of Agis.

Then Leotychides protested: "Yet consider, Agesilaus, the law bids not

'the king's brother,' but 'the king's son' to be king; only if there

chance to be no son, in that case shall the brother of the king be

king." Agesilaus: "Then must I needs be king." Leotychides: "How so,

seeing that I am not dead?" Agesilaus: "Because he whom you call your

father denied you, saying, 'Leotychides is no son of mine.'"

Leotychides: "Nay, but my mother, who would know far better than he,

said, and still to-day says, I am." Agesilaus: "Nay, but the god

himself, Poteidan, laid his finger on thy falsity when by his

earthquake he drove forth thy father from the bridal chamber into the

light of day; and time, 'that tells no lies,' as the proverb has it,

bare witness to the witness of the god; for just ten months from the

moment at which he fled and was no more seen within that chamber, you

were born."[2] So they reasoned together.



[2] I have followed Sauppe as usual, but see Hartman ("Anal. Xen." p.

    327) for a discussion of the whole passage. He thinks Xenophon

    wrote {ex ou gar toi ephugen} ({o sos pater}, i.e. adulterer) {ek

    to thalamo dekato meni tu ephus}. The Doric {ek to thalamo} was

    corrupted into {en to thalamo} and {kai ephane} inserted. This

    corrupt reading Plutarch had before him, and hence his distorted

    version of the story.



Diopethes,[3] a great authority upon oracles, supported Leotychides.

There was an oracle of Apollo, he urged, which said "Beware of the

lame reign." But Diopethes was met by Lysander, who in behalf of

Agesilaus demurred to this interpretation put upon the language of the

god. If they were to beware of a lame reign, it meant not, beware lest

a man stumble and halt, but rather, beware of him in whose veins flows

not the blood of Heracles; most assuredly the kingdom would halt, and

that would be a lame reign in very deed, whensoever the descendants of

Heracles should cease to lead the state. Such were the arguments on

either side, after hearing which the city chose Agesilaus to be king.



[3] See Plut. "Ages." ii. 4; "Lys." xxii. (Clough, iv. 3; iii. 129);

    Paus. III. viii. 5.



Now Agesilaus had not been seated on the throne one year when, as he

sacrificed one of the appointed sacrifices in behalf of the city,[4]

the soothsayer warned him, saying: "The gods reveal a conspiracy of

the most fearful character"; and when the king sacrificed a second

time, he said: "The aspect of the victims is now even yet more

terrible"; but when he had sacrificed for the third time, the

soothsayer exclaimed: "O Agesilaus, the sign is given to me, even as

though we were in the very midst of the enemy." Thereupon they

sacrificed to the deities who avert evil and work salvation, and so

barely obtained good omens and ceased sacrificing. Nor had five days

elapsed after the sacrifices were ended, ere one came bringing

information to the ephors of a conspiracy, and named Cinadon as the

ringleader; a young man robust of body as of soul, but not one of the

peers.[5] Accordingly the ephors questioned their informant: "How say

you the occurrence is to take place?" and he who gave the information

answered: "Cinadon took me to the limit of the market-place, and bade

me count how many Spartans there were in the market-place; and I

counted--'king, ephors, and elders, and others--maybe forty. But tell

me, Cinadon,' I said to him, 'why have you bidden me count them?' and

he answered me: 'Those men, I would have you know, are your sworn

foes; and all those others, more than four thousand, congregated there

are your natural allies.' Then he took and showed me in the streets,

here one and there two of 'our enemies,' as we chanced to come across

them, and all the rest 'our natural allies'; and so again running

through the list of Spartans to be found in the country districts, he

still kept harping on that string: 'Look you, on each estate one

foeman--the master--and all the rest allies.'" The ephors asked: "How

many do you reckon are in the secret of this matter?" The informant

answered: "On that point also he gave me to understand that there were

by no means many in their secret who were prime movers of the affair,

but those few to be depended on; 'and to make up,' said he, 'we

ourselves are in their secret, all the rest of them--helots,

enfranchised, inferiors, provincials, one and all.[6] Note their

demeanour when Spartans chance to be the topic of their talk. Not one

of them can conceal the delight it would give him if he might eat up

every Spartan raw.'"[7] Then, as the inquiry went on, the question

came: "And where did they propose to find arms?" The answer followed:

"He explained that those of us, of course, who are enrolled in

regiments have arms of our own already, and as for the mass--he led

the way to the war foundry, and showed me scores and scores of knives,

of swords, of spits, hatchets, and axes, and reaping-hooks. 'Anything

or everything,' he told me, 'which men use to delve in earth, cut

timber, or quarry stone, would serve our purpose; nay, the instruments

used for other arts would in nine cases out of ten furnish weapons

enough and to spare, especially when dealing with unarmed

antagonists.'" Once more being asked what time the affair was to come

off, he replied his orders were "not to leave the city."



[4] "Pol. Lac." xv. 2.



[5] For the {omoioi}, see Muller, "Dorians," iii. 5, 7 (vol. ii. p.

    84); Grote, "H. G." ix. 345, note 2.



[6] For the neodamodes, hypomeiones, perioeci, see Arnold, "Thuc." v.

    34; Muller, "Dorians," ii. 43, 84, 18; Busolt, op. cit. p 16.



[7] See "Anab." IV. viii. 14; and Hom. "Il." iv. 34.



As the result of their inquiry the ephors were persuaded that the

man's statements were based upon things he had really seen,[8] and

they were so alarmed that they did not even venture to summon the

Little Assembly,[9] as it was named; but holding informal meetings

among themselves--a few senators here and a few there--they determined

to send Cinadon and others of the young men to Aulon, with

instructions to apprehend certain of the inhabitants and helots, whose

names were written on the scytale (or scroll).[10] He had further

instructions to capture another resident in Aulon; this was a woman,

the fashionable beauty of the place--supposed to be the arch-

corruptress of all Lacedaemonians, young and old, who visited Aulon.

It was not the first mission of the sort on which Cinadon had been

employed by the ephors. It was natural, therefore, that the ephors

should entrust him with the scytale on which the names of the suspects

were inscribed; and in answer to his inquiry which of the young men he

was to take with him, they said: "Go and order the eldest of the

Hippagretae[11] (or commanders of horse) to let you have six or seven

who chance to be there." But they had taken care to let the commander

know whom he was to send, and that those sent should also know that

their business was to capture Cinadon. Further, the authorities

instructed Cinadon that they would send three waggons to save bringing

back his captives on foot--concealing as deeply as possible the fact

that he, and he alone, was the object of the mission. Their reason for

not securing him in the city was that they did not really know the

extent of the mischief; and they wished, in the first instance, to

learn from Cinadon who his accomplices were before these latter could

discover they were informed against and effect their escape. His

captors were to secure him first, and having learnt from him the names

of his confederates, to write them down and send them as quickly as

possible to the ephors. The ephors, indeed, were so much concerned

about the whole occurrence that they further sent a company of horse

to assist their agents at Aulon.[12] As soon as the capture was

effected, and one of the horsemen was back with the list of names

taken down on the information of Cinadon, they lost no time in

apprehending the soothsayer Tisamenus and the rest who were the

principals in the conspiracy. When Cinadon[13] himself was brought

back and cross-examined, and had made a full confession of the whole

plot, his plans, and his accomplices, they put to him one final

question: "What was your object in undertaking this business?" He

answered: "I wished to be inferior to no man in Lacedaemon." Let that

be as it might, his fate was to be taken out forthwith in irons, just

as he was, and to be placed with his two hands and his neck in the

collar, and so under scourge and goad to be driven, himself and his

accomplices, round the city. Thus upon the heads of those was visited

the penalty of their offences.



[8] "And pointed to a well-concerted plan."



[9] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 348.



[10] See Thuc. i. 131; Plut. "Lys." 19 (Clough, iii. p. 125).



[11] "The Hippagretes (or commander of the three hundred guards called

    horsemen, though they were not really mounted)." Grote, "H. G."

    vol. ix. p. 349; see "Pol. Lac." iv. 3.



[12] Or, "to those on the way to Aulon."



[13] See for Cinadon's case, Arist. "Pol." v. 7, 3.







IV



B.C. 397.[1] It was after the incidents just recorded that a Syracusan

named Herodas brought news to Lacedaemon. He had chanced to be in

Phoenicia with a certain shipowner, and was struck by the number of

Phoenician triremes which he observed, some coming into harbour from

other ports, others already there with their ships' companies

complete, while others again were still completing their equipments.

Nor was it only what he saw, but he had heard say further that there

were to be three hundred of these vessels all told; whereupon he had

taken passage on the first sailing ship bound for Hellas. He was in

haste to lay this information before the Lacedaemonians, feeling sure

that the king and Tissaphernes were concerned in these preparations--

though where the fleet was to act, or against whom, he would not

venture to predict.



[1] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 353, for chronology, etc.



These reports threw the Lacedaemonians into a flutter of expectation

and anxiety. They summoned a meeting of the allies, and began to

deliberate as to what ought to be done. Lysander, convinced of the

enormous superiority of the Hellenic navy, and with regard to land

forces drawing an obvious inference from the exploits and final

deliverance of the troops with Cyrus, persuaded Agesilaus, to

undertake a campaign into Asia, provided the authorities would furnish

him with thirty Spartans, two thousand of the enfranchised,[2] and

contingents of the allies amounting to six thousand men. Apart from

these calculations, Lysander had a personal object: he wished to

accompany the king himself, and by his aid to re-establish the

decarchies originally set up by himself in the different cities, but

at a later date expelled through the action of the ephors, who had

issued a fiat re-establishing the old order of constitution.



[2] Technically, "neodamodes."



B.C. 396. To this offer on the part of Agesilaus to undertake such an

expedition the Lacedaemonians responded by presenting him with all he

asked for, and six months' provisions besides. When the hour of

departure came he offered all such sacrifices as are necessary, and

lastly those "before crossing the border,"[3] and so set out. This

done, he despatched to the several states[4] messengers with

directions as to the numbers to be sent from each, and the points of

rendezvous; but for himself he was minded to go and do sacrifice at

Aulis, even as Agamemnon had offered sacrifice in that place ere he

set sail for Troy. But when he had reached the place and had begun to

sacrifice, the Boeotarchs[5] being apprised of his design, sent a body

of cavalry and bade him desist from further sacrificing;[6] and

lighting upon victims already offered, they hurled them from off the

altars, scattering the fragments. Then Agesilaus, calling the gods to

witness, got on board his trireme in bitter indignation, and sailed

away. Arrived at Geraestus, he there collected as large a portion of

his troops as possible, and with the armada made sail for Ephesus.



[3] "Pol. Lac." xiii. 2 foll.



[4] Or, "To the several cities he had already despatched messengers

    with directions," etc.; see Paus. III. ix. 1-3.



[5] See Freeman, "Hist. of Federal Government," ch. iv. "Constitution

    of the Boeotian League," pp. 162, 163. The Boeotarchs, as

    representatives of the several Boeotian cities, were the supreme

    military commanders of the League, and, as it would appear, the

    general administrators of Federal affairs. "The Boeotarchs of

    course command at Delion, but they also act as administrative

    magistrates of the League by hindering Agesilaus from sacrificing

    at Aulis."



[6] Plut. "Ages." vi.; "Pelop." xxi. See Breitenb. op. cit. Praef. p.

    xvi.; and below, III. v. 5; VI. iv. 23.



When he had reached that city the first move was made by Tissaphernes,

who sent asking, "With what purpose he was come thither?" And the

Spartan king made answer: "With the intention that the cities in Asia

shall be independent even as are the cities in our quarter of Hellas."

In answer to this Tissaphernes said: "If you on your part choose to

make a truce whilst I send ambassadors to the king, I think you may

well arrange the matter, and sail back home again, if so you will."

"Willing enough should I be," replied Agesilaus, "were I not persuaded

that you are cheating me." "Nay, but it is open to you," replied the

satrap, "to exact a surety for the execution of the terms . . .

'Provided always that you, Tissaphernes, carry out what you say

without deceit, we on our side will abstain from injuring your

dominion in any respect whatever during the truce.'"[7] Accordingly in

the presence of three commissioners--Herippidas, Dercylidas, and

Megillus--Tissaphernes took an oath in the words prescribed: "Verily

and indeed, I will effect peace honestly and without guile." To which

the commissioners, on behalf of Agesilaus, swore a counter-oath:

"Verily and indeed, provided Tissaphernes so acts, we on our side will

observe the truce."



[7] For this corrupt passage, see Hartman, "Anal. Xen." p. 332; also

    Otto Keller's critical edition of the "Hellenica" (Lips,

    MDCCCLXXX.)



Tissaphernes at once gave the lie to what he had sworn. Instead of

adhering to peace he sent up to demand a large army from the king, in

addition to what he already had. But Agesilaus, though he was fully

alive to these proceedings, adhered as rigidly as ever to the truce.



To keep quiet and enjoy leisure was his duty, in the exercise of which

he wore away the time at Ephesus. But in reference to the organisation

of the several states it was a season of vehement constitutional

disturbance in the several cities; that is to say, there were neither

democracies as in the old days of the Athenians, nor yet were there

decarchies as in the days of Lysander. But here was Lysander back

again. Every one recognised him, and flocked to him with petitions for

one favour or another, which he was to obtain for them from Agesilaus.

A crowd of suitors danced attendance on his heels, and formed so

conspicuous a retinue that Agesilaus, any one would have supposed, was

the private person and Lysander the king. All this was maddening to

Agesilaus, as was presently plain. As to the rest of the Thirty,

jealousy did not suffer them to keep silence, and they put it plainly

to Agesilaus that the super-regal splendour in which Lysander lived

was a violation of the constitution. So when Lysander took upon

himself to introduce some of his petitioners to Agesilaus, the latter

turned them a deaf ear. Their being aided and abetted by Lysander was

sufficient; he sent them away discomfited. At length, as time after

time things turned out contrary to his wishes, Lysander himself

perceived the position of affairs. He now no longer suffered that

crowd to follow him, and gave those who asked him help in anything

plainly to understand that they would gain nothing, but rather be

losers, by his intervention. But being bitterly annoyed at the

degradation put upon him, he came to the king and said to him: "Ah,

Agesilaus, how well you know the art of humbling your friends!" "Ay,

indeed," the king replied; "those of them whose one idea it is to

appear greater than myself; if I did not know how also to requite with

honour those who work for my good, I should be ashamed." And Lysander

said: "maybe there is more reason in your doings than ever guided my

conduct;" adding, "Grant me for the rest one favour, so shall I cease

to blush at the loss of my influence with you, and you will cease to

be embarrassed by my presence. Send me off on a mission somewhere;

wherever I am I will strive to be of service to you." Such was the

proposal of Lysander. Agesilaus resolved to act upon it, and

despatched Lysander to the Hellespont. And this is what befell.[8]

Lysander, being made aware of a slight which had been put upon

Spithridates the Persian by Pharnabazus, got into conversation with

the injured man, and so worked upon him that he was persuaded to bring

his children and his personal belongings, and with a couple of hundred

troops to revolt. The next step was to deposit all the goods safely in

Cyzicus, and the last to get on shipboard with Spithridates and his

son, and so to present himself with his Persian friends to Agesilaus.

Agesilaus, on his side, was delighted at the transaction, and set

himself at once to get information about Pharnabazus, his territory

and his government.



[8] See "Ages." iii. 3; "Anab." VI. v. 7.



Meanwhile Tissaphernes had waxed bolder. A large body of troops had

been sent down by the king. On the strength of that he declared war

against Agesilaus, if he did not instantly withdraw his troops from

Asia. The Lacedaemonians there[9] present, no less than the allies,

received the news with profound vexation, persuaded as they were that

Agesilaus had no force capable of competing with the king's grand

armament. But a smile lit up the face of Agesilaus as he bade the

ambassadors return to Tissaphernes and tell him that he was much in

his debt for the perjury by which he had won the enmity of Heaven and

made the very gods themselves allies of Hellas. He at once issued a

general order to the troops to equip themselves for a forward

movement. He warned the cities through which he must pass in an

advance upon Caria, to have markets in readiness, and lastly, he

despatched a message to the Ionian, Aeolian, and Hellespontine

communities to send their contingents to join him at Ephesus.



[9] I.e. at Ephesus.



Tissaphernes, putting together the facts that Agesilaus had no cavalry

and that Caria was a region unadapted to that arm, and persuaded in

his own mind also that the Spartan could not but cherish wrath against

himself personally for his chicanery, felt convinced that he was

really intending to invade Caria, and that the satrap's palace was his

final goal. Accordingly he transferred the whole of his infantry to

that province, and proceeded to lead his cavalry round into the plain

of the Maeander. Here he conceived himself capable of trampling the

Hellenes under foot with his horsemen before they could reach the

craggy districts where no cavalry could operate.



But, instead of marching straight into Caria, Agesilaus turned sharp

off in the opposite direction towards Phrygia. Picking up various

detachments of troops which met him on his march, he steadily

advanced, laying cities prostrate before him, and by the

unexpectedness of his attack reaping a golden harvest of spoil. As a

rule the march was prosecuted safely; but not far from Dascylium his

advanced guard of cavalry were pushing on towards a knoll to take a

survery of the state of things in front, when, as chance would have

it, a detachment of cavalry sent forward by Pharnabazus--the corps, in

fact, of Rhathines and his natural brother Bagaeus--just about equal

to the Hellenes in number, also came galloping up to the very knoll in

question. The two bodies found themselves face to face not one hundred

and fifty yards[10] apart, and for the first moment or two stood stock

still. The Hellenic horse were drawn up like an ordinary phalanx four

deep, the barbarians presenting a narrow front of twelve or

thereabouts, and a very disproportionate depth. There was a moment's

pause, and then the barbarians, taking the initiative, charged. There

was a hand-to-hand tussle, in which any Hellene who succeeded in

striking his man shivered his lance with the blow, while the Persian

troopers, armed with cornel-wood javelins, speedly despatched a dozen

men and a couple of horses.[11] At this point the Hellenic cavalry

turned and fled. But as Agesilaus came up to the rescue with his heavy

infantry, the Asiatics were forced in their turn to withdraw, with the

loss of one man slain. This cavalry engagement gave them pause.

Agesilaus on the day following it offered sacrifice. "Was he to

continue his advance?" But the victims proved hopeless.[12] There was

nothing for it after this manifestation but to turn and march towards

the sea. It was clear enough to his mind that without a proper cavalry

force it would be impossible to conduct a campaign in the flat

country. Cavalry, therefore, he must get, or be driven to mere

guerilla warfare. With this view he drew up a list of all the

wealthiest inhabitants belonging to the several cities of those parts.

Their duty would be to support a body of cavalry, with the proviso,

however, that any one contributing a horse, arms, and rider, up to the

standard, would be exempted from personal service. The effect was

instantaneous. The zeal with which the recipients of these orders

responded could hardly have been greater if they had been seeking

substitutes to die for them.



[10] Lit. "four plethra."



[11] See Xenophon's treatise "On Horsemanship," xii. 12.



[12] Lit. "lobeless," i.e. with a lobe of the liver wanting--a bad

    sign.



B.C. 395. After this, at the first indication of spring, he collected

the whole of his army at Ephesus. But the army needed training. With

that object he proposed a series of prizes--prizes to the heavy

infantry regiments, to be won by those who presented their men in the

best condition; prizes for the cavalry regiments which could ride

best; prizes for those divisions of peltasts and archers which proved

most efficient in their respective duties. And now the gymnasiums were

a sight to see, thronged as they were, one and all, with warriors

stripping for exercise; or again, the hippodrome crowded with horses

and riders performing their evolutions; or the javelin men and archers

going through their peculiar drill. In fact, the whole city where he

lay presented under his hands a spectacle not to be forgotten. The

market-place literally teemed with horses, arms, and accoutrements of

all sorts for sale. The bronze-worker, the carpenter, the smith, the

leather-cutter, the painter and embosser, were all busily engaged in

fabricating the implements of war; so that the city of Ephesus itself

was fairly converted into a military workshop.[13] It would have done

a man's heart good to see those long lines of soldiers with Agesilaus

at their head, as they stepped gaily be-garlanded from the gymnasiums

to dedicate their wreaths to the goddess Artemis. Nor can I well

conceive of elements more fraught with hope than were here combined.

Here were reverence and piety towards Heaven; here practice in war and

military training; here discipline with habitual obedience to

authority. But contempt for one's enemy will infuse a kind of strength

in battle. So the Spartan leader argued; and with a view to its

production he ordered the quartermasters to put up the prisoners who

had been captured by his foraging bands for auction, stripped naked;

so that his Hellenic soldiery, as they looked at the white skins which

had never been bared to sun and wind, the soft limbs unused to toil

through constant riding in carriages, came to the conclusion that war

with such adversaries would differ little from a fight with women.



[13] See Plut. "Marc." (Clough, ii. 262); Polyb. "Hist." x. 20.



By this date a full year had elapsed since the embarkation of

Agesilaus, and the time had come for the Thirty with Lysander to sail

back home, and for their successors, with Herippidas, to arrive. Among

these Agesilaus appointed Xenocles and another to the command of the

cavalry, Scythes to that of the heavy infantry of the

enfranchised,[14] Herippidas to that of the Cyreians, and Migdon to

that of the contingents from the states. Agesilaus gave them to

understand that he intended to lead them forthwith by the most

expeditious route against the stronghold of the country,[15] so that

without further ceremony they might prepare their minds and bodies for

the tug of battle. Tissaphernes, however, was firmly persuaded that

this was only talk intended to deceive him; Agesilaus would this time

certainly invade Caria. Accordingly he repeated his former tactics,

transporting his infantry bodily into Caria and posting his cavalry in

the valley of the Maeander. But Agesilaus was as good as his word, and

at once invaded the district of Sardis. A three days' march through a

region denuded of the enemy threw large supplies into his hands. On

the fourth day the cavalry of the enemy approached. Their general

ordered the officer in charge of his baggage-train to cross the

Pactolus and encamp, while his troopers, catching sight of stragglers

from the Hellenic force scattered in pursuit of booty, put several of

them to the sword. Perceiving which, Agesilaus ordered his cavalry to

the rescue; and the Persians on their side, seeing their advance,

collected together in battle order to receive them, with dense

squadrons of horse, troop upon troop. The Spartan, reflecting that the

enemy had as yet no infantry to support him, whilst he had all

branches of the service to depend upon, concluded that the critical

moment had arrived at which to risk an engagement. In this mood he

sacrificed, and began advancing his main line of battle against the

serried lines of cavalry in front of him, at the same time ordering

the flower of his heavy infantry--the ten-years-service men[16]--to

close with them at a run, and the peltasts to bring up their supports

at the double. The order passed to his cavalry was to charge in

confidence that he and the whole body of his troops were close behind

them. The cavalry charge was received by the Persians without

flinching, but presently finding themselves environed by the full tide

of war they swerved. Some found a speedy grave within the river, but

the mass of them gradually made good their escape. The Hellenes

followed close on the heels of the flying foe and captured his camp.

here the peltasts not unnaturally fell to pillaging; whereupon

Agesilaus planted his troops so as to form a cordon enclosing the

property of friends and foes alike. The spoil taken was considerable;

it fetched more than seventy talents,[17] not to mention the famous

camels, subsequently brought over by Agesilaus into Hellas, which were

captured here. At the moment of the battle Tissaphernes lay in Sardis.

Hence the Persians argued that they had been betrayed by the satrap.

And the king of Persia, coming to a like conclusion himself that

Tissaphernes was to blame for the evil turn of his affairs, sent down

Tithraustes and beheaded him.[18]



[14] The neodamodes.



[15] I.e. Lydia. See Plut. "Ages." x. (Clough, iv. 11).



[16] See note to "Hell." II. iv. 32.



[17] = 17,062 pounds: 10 shillings.



[18] See Diod. xiv. 80.



This done, Tithraustes sent an embassy to Agesilaus with a message as

follows: "The author of all our trouble, yours and ours, Agesilaus,

has paid the penalty of his misdoings; the king therefore asks of you

first that you should sail back home in peace; secondly, that the

cities in Asia secured in their autonomy should continue to render him

the ancient tribute." To this proposition Agesilaus made answer that

"without the authorities at home he could do nothing in the matter."

"Then do you, at least," replied Tithraustes, "while awaiting advice

from Lacedaemon, withdraw into the territory of Pharnabazus. Have I

not avenged you of your enemy?" "While, then, I am on my way thither,"

rejoined Agesilaus, "will you support my army with provisions?" On

this wise Tithraustes handed him thirty talents,[19] which the other

took, and forthwith began his march into Phrygia (the Phrygia of

Pharnabazus). He lay in the plain district above Cyme,[20] when a

message reached him from the home authorities, giving him absolute

disposal of the naval forces,[21] with the right to appoint the

admiral of his choice. This course the Lacedaemonians were led to

adopt by the following considerations: If, they argued, the same man

were in command of both services, the land force would be greatly

strengthened through the concentration of the double force at any

point necessary; and the navy likewise would be far more useful

through the immediate presence and co-operation of the land force

where needed. Apprised of these measures, Agesilaus in the first

instance sent an order to the cities on the islands and the seaboard

to fit out as many ships of war as they severally might deem

desirable. The result was a new navy, consisting of the vessels thus

voluntarily furnished by the states, with others presented by private

persons out of courtesy to their commander, and amounting in all to a

fleet of one hundred and twenty sail. The admiral whom he selected was

Peisander, his wife's brother, a man of genuine ambition and of a

vigorous spirit, but not sufficiently expert in the details of

equipment to achieve a great naval success. Thus while Peisander set

off to attend to naval matters, Agesilaus continued his march whither

he was bound to Phrygia.



[19] = 7,312 pounds: 10 shillings.



[20] See "Cyrop." VII. i. 45.



[21] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 327, note 3; Arist. "Pol." ii. 9, 33.







V



But now Tithraustes seemed to have discovered in Agesilaus a

disposition to despise the fortunes of the Persian monarch--he

evidently had no intention to withdraw from Asia; on the contrary, he

was cherishing hopes vast enough to include the capture of the king

himself. Being at his wits' end how to manage matters, he resolved to

send Timocrates the Rhodian to Hellas with a gift of gold worthy fifty

silver talents,[1] and enjoined upon him to endeavour to exchange

solemn pledges with the leading men in the several states, binding

them to undertake a war against Lacedaemon. Timocrates arrived and

began to dole out his presents. In Thebes he gave gifts to

Androcleidas, Ismenias, and Galaxidorus; in Corinth to Timolaus and

Polyanthes; in Argos to Cylon and his party. The Athenians,[2] though

they took no share of the gold, were none the less eager for the war,

being of opinion that empire was theirs by right.[3] The recipients of

the moneys forthwith began covertly to attack the Lacedaemonians in

their respective states, and, when they had brought these to a

sufficient pitch of hatred, bound together the most important of them

in a confederacy.



[1] = 12,187 pounds: 10 shillings.



[2] See Paus. III. ix. 8; Plut. "Ages." xv.



[3] Reading {nomizontes auton to arkhein} with Sauppe; or if, as

    Breitinbach suggests, {enomizon de oukh outon to arkhesthai},

    translate "but thought it was not for them to take the

    initiative."



But it was clear to the leaders in Thebes that, unless some one struck

the first blow, the Lacedaemonians would never be brought to break the

truce with their allies. They therefore persuaded the Opuntian

Locrians[4] to levy moneys on a debatable district,[5] jointly claimed

by the Phocians and themselves, when the Phocians would be sure to

retaliate by an attack on Locris. These expectations were fulfilled.

The Phocians immediately invaded Locris and seized moneys on their

side with ample interest. Then Androcleidas and his friends lost no

time in persuading the Thebans to assist the Locrians, on the ground

that it was no debatable district which had been entered by the

Phocians, but the admittedly friendly and allied territory of Locris

itself. The counter-invasion of Phocis and pillage of their country by

the Thebans promptly induced the Phocians to send an embassy to

Lacedaemon. In claiming assistance they explained that the war was not

of their own seeking, but that they had attacked the Locrians in self-

defence. On their side the Lacedaemonians were glad enough to seize a

pretext for marching upon the Thebans, against whom they cherished a

long-standing bitterness. They had not forgotten the claim which the

Thebans had set up to a tithe for Apollo in Deceleia,[6] nor yet their

refusal to support Lacedaemon in the attack on Piraeus;[7] and they

accused them further of having persuaded the Corinthians not to join

that expedition. Nor did they fail to call to mind some later

proceedings of the Thebans--their refusal to allow Agesilaus to

sacrifice in Aulis;[8] their snatching the victims already offered and

hurling them from the altars; their refusal to join the same general

in a campaign directed even against Asia.[9] The Lacedaemonians

further reasoned that now, if ever, was the favourable moment to

conduct an expedition against the Thebans, and once for all to put a

stop to their insolent behaviour towards them. Affairs in Asia were

prospering under the strong arm of Agesilaus, and in Hellas they had

no other war on hand to trammel their movements. Such, therefore,

being the general view of the situation adopted at Lacedaemon, the

ephors proceeded to call out the ban. Meanwhile they despatched

Lysander to Phocis with orders to put himself at the head of the

Phocians along with the Oetaeans, Heracleotes, Melians, and

Aenianians, and to march upon Haliartus; before the walls of which

place Pausanias, the destined leader of the expedition, undertook to

present himself at the head of the Lacedaemonians and other

Peloponnesian forces by a specified date. Lysander not only carried

out his instructions to the letter, but going a little beyond them,

succeeded in detaching Orchomenus from Thebes.[10] Pausanias, on the

other hand, after finding the sacrifice for crossing the frontier

favourable, sat down at Tegea and set about despatching to and fro the

commandants of allied troops whilst contentedly awaiting the soldiers

from the provincial[11] districts of Laconia.



[4] For an alliance between Athens and the Locrians, B.C. 395, see

    Hicks, 67; and below, IV. ii. 17.



[5] Lit. "the." See Paus. III. ix. 9.



[6] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 309, 403; viii. 355.



[7] "Hell." II. iv. 30, B.C. 403.



[8] See above, III. iv. 3; and below, VII. i. 34.



[9] See Paus. III. ix. 1-3.



[10] See Freeman, op. cit. p. 167, "Ill feeling between Thebes and

    other towns."--"Against Thebes, backed by Sparta, resistance was

    hopeless. It was not till long after that, at last [in 395 B.C.],

    on a favourable opportunity during the Corinthian war, Orchomenos

    openly seceded." And for the prior "state of disaffection towards

    Thebes on the part of the smaller cities," see "Mem." III. v. 2,

    in reference to B.C. 407.



[11] Lit. "perioecid."



And now that it was fully plain to the Thebans that the Lacedaemonians

would invade their territory, they sent ambassadors to Athens, who

spoke as follows:--



"Men of Athens, it is a mistake on your part to blame us for certain

harsh resolutions concerning Athens at the conclusion of the war.[12]

That vote was not authorised by the state of Thebes. It was the

utterance merely of one man,[13] who was at that time seated in the

congress of the allies. A more important fact is that when the

Lacedaemonians summoned us to attack Piraeus[14] the collective state

of Thebes passed a resolution refusing to join in the campaign. As

then you are to a large extent the cause of the resentment which the

Lacedaemonians feel towards us, we consider it only fair that you in

your turn should render us assistance. Still more do we demand of you,

sirs, who were of the city party at that date, to enter heart and soul

into war with the Lacedaemonians. For what were their services to you?

They first deliberately converted you into an oligarchy and placed you

in hostility to the democracy, and then they came with a great force

under guise of being your allies, and delivered you over to the

majority, so that, for any service they rendered you, you were all

dead men; and you owe your lives to our friends here, the people of

Athens.[15]



[12] See "Hell." II. ii. 19; and below, VI. v. 35.



[13] Plut. "Lys." xv. "Erianthus the Theban gave his vote to pull down

    the city, and turn the country into sheep-pasture."--Clough, iii.

    121.



[14] See "Hell." II. iv. 30.



[15] See "Hell." II. iv. 38, 40, 41.



"But to pass on--we all know, men of Athens, that you would like to

recover the empire which you formerly possessed; and how can you

compass your object better than by coming to the aid yourselves of the

victims of Lacedaemonian injustice? Is it their wide empire of which

you are afraid? Let not that make cowards of you--much rather let it

embolden you as you lay to heart and ponder your own case. When your

empire was widest then the crop of your enemies was thickest. Only so

long as they found no opportunity to revolt did they keep their hatred

of you dark; but no sooner had they found a champion in Lacedaemon

than they at once showed what they really felt towards you. So too to-

day. Let us show plainly that we mean to stand shoulder to

shoulder[16] embattled against the Lacedaemonians; and haters enough

of them--whole armies--never fear, will be forthcoming. To prove the

truth of this assertion you need only to count upon your fingers. How

many friends have they left to them to-day? The Argives have been,

are, and ever will be, hostile to them. Of course. But the Eleians?

Why, the Eleians have quite lately[17] been robbed of so much

territory and so many cities that their friendship is converted into

hatred. And what shall we say of the Corinthians? the Arcadians? the

Achaeans? In the war which Sparta waged against you, there was no

toil, no danger, no expense, which those peoples did not share, in

obedience to the dulcet coaxings[18] and persuasions of that power.

The Lacedaemonians gained what they wanted, and then not one

fractional portion of empire, honour, or wealth did these faithful

followers come in for. That is not all. They have no scruple in

appointing their helots[19] as governors, and on the free necks of

their alies, in the day of their good fortune, they have planted the

tyrant's heel.



[16] Lit. "shield to shield."



[17] Lit. "to-day," "nowadays."



[18] {mala liparoumenoi}. See Thuc. i. 66 foll.; vi. 88.



[19] See "Pol. Lac." xiv.



"Then again take the case of those whom they have detached from

yourselves. In the most patent way they have cajoled and cheated them;

in place of freedom they have presented them with a twofold slavery.

The allies are tyrannised over by the governor and tyrannised over by

the ten commissioners set up by Lysander over every city.[20] And to

come lastly to the great king. In spite of all the enormous

contributions with which he aided them to gain a mastery over you, is

the lord of Asia one whit better off to-day than if he had taken

exactly the opposite course and joined you in reducing them?



[20] Grote ("H. G." ix. 323), referring to this passage, and to

    "Hell." VI. iii. 8-11, notes the change in Spartan habits between

    405 and 394 B.C. (i.e. between the victory of Aegospotami and the

    defeat of Cnidos), when Sparta possessed a large public revenue

    derived from the tribute of the dependent cities. For her earlier

    condition, 432 B.C., cf. Thuc. i. 80. For her subsequent

    condition, 334 B.C., cf. Arist. "Pol." ii. 6, 23.



"Is it not clear that you have only to step forward once again as the

champions of this crowd of sufferers from injustice, and you will

attain to a pinnacle of power quite unprecedented? In the days of your

old empire you were leaders of the maritime powers merely--that is

clear; but your new empire to-day will be universal. You will have at

your backs not only your former subjects, but ourselves, and the

Peloponnesians, and the king himself, with all that mighty power which

is his. We do not deny that we were serviceable allies enough to

Lacedaemon, as you will bear us witness; but this we say:--If we

helped the Lacedaemonians vigorously in the past, everything tends to

show that we shall help you still more vigorously to-day; for our

swords will be unsheathed, not in behalf of islanders, or Syracusans,

or men of alien stock, as happened in the late war, but of ourselves,

suffering under a sense of wrong. And there is another important fact

which you ought to realise: this selfish system of organised greed

which is Sparta's will fall more readily to pieces than your own late

empire. Yours was the proud assertion of naval empire over subjects

powerless by sea. Theirs is the selfish sway of a minority asserting

dominion over states equally well armed with themselves, and many

times more numerous. Here our remarks end. Do not forget, however, men

of Athens, that as far as we can understand the matter, the field to

which we invite you is destined to prove far richer in blessings to

your own state of Athens than to ours, Thebes."



With these words the speaker ended. Among the Athenians, speaker after

speaker spoke in favour of the proposition,[21] and finally a

unanimous resolution was passed voting assitance to the Thebans.

Thrasybulus, in an answer communicating the resolution, pointed out

with pride that in spite of the unfortified condition of Piraeus,

Athens would not shrink from repaying her former debt of gratitude to

Thebes with interest. "You," he added, "refused to join in a campaign

against us; we are prepared to fight your battles with you against the

enemy, if he attacks you." Thus the Thebans returned home and made

preparations to defend themselves, whilst the Athenians made ready to

assist them.



[21] For the alliance between Boeotia and Athens, B.C. 395, see

    Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. 6; Hicks, op. cit. 65; Lys. "pro Man." S.

    13; Jebb, "Att. Or." i. p. 247; and the two speeches of the same

    orator Lysias against Alcibiades (son of the famous Alcibiades),

    on a Charge of Desertion ("Or." xiv.), and on a Charge of Failure

    to Serve ("Or." xv.)--Jebb, op. cit. i. p. 256 foll.



And now the Lacedaemonians no longer hesitated. Pausanias the king

advanced into Boeotia with the home army and the whole of the

Peloponnesian contingents, saving only the Corinthians, who declined

to serve. Lysander, at the head of the army supplied by Phocis and

Orchomenus and the other strong places in those parts, had already

reached Haliartus, in front of Pausanias. Being arrived, he refused to

sit down quietly and await the arrival of the army from Lacedaemon,

but at once marched with what troops he had against the walls of

Haliartus; and in the first instance he tried to persuade the citizens

to detach themselves from Thebes and to assume autonomy, but the

intention was cut short by certain Thebans within the fortress.

Whereupon Lysander attacked the place. The Thebans were made

aware,[22] and hurried to the rescue with heavy infantry and cavalry.

Then, whether it was that the army of relief fell upon Lysander

unawares, or that with clear knowledge of his approach he preferred to

await the enemy, with intent to crush him, is uncertain. This only is

clear: a battle was fought beside the walls, and a trophy still exists

to mark the victory of the townsfolk before the gates of Haliartus.

Lysander was slain, and the rest fled to the mountains, the Thebans

hotly pursuing. But when the pursuit had led them to some considerable

height, and they were fairly environed and hemmed in by difficult

ground and narrow space, then the heavy infantry turned to bay, and

greeted them with a shower of darts and missiles. First two or three

men dropped who had been foremost of the pursuers, and then upon the

rest they poured volleys of stones down the precipitous incline, and

pressed on their late pursuers with much zeal, until the Thebans

turned tail and quitted the deadly slope, leaving behind them more

than a couple of hundred corpses.



[22] See Plut. "Lys." xxviii. (Clough, iii. 137).



On this day, thereafter, the hearts of the Thebans failed them as they

counted their losses and found them equal to their gains; but the next

day they discovered that during the night the Phocians and the rest of

them had made off to their several homes, whereupon they fell to

pluming themselves highly on their achievement. But presently

Pausanias appeared at the head of the Lacedaemonian army, and once

more their dangers seemed to thicken round them. Deep, we are told,

was the silence and abasement which reigned in their host. It was not

until the third day, when the Athenians arrived[23] and were duely

drawn up beside them, whilst Pausanias neither attacked nor offered

battle, that at length the confidence of the Thebans took a larger

range. Pausanias, on his side, having summoned his generals and

commanders of fifties,[24] deliberated whether to give battle or to

content himself with picking up the bodies of Lysander and those who

fell with him, under cover of a truce.



[23] See Dem. "On the Crown," 258.



[24] Lit. "polemarchs and penteconters"--"colonels and lieutenants."

    See "Pol. Lac." xi.



The considerations which weighed upon the minds of Pausanias and the

other high officers of the Lacedaemonians seem to have been that

Lysander was dead and his defeated army in retreat; while, as far as

they themselves were concerned, the Corinthian contingent was

absolutely wanting, and the zeal of the troops there present at the

lowest ebb. They further reasoned that the enemy's cavalry was

numerous and theirs the reverse; whilst, weightiest of all, there lay

the dead right under the walls, so that if they had been ever so much

stronger it would have been no easy task to pick up the bodies within

range of the towers of Haliartus. On all these grounds they determined

to ask for a flag of truce, in order to pick up the bodies of the

slain. These, however, the Thebans were not disposed to give back

unless they agreed to retire from their territory. The terms were

gladly accepted by the Lacedaemonians, who at once picked up the

corpses of the slain, and prepared to quit the territory of Boeotia.

The preliminaries were transacted, and the retreat commenced.

Despondent indeed was the demeanour of the Lacedaemonians, in contrast

with the insolent bearing of the Thebans, who visited the slightest

attempt to trespass on their private estates with blows and chased the

offenders back on to the high roads unflinchingly. Such was the

conclusion of the campaign of the Lacedaemonians.



As for Pausanias, on his arrival at home he was tried on the capital

charge. The heads of indictment set forth that he had failed to reach

Haliartus as soon as Lysander, in spite of his undertaking to be there

on the same day: that, instead of using any endeavour to pick up the

bodies of the slain by force of arms, he had asked for a flag of

truce: that at an earlier date, when he had got the popular government

of Athens fairly in his grip at Piraeus, he had suffered it to slip

through his fingers and escape. Besides this,[25] he failed to present

himself at the trial, and a sentence of death was passed upon him. He

escaped to Tegea and there died of an illness whilst still in exile.

Thus closes the chapter of events enacted on the soil of Hellas. To

return to Asia and Agesilaus.



[25] Or, add, "as a further gravamen."


