




The Theory of Moral Sentiments


by Adam Smith


1759





The Theory of Moral Sentiments.


by Adam Smith


Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Glasgow.





London:


Printed for A. Millar, in the Strand;


And A. Kincaid and J. Bell in Edinburgh.


MDCCLIX








Part I





Of the Propriety of Action


Consisting of Three Sections





Section I





Of the Sense of Propriety





Chap. I





Of Sympathy





    How selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently


some principles in his nature, which interest him in the fortune


of others, and render their happiness necessary to him, though he


derives nothing from it except the pleasure of seeing it. Of this


kind is pity or compassion, the emotion which we feel for the


misery of others, when we either see it, or are made to conceive


it in a very lively manner. That we often derive sorrow from the


sorrow of others, is a matter of fact too obvious to require any


instances to prove it; for this sentiment, like all the other


original passions of human nature, is by no means confined to the


virtuous and humane, though they perhaps may feel it with the


most exquisite sensibility. The greatest ruffian, the most


hardened violator of the laws of society, is not altogether


without it.


    As we have no immediate experience of what other men feel, we


can form no idea of the manner in which they are affected, but by


conceiving what we ourselves should feel in the like situation.


Though our brother is upon the rack, as long as we ourselves are


at our ease, our senses will never inform us of what he suffers.


They never did, and never can, carry us beyond our own person,


and it is by the imagination only that we can form any conception


of what are his sensations. Neither can that faculty help us to


this any other way, than by representing to us what would be our


own, if we were in his case. It is the impressions of our own


senses only, not those of his, which our imaginations copy. By


the imagination we place ourselves in his situation, we conceive


ourselves enduring all the same torments, we enter as it were


into his body, and become in some measure the same person with


him, and thence form some idea of his sensations, and even feel


something which, though weaker in degree, is not altogether


unlike them. His agonies, when they are thus brought home to


ourselves, when we have thus adopted and made them our own, begin


at last to affect us, and we then tremble and shudder at the


thought of what he feels. For as to be in pain or distress of any


kind excites the most excessive sorrow, so to conceive or to


imagine that we are in it, excites some degree of the same


emotion, in proportion to the vivacity or dulness of the


conception.


    That this is the source of our fellow-feeling for the misery


of others, that it is by changing places in fancy with the


sufferer, that we come either to conceive or to be affected by


what he feels, may be demonstrated by many obvious observations,


if it should not be thought sufficiently evident of itself. When


we see a stroke aimed and just ready to fall upon the leg or arm


of another person, we naturally shrink and draw back our own leg


or our own arm; and when it does fall, we feel it in some


measure, and are hurt by it as well as the sufferer. The mob,


when they are gazing at a dancer on the slack rope, naturally


writhe and twist and balance their own bodies, as they see him


do, and as they feel that they themselves must do if in his


situation. Persons of delicate fibres and a weak constitution of


body complain, that in looking on the sores and ulcers which are


exposed by beggars in the streets, they are apt to feel an


itching or uneasy sensation in the correspondent part of their


own bodies. The horror which they conceive at the misery of those


wretches affects that particular part in themselves more than any


other; because that horror arises from conceiving what they


themselves would suffer, if they really were the wretches whom


they are looking upon, and if that particular part in themselves


was actually affected in the same miserable manner. The very


force of this conception is sufficient, in their feeble frames,


to produce that itching or uneasy sensation complained of. Men of


the most robust make, observe that in looking upon sore eyes they


often feel a very sensible soreness in their own, which proceeds


from the same reason; that organ being in the strongest man more


delicate, than any other part of the body is in the weakest.


    Neither is it those circumstances only, which create pain or


sorrow, that call forth our fellow-feeling. Whatever is the


passion which arises from any object in the person principally


concerned, an analogous emotion springs up, at the thought of his


situation, in the breast of every attentive spectator. Our joy


for the deliverance of those heroes of tragedy or romance who


interest us, is as sincere as our grief for their distress, and


our fellow-feeling with their misery is not more real than that


with their happiness. We enter into their gratitude towards those


faithful friends who did not desert them in their difficulties;


and we heartily go along with their resentment against those


perfidious traitors who injured, abandoned, or deceived them. In


every passion of which the mind of man is susceptible, the


emotions of the by-stander always correspond to hat, by bringing


the case home to himself, he imagines should be the sentiments of


the sufferer.


    Pity and compassion are words appropriated to signify our


fellow-feeling with the sorrow of others. Sympathy, though its


meaning was, perhaps, originally the same, may now, however,


without much impropriety, be made use of to denote our


fellow-feeling with any passion whatever.


    Upon some occasions sympathy may seen to arise merely from


the view of a certain emotion in another person. The passions,


upon some occasions, may seem to be transfused from one man to


another, instantaneously and antecedent to any knowledge of what


excited them in the person principally concerned. Grief and joy,


for example, strongly expressed in the look and gestures of any


one, at once affect the spectator with some degree of a like


painful or agreeable emotion. A smiling face is, to every body


that sees it, a cheerful object; as a sorrowful countenance, on


the other hand, is a melancholy one.


    This, however, does not hold universally, or with regard to


every passion. There are some passions of which the expressions


excite no sort of sympathy, but before we are acquainted with


what gave occasion to them, serve rather to disgust and provoke


us against them. The furious behaviour of an angry man is more


likely to exasperate us against himself than against his enemies.


As we are unacquainted with his provocation, we cannot bring his


case home to ourselves, nor conceive any thing like the passions


which it excites. But we plainly see what is the situation of


those with whom he is angry, and to what violence they may be


exposed from so enraged an adversary. We readily, therefore,


sympathize with their fear or resentment, and are immediately


disposed to take part against the man from whom they appear to be


in so much danger.


    If the very appearances of grief and joy inspire us with some


degree of the like emotions, it is because they suggest to us the


general idea of some good or bad fortune that has befallen the


person in whom we observe them: and in these passions this is


sufficient to have some little influence upon us. The effects of


grief and joy terminate in the person who feels those emotions,


of which the expressions do not, like those of resentment,


suggest to us the idea of any other person for whom we are


concerned, and whose interests are opposite to his. The general


idea of good or bad fortune, therefore, creates some concern for


the person who has met with it, but the general idea of


provocation excites no sympathy with the anger of the man who has


received it. Nature, it seems, teaches us to be more averse to


enter into this passion, and, till informed of its cause, to be


disposed rather to take part against it.


    Even our sympathy with the grief or joy of another, before we


are informed of the cause of either, is always extremely


imperfect. General lamentations, which express nothing but the


anguish of the sufferer, create rather a curiosity to inquire


into his situation, along with some disposition to sympathize


with him, than any actual sympathy that is very sensible. The


first question which we ask is, What has befallen you? Till this


be answered, though we are uneasy both from the vague idea of his


misfortune, and still more from torturing ourselves with


conjectures about what it may be, yet our fellow-feeling is not


very considerable.


    Sympathy, therefore, does not arise so much from the view of


the passion, as from that of the situation which excites it. We


sometimes feel for another, a passion of which he himself seems


to be altogether incapable; because, when we put ourselves in his


case, that passion arises in our breast from the imagination,


though it does not in his from the reality. We blush for the


impudence and rudeness of another, though he himself appears to


have no sense of the impropriety of his own behaviour; because we


cannot help feeling with what confusion we ourselves should be


covered, had we behaved in so absurd a manner.


    Of all the calamities to which the condition of mortality


exposes mankind, the loss of reason appears, to those who have


the least spark of humanity, by far the most dreadful, and they


behold that last stage of human wretchedness with deeper


commiseration than any other. But the poor wretch, who is in it,


laughs and sings perhaps, and is altogether insensible of his own


misery. The anguish which humanity feels, therefore, at the sight


of such an object, cannot be the reflection of any sentiment of


the sufferer. The compassion of the spectator must arise


altogether from the consideration of what he himself would feel


if he was reduced to the same unhappy situation, and, what


perhaps is impossible, was at the same time able to regard it


with his present reason and judgment.


    What are the pangs of a mother, when she hears the moanings


of her infant that during the agony of disease cannot express


what it feels? In her idea of what it suffers, she joins, to its


real helplessness, her own consciousness of that helplessness,


and her own terrors for the unknown consequences of its disorder;


and out of all these, forms, for her own sorrow, the most


complete image of misery and distress. The infant, however, feels


only the uneasiness of the present instant, which can never be


great. With regard to the future, it is perfectly secure, and in


its thoughtlessness and want of foresight, possesses an antidote


against fear and anxiety, the great tormentors of the human


breast, from which reason and philosophy will, in vain, attempt


to defend it, when it grows up to a man.


    We sympathize even with the dead, and overlooking what is of


real importance in their situation, that awful futurity which


awaits them, we are chiefly affected by those circumstances which


strike our senses, but can have no influence upon their


happiness. It is miserable, we think, to be deprived of the light


of the sun; to be shut out from life and conversation; to be laid


in the cold grave, a prey to corruption and the reptiles of the


earth; to be no more thought of in this world, but to be


obliterated, in a little time, from the affections, and almost


from the memory, of their dearest friends and relations. Surely,


we imagine, we can never feel too much for those who have


suffered so dreadful a calamity. The tribute of our


fellow-feeling seems doubly due to them now, when they are in


danger of being forgot by every body; and, by the vain honours


which we pay to their memory, we endeavour, for our own misery,


artificially to keep alive our melancholy remembrance of their


misfortune. That our sympathy can afford them no consolation


seems to be an addition to their calamity; and to think that all


we can do is unavailing, and that, what alleviates all other


distress, the regret, the love, and the lamentations of their


friends, can yield no comfort to them, serves only to exasperate


our sense of their misery. The happiness of the dead, however,


most assuredly, is affected by none of these circumstances; nor


is it the thought of these things which can ever disturb the


profound security of their repose. The idea of that dreary and


endless melancholy, which the fancy naturally ascribes to their


condition, arises altogether from our joining to the change which


has been produced upon them, our own consciousness of that


change, from our putting ourselves in their situation, and from


our lodging, if I may be allowed to say so, our own living souls


in their inanimated bodies, and thence conceiving what would be


our emotions in this case. It is from this very illusion of the


imagination, that the foresight of our own dissolution is so


terrible to us, and that the idea of those circumstances, which


undoubtedly can give us no pain when we are dead, makes us


miserable while we are alive. And from thence arises one of the


most important principles in human nature, the dread of death,


the great poison to the happiness, but the great restraint upon


the injustice of mankind, which, while it afflicts and mortifies


the individual, guards and protects the society.





Chap. II





Of the Pleasure of mutual Sympathy





    But whatever may be the cause of sympathy, or however it may


be excited, nothing pleases us more than to observe in other men


a fellow-feeling with all the emotions of our own breast; nor are


we ever so much shocked as by the appearance of the contrary.


Those who are fond of deducing all our sentiments from certain


refinements of self-love, think themselves at no loss to account,


according to their own principles, both for this pleasure and


this pain. Man, say they, conscious of his own weakness, and of


the need which he has for the assistance of others, rejoices


whenever he observes that they adopt his own passions, because he


is then assured of that assistance; and grieves whenever he


observes the contrary, because he is then assured of their


opposition. But both the pleasure and the pain are always felt so


instantaneously, and often upon such frivolous occasions, that it


seems evident that neither of them can be derived from any such


self-interested consideration. A man is mortified when, after


having endeavoured to divert the company, he looks round and sees


that nobody laughs at his jests but himself. On the contrary, the


mirth of the company is highly agreeable to him, and he regards


this correspondence of their sentiments with his own as the


greatest applause.


    Neither does his pleasure seem to arise altogether from the


additional vivacity which his mirth may receive from sympathy


with theirs, nor his pain from the disappointment he meets with


when he misses this pleasure; though both the one and the other,


no doubt, do in some measure. When we have read a book or poem so


often that we can no longer find any amusement in reading it by


ourselves, we can still take pleasure in reading it to a


companion. To him it has all the graces of novelty; we enter into


the surprise and admiration which it naturally excites in him,


but which it is no longer capable of exciting in us; we consider


all the ideas which it presents rather in the light in which they


appear to him, than in that in which they appear to ourselves,


and we are amused by sympathy with his amusement which thus


enlivens our own. On the contrary, we should be vexed if he did


not seem to be entertained with it, and we could no longer take


any pleasure in reading it to him. It is the same case here. The


mirth of the company, no doubt, enlivens our own mirth, and their


silence, no doubt, disappoints us. But though this may contribute


both to the pleasure which we derive from the one, and to the


pain which we feel from the other, it is by no means the sole


cause of either; and this correspondence of the sentiments of


others with our own appears to be a cause of pleasure, and the


want of it a cause of pain, which cannot be accounted for in this


manner. The sympathy, which my friends express with my joy,


might, indeed, give me pleasure by enlivening that joy: but that


which they express with my grief could give me none, if it served


only to enliven that grief. Sympathy, however, enlivens joy and


alleviates grief. It enlivens joy by presenting another source of


satisfaction; and it alleviates grief by insinuating into the


heart almost the only agreeable sensation which it is at that


time capable of receiving.


    It is to be observed accordingly, that we are still more


anxious to communicate to our friends our disagreeable than our


agreeable passions, that we derive still more satisfaction from


their sympathy with the former than from that with the latter,


and that we are still more shocked by the want of it.


    How are the unfortunate relieved when they have found out a


person to whom they can communicate the cause of their sorrow?


Upon his sympathy they seem to disburthen themselves of a part of


their distress: he is not improperly said to share it with them.


He not only feels a sorrow of the same kind with that which they


feel, but as if he had derived a part of it to himself, what he


feels seems to alleviate the weight of what they feel. Yet by


relating their misfortunes they in some measure renew their


grief. They awaken in their memory the remembrance of those


circumstances which occasioned their affliction. Their tears


accordingly flow faster than before, and they are apt to abandon


themselves to all the weakness of sorrow. They take pleasure,


however, in all this, and, it is evident, are sensibly relieved


by it; because the sweetness of his sympathy more than


compensates the bitterness of that sorrow, which, in order to


excite this sympathy, they had thus enlivened and renewed. The


cruelest insult, on the contrary, which can be offered to the


unfortunate, is to appear to make light of their calamities. To


seem not to be affected with the joy of our companions is but


want of politeness; but not to wear a serious countenance when


they tell us their afflictions, is real and gross inhumanity.


    Love is an agreeable; resentment, a disagreeable passion; and


accordingly we are not half so anxious that our friends should


adopt our friendships, as that they should enter into our


resentments. We can forgive them though they seem to be little


affected with the favours which we may have received, but lose


all patience if they seem indifferent about the injuries which


may have been done to us: nor are we half so angry with them for


not entering into our gratitude, as for not sympathizing with our


resentment. They can easily avoid being friends to our friends,


but can hardly avoid being enemies to those with whom we are at


variance. We seldom resent their being at enmity with the first,


though upon that account we may sometimes affect to make an


awkward quarrel with them; but we quarrel with them in good


earnest if they live in friendship with the last. The agreeable


passions of love and joy can satisfy and support the heart


without any auxiliary pleasure. The bitter and painful emotions


of grief and resentment more strongly require the healing


consolation of sympathy.


    As the person who is principally interested in any event is


pleased with our sympathy, and hurt by the want of it, so we,


too, seem to be pleased when we are able to sympathize with him,


and to be hurt when we are unable to do so. We run not only to


congratulate the successful, but to condole with the afflicted;


and the pleasure which we find in the conversation of one whom in


all the passions of his heart we can entirely sympathize with,


seems to do more than compensate the painfulness of that sorrow


with which the view of his situation affects us. On the contrary,


it is always disagreeable to feel that we cannot sympathize with


him, and instead of being pleased with this exemption from


sympathetic pain, it hurts us to find that we cannot share his


uneasiness. If we hear a person loudly lamenting his misfortunes,


which, however, upon bringing the case home to ourselves, we


feel, can produce no such violent effect upon us, we are shocked


at his grief; and, because we cannot enter into it, call it


pusillanimity and weakness. It gives us the spleen, on the other


hand, to see another too happy or too much elevated, as we call


it, with any little piece of good fortune. We are disobliged even


with his joy; and, because we cannot go along with it, call it


levity and folly. We are even put out of humour if our companion


laughs louder or longer at a joke than we think it deserves; that


is, than we feel that we ourselves could laugh at it.





Chap. III





Of the manner in which we judge of the propriety or impropriety


of the affections of other men, by their concord or dissonance


with out own.





    When the original passions of the person principally


concerned are in perfect concord with the sympathetic emotions of


the spectator, they necessarily appear to this last just and


proper, and suitable to their objects; and, on the contrary,


when, upon bringing the case home to himself, he finds that they


do not coincide with what he feels, they necessarily appear to


him unjust and improper, and unsuitable to the causes which


excite them. To approve of the passions of another, therefore, as


suitable to their objects, is the same thing as to observe that


we entirely sympathize with them; and not to approve of them as


such, is the same thing as to observe that we do not entirely


sympathize with them. The man who resents the injuries that have


been done to me, and observes that I resent them precisely as he


does, necessarily approves of my resentment. The man whose


sympathy keeps time to my grief, cannot but admit the


reasonableness of my sorrow. He who admires the same poem, or the


same picture, and admires them exactly as I do, must surely allow


the justness of my admiration. He who laughs at the same joke,


and laughs along with me, cannot well deny the propriety of my


laughter. On the contrary, the person who, upon these different


occasions, either feels no such emotion as that which I feel, or


feels none that bears any proportion to mine, cannot avoid


disapproving my sentiments on account of their dissonance with


his own. If my animosity goes beyond what the indignation of my


friend can correspond to; if my grief exceeds what his most


tender compassion can go along with; if my admiration is either


too high or too low to tally with his own; if I laugh loud and


heartily when he only smiles, or, on the contrary, only smile


when he laughs loud and heartily; in all these cases, as soon as


he comes from considering the object, to observe how I am


affected by it, according as there is more or less disproportion


between his sentiments and mine, I must incur a greater or less


degree of his disapprobation: and upon all occasions his own


sentiments are the standards and measures by which he judges of


mine.


    To approve of another man's opinions is to adopt those


opinions, and to adopt them is to approve of them. If the same


arguments which convince you convince me likewise, I necessarily


approve of your conviction; and if they do not, I necessarily


disapprove of it: neither can I possibly conceive that I should


do the one without the other. To approve or disapprove,


therefore, of the opinions of others is acknowledged, by every


body, to mean no more than to observe their agreement or


disagreement with our own. But this is equally the case with


regard to our approbation or disapprobation of the sentiments or


passions of others.


    There are, indeed, some cases in which we seem to approve


without any sympathy or correspondence of sentiments, and in


which, consequently, the sentiment of approbation would seem to


be different from the perception of this coincidence. A little


attention, however, will convince us that even in these cases our


approbation is ultimately founded upon a sympathy or


correspondence of this kind. I shall give an instance in things


of a very frivolous nature, because in them the judgments of


mankind are less apt to be perverted by wrong systems. We may


often approve of a jest, and think the laughter of the company


quite just and proper, though we ourselves do not laugh, because,


perhaps, we are in a grave humour, or happen to have our


attention engaged with other objects. We have learned, however,


from experience, what sort of pleasantry is upon most occasions


capable of making us laugh, and we observe that this is one of


that kind. We approve, therefore, of the laughter of the company,


and feel that it is natural and suitable to its object; because,


though in our present mood we cannot easily enter into it, we are


sensible that upon most occasions we should very heartily join in


it.


    The same thing often happens with regard to all the other


passions. A stranger passes by us in the street with all the


marks of the deepest affliction; and we are immediately told that


he has just received the news of the death of his father. It is


impossible that, in this case, we should not approve of his


grief. Yet it may often happen, without any defect of humanity on


our part, that, so far from entering into the violence of his


sorrow, we should scarce conceive the first movements of concern


upon his account. Both he and his father, perhaps, are entirely


unknown to us, or we happen to be employed about other things,


and do not take time to picture out in our imagination the


different circumstances of distress which must occur to him. We


have learned, however, from experience, that such a misfortune


naturally excites such a degree of sorrow, and we know that if we


took time to consider his situation, fully and in all its parts,


we should, without doubt, most sincerely sympathize with him. It


is upon the consciousness of this conditional sympathy, that our


approbation of his sorrow is founded, even in those cases in


which that sympathy does not actually take place; and the general


rules derived from our preceding experience of what our


sentiments would commonly correspond with, correct upon this, as


upon many other occasions, the impropriety of our present


emotions.


    The sentiment or affection of the heart from which any action


proceeds, and upon which its whole virtue or vice must ultimately


depend, may be considered under two different aspects, or in two


different relations; first, in relation to the cause which


excites it, or the motive which gives occasion to it; and


secondly, in relation to the end which it proposes, or the effect


which it tends to produce.


    In the suitableness or unsuitableness, in the proportion or


disproportion which the affection seems to bear to the cause or


object which excites it, consists the propriety or impropriety,


the decency or ungracefulness of the consequent action.


    In the beneficial or hurtful nature of the effects which the


affection aims at, or tends to produce, consists the merit or


demerit of the action, the qualities by which it is entitled to


reward, or is deserving of punishment.


    Philosophers have, of late years, considered chiefly the


tendency of affections, and have given little attention to the


relation which they stand in to the cause which excites them. In


common life, however, when we judge of any person's conduct, and


of the sentiments which directed it, we constantly consider them


under both these aspects. When we blame in another man the


excesses of love, of grief, of resentment, we not only consider


the ruinous effects which they tend to produce, but the little


occasion which was given for them. The merit of his favourite, we


say, is not so great, his misfortune is not so dreadful, his


provocation is not so extraordinary, as to justify so violent a


passion. We should have indulged, we say; perhaps, have approved


of the violence of his emotion, had the cause been in any respect


proportioned to it.


    When we judge in this manner of any affection, as


proportioned or disproportioned to the cause which excites it, it


is scarce possible that we should make use of any other rule or


canon but the correspondent affection in ourselves. If, upon


bringing the case home to our own breast, we find that the


sentiments which it gives occasion to, coincide and tally with


our own, we necessarily approve of them as proportioned and


suitable to their objects; if otherwise, we necessarily


disapprove of them, as extravagant and out of proportion.


    Every faculty in one man is the measure by which he judges of


the like faculty in another. I judge of your sight by my sight,


of your ear by my ear, of your reason by my reason, of your


resentment by my resentment, of your love by my love. I neither


have, nor can have, any other way of judging about them.





Chap. IV





The same subject continued





    We may judge of the propriety or impropriety of the


sentiments of another person by their correspondence or


disagreement with our own, upon two different occasions; either,


first, when the objects which excite them are considered without


any peculiar relation, either to ourselves or to the person whose


sentiments we judge of; or, secondly, when they are considered as


peculiarly affecting one or other of us.





    1. With regard to those objects which are considered without


any peculiar relation either to ourselves or to the person whose


sentiments we judge of; wherever his sentiments entirely


correspond with our own, we ascribe to him the qualities of taste


and good judgment. The beauty of a plain, the greatness of a


mountain, the ornaments of a building, the expression of a


picture, the composition of a discourse, the conduct of a third


person, the proportions of different quantities and numbers, the


various appearances which the great machine of the universe is


perpetually exhibiting, with the secret wheels and springs which


product them; all the general subjects of science and taste, are


what we and our companion regard as having no peculiar relation


to either of us. We both look at them from the same point of


view, and we have no occasion for sympathy, or for that imaginary


change of situations from which it arises, in order to produce,


with regard to these, the most perfect harmony of sentiments and


affections. If, notwithstanding, we are often differently


affected, it arises either from the different degrees of


attention, which our different habits of life allow us to give


easily to the several parts of those complex objects, or from the


different degrees of natural acuteness in the faculty of the mind


to which they are addressed.


    When the sentiments of our companion coincide with our own in


things of this kind, which are obvious and easy, and in which,


perhaps, we never found a single person who differed from us,


though we, no doubt, must approve of them, yet he seems to


deserve no praise or admiration on account of them. But when they


not only coincide with our own, but lead and direct our own; when


in forming them he appears to have attended to many things which


we had overlooked, and to have adjusted them to all the various


circumstances of their objects; we not only approve of them, but


wonder and are surprised at their uncommon and unexpected


acuteness and comprehensiveness, and he appears to deserve a very


high degree of admiration and applause. For approbation


heightened by wonder and surprise, constitutes the sentiment


which is properly called admiration, and of which applause is the


natural expression. The decision of the man who judges that


exquisite beauty is preferable to the grossest deformity, or that


twice two are equal to four, must certainly be approved of by all


the world, but will not, surely, be much admired. It is the acute


and delicate discernment of the man of taste, who distinguishes


the minute, and scarce perceptible differences of beauty and


deformity; it is the comprehensive accuracy of the experienced


mathematician, who unravels, with ease, the most intricate and


perplexed proportions; it is the great leader in science and


taste, the man who directs and conducts our own sentiments, the


extent and superior justness of whose talents astonish us with


wonder and surprise, who excites our admiration, and seems to


deserve our applause: and upon this foundation is grounded the


greater part of the praise which is bestowed upon what are called


the intellectual virtues.


    The utility of those qualities, it may be thought, is what


first recommends them to us; and, no doubt, the consideration of


this, when we come to attend to it, gives them a new value.


Originally, however, we approve of another man's judgment, not as


something useful, but as right, as accurate, as agreeable to


truth and reality: and it is evident we attribute those qualities


to it for no other reason but because we find that it agrees with


our own. Taste, in the same manner, is originally approved of,


not as useful, but as just, as delicate, and as precisely suited


to its object. The idea of the utility of all qualities of this


kind, is plainly an after-thought, and not what first recommends


them to our approbation.





    2. With regard to those objects, which affect in a particular


manner either ourselves or the person whose sentiments we judge


of, it is at once more difficult to preserve this harmony and


correspondence, and at the same time, vastly more important. My


companion does not naturally look upon the misfortune that has


befallen me, or the injury that has been done me, from the same


point of view in which I consider them. They affect me much more


nearly. We do not view them from the same station, as we do a


picture, or a poem, or a system of philosophy, and are,


therefore, apt to be very differently affected by them. But I can


much more easily overlook the want of this correspondence of


sentiments with regard to such indifferent objects as concern


neither me nor my companion, than with regard to what interests


me so much as the misfortune that has befallen me, or the injury


that has been done me. Though you despise that picture, or that


poem, or even that system of philosophy, which I admire, there is


little danger of our quarrelling upon that account. Neither of us


can reasonably be much interested about them. They ought all of


them to be matters of great indifference to us both; so that,


though our opinions may be opposite, our affections may still be


very nearly the same. But it is quite otherwise with regard to


those objects by which either you or I are particularly affected.


Though your judgments in matters of speculation, though your


sentiments in matters of taste, are quite opposite to mine, I can


easily overlook this opposition; and if I have any degree of


temper, I may still find some entertainment in your conversation,


even upon those very subjects. But if you have either no


fellow-feeling for the misfortunes I have met with, or none that


bears any proportion to the grief which distracts me; or if you


have either no indignation at the injuries I have suffered, or


none that bears any proportion to the resentment which transports


me, we can no longer converse upon these subjects. We become


intolerable to one another. I can neither support your company,


nor you mine. You are confounded at my violence and passion, and


I am enraged at your cold insensibility and want of feeling.


    In all such cases, that there may be some correspondence of


sentiments between the spectator and the person principally


concerned, the spectator must, first of all, endeavour, as much


as he can, to put himself in the situation of the other, and to


bring home to himself every little circumstance of distress which


can possibly occur to the sufferer. He must adopt the whole case


of his companion with all its minutest incidents; and strive to


render as perfect as possible, that imaginary change of situation


upon which his sympathy is founded.


    After all this, however, the emotions of the spectator will


still be very apt to fall short of the violence of what is felt


by the sufferer. Mankind, though naturally sympathetic, never


conceive, for what has befallen another, that degree of passion


which naturally animates the person principally concerned. That


imaginary change of situation, upon which their sympathy is


founded, is but momentary. The thought of their own safety, the


thought that they themselves are not really the sufferers,


continually intrudes itself upon them; and though it does not


hinder them from conceiving a passion somewhat analogous to what


is felt by the sufferer, hinders them from conceiving any thing


that approaches to the same degree of violence. The person


principally concerned is sensible of this, and at the same time


passionately desires a more complete sympathy. He longs for that


relief which nothing can afford him but the entire concord of the


affections of the spectators with his own. To see the emotions of


their hearts, in every respect, beat time to his own, in the


violent and disagreeable passions, constitutes his sole


consolation. But he can only hope to obtain this by lowering his


passion to that pitch, in which the spectators are capable of


going along with him. He must flatten, if I may be allowed to say


so, the sharpness of its natural tone, in order to reduce it to


harmony and concord with the emotions of those who are about him.


What they feel, will, indeed, always be, in some respects,


different from what he feels, and compassion can never be exactly


the same with original sorrow; because the secret consciousness


that the change of situations, from which the sympathetic


sentiment arises, is but imaginary, not only lowers it in degree,


but, in some measure, varies it in kind, and gives it a quite


different modification. These two sentiments, however, may, it is


evident, have such a correspondence with one another, as is


sufficient for the harmony of society. Though they will never be


unisons, they may be concords, and this is all that is wanted or


required.


    In order to produce this concord, as nature teaches the


spectators to assume the circumstances of the person principally


concerned, so she teaches this last in some measure to assume


those of the spectators. As they are continually placing


themselves in his situation, and thence conceiving emotions


similar to what he feels; so he is as constantly placing himself


in theirs, and thence conceiving some degree of that coolness


about his own fortune, with which he is sensible that they will


view it. As they are constantly considering what they themselves


would feel, if they actually were the sufferers, so he is as


constantly led to imagine in what manner he would be affected if


he was only one of the spectators of his own situation. As their


sympathy makes them look at it, in some measure, with his eyes,


so his sympathy makes him look at it, in some measure, with


theirs, especially when in their presence and acting under their


observation: and as the reflected passion, which he thus


conceives, is much weaker than the original one, it necessarily


abates the violence of what he felt before he came into their


presence, before he began to recollect in what manner they would


be affected by it, and to view his situation in this candid and


impartial light.


    The mind, therefore, is rarely so disturbed, but that the


company of a friend will restore it to some degree of


tranquillity and sedateness. The breast is, in some measure,


calmed and composed the moment we come into his presence. We are


immediately put in mind of the light in which he will view our


situation, and we begin to view it ourselves in the same light;


for the effect of sympathy is instantaneous. We expect less


sympathy from a common acquaintance than from a friend: we cannot


open to the former all those little circumstances which we can


unfold to the latter: we assume, therefore, more tranquillity


before him, and endeavour to fix our thoughts upon those general


outlines of our situation which he is willing to consider. We


expect still less sympathy from an assembly of strangers, and we


assume, therefore, still more tranquillity before them, and


always endeavour to bring down our passion to that pitch, which


the particular company we are in may be expected to go along


with. Nor is this only an assumed appearance: for if we are at


all masters of ourselves, the presence of a mere acquaintance


will really compose us, still more than that of a friend; and


that of an assembly of strangers still more than that of an


acquaintance.


    Society and conversation, therefore, are the most powerful


remedies for restoring the mind to its tranquillity, if, at any


time, it has unfortunately lost it; as well as the best


preservatives of that equal and happy temper, which is so


necessary to self-satisfaction and enjoyment. Men of retirement


and speculation, who are apt to sit brooding at home over either


grief or resentment, though they may often have more humanity,


more generosity, and a nicer sense of honour, yet seldom possess


that equality of temper which is so common among men of the


world.





Chap. V





Of the amiable and respectable virtues





    Upon these two different efforts, upon that of the spectator


to enter into the sentiments of the person principally concerned,


and upon that of the person principally concerned, to bring down


his emotions to what the spectator can go along with, are founded


two different sets of virtues. The soft, the gentle, the amiable


virtues, the virtues of candid condescension and indulgent


humanity, are founded upon the one: the great, the awful and


respectable, the virtues of self-denial, of self-government, of


that command of the passions which subjects all the movements of


our nature to what our own dignity and honour, and the propriety


of our own conduct require, take their origin from the other.


    How amiable does he appear to be, whose sympathetic heart


seems to reecho all the sentiments of those with whom he


converses, who grieves for their calamities, who resents their


injuries, and who rejoices at their good fortune! When we bring


home to ourselves the situation of his companions, we enter into


their gratitude, and feel what consolation they must derive from


the tender sympathy of so affectionate a friend. And for a


contrary reason, how disagreeable does he appear to be, whose


hard and obdurate heart feels for himself only, but is altogether


insensible to the happiness or misery of others! We enter, in


this case too, into the pain which his presence must give to


every mortal with whom he converses, to those especially with


whom we are most apt to sympathize, the unfortunate and the


injured.


    On the other hand, what noble propriety and grace do we feel


in the conduct of those who, in their own case, exert that


recollection and self-command which constitute the dignity of


every passion, and which bring it down to what others can enter


into! We are disgusted with that clamorous grief, which, without


any delicacy, calls upon our compassion with sighs and tears and


importunate lamentations. But we reverence that reserved, that


silent and majestic sorrow, which discovers itself only in the


swelling of the eyes, in the quivering of the lips and cheeks,


and in the distant, but affecting, coldness of the whole


behaviour. It imposes the like silence upon us. We regard it with


respectful attention, and watch with anxious concern over our


whole behaviour, lest by any impropriety we should disturb that


concerted tranquillity, which it requires so great an effort to


support.


    The insolence and brutality of anger, in the same manner,


when we indulge its fury without check or restraint, is, of all


objects, the most detestable. But we admire that noble and


generous resentment which governs its pursuit of the greatest


injuries, not by the rage which they are apt to excite in the


breast of the sufferer, but by the indignation which they


naturally call forth in that of the impartial spectator; which


allows no word, no gesture, to escape it beyond what this more


equitable sentiment would dictate; which never, even in thought,


attempts any greater vengeance, nor desires to inflict any


greater punishment, than what every indifferent person would


rejoice to see executed.


    And hence it is, that to feel much for others and little for


ourselves, that to restrain our selfish, and to indulge our


benevolent affections, constitutes the perfection of human


nature; and can alone produce among mankind that harmony of


sentiments and passions in which consists their whole grace and


propriety. As to love our neighbour as we love ourselves is the


great law of Christianity, so it is the great precept of nature


to love ourselves only as we love our neighbour, or what comes to


the same thing, as our neighbour is capable of loving us.


    As taste and good judgment, when they are considered as


qualities which deserve praise and admiration, are supposed to


imply a delicacy of sentiment and an acuteness of understanding


not commonly to be met with; so the virtues of sensibility and


self-command are not apprehended to consist in the ordinary, but


in the uncommon degrees of those qualities. The amiable virtue of


humanity requires, surely, a sensibility, much beyond what is


possessed by the rude vulgar of mankind. The great and exalted


virtue of magnanimity undoubtedly demands much more than that


degree of self-command, which the weakest of mortals is capable


of exerting. As in the common degree of the intellectual


qualities, there is no abilities; so in the common degree of the


moral, there is no virtue. Virtue is excellence, something


uncommonly great and beautiful, which rises far above what is


vulgar and ordinary. The amiable virtues consist in that degree


of sensibility which surprises by its exquisite and unexpected


delicacy and tenderness. The awful and respectable, in that


degree of self-command which astonishes by its amazing


superiority over the most ungovernable passions of human nature.


    There is, in this respect, a considerable difference between


virtue and mere propriety; between those qualities and actions


which deserve to be admired and celebrated, and those which


simply deserve to be approved of. Upon many occasions, to act


with the most perfect propriety, requires no more than that


common and ordinary degree of sensibility or self-command which


the most worthless of mankind are possest of, and sometimes even


that degree is not necessary. Thus, to give a very low instance,


to eat when we are hungry, is certainly, upon ordinary occasions,


perfectly right and proper, and cannot miss being approved of as


such by every body. Nothing, however, could be more absurd than


to say it was virtuous.


    On the contrary, there may frequently be a considerable


degree of virtue in those actions which fall short of the most


perfect propriety; because they may still approach nearer to


perfection than could well be expected upon occasions in which it


was so extremely difficult to attain it: and this is very often


the case upon those occasions which require the greatest


exertions of self-command. There are some situations which bear


so hard upon human nature, that the greatest degree of


self-government, which can belong to so imperfect a creature as


man, is not able to stifle, altogether, the voice of human


weakness, or reduce the violence of the passions to that pitch of


moderation, in which the impartial spectator can entirely enter


into them. Though in those cases, therefore, the behaviour of the


sufferer fall short of the most perfect propriety, it may still


deserve some applause, and even in a certain sense, may be


denominated virtuous. It may still manifest an effort of


generosity and magnanimity of which the greater part of men are


incapable; and though it fails of absolute perfection, it may be


a much nearer approximation towards perfection, than what, upon


such trying occasions, is commonly either to be found or to be


expected.


    In cases of this kind, when we are determining the degree of


blame or applause which seems due to any action, we very


frequently make use of two different standards. The first is the


idea of complete propriety and perfection, which, in those


difficult situations, no human conduct ever did, or ever can


come, up to; and in comparison with which the actions of all men


must for ever appear blameable and imperfect. The second is the


idea of that degree of proximity or distance from this complete


perfection, which the actions of the greater part of men commonly


arrive at. Whatever goes beyond this degree, how far soever it


may be removed from absolute perfection, seems to deserve


applause; and whatever falls short of it, to deserve blame.


    It is in the same manner that we judge of the productions of


all the arts which address themselves to the imagination. When a


critic examines the work of any of the great masters in poetry or


painting, he may sometimes examine it by an idea of perfection,


in his own mind, which neither that nor any other human work will


ever come up to; and as long as he compares it with this


standard, he can see nothing in it but faults and imperfections.


But when he comes to consider the rank which it ought to hold


among other works of the same kind, he necessarily compares it


with a very different standard, the common degree of excellence


which is usually attained in this particular art; and when he


judges of it by this new measure, it may often appear to deserve


the highest applause, upon account of its approaching much nearer


to perfection than the greater part of those works which can be


brought into competition with it.





Section II





Of the Degrees of the different Passions which are consistent


with Propriety





Introduction





    The propriety of every passion excited by objects peculiarly


related to ourselves, the pitch which the spectator can go along


with, must lie, it is evident, in a certain mediocrity. If the


passion is too high, or if it is too low, he cannot enter into


it. Grief and resentment for private misfortunes and injuries may


easily, for example, be too high, and in the greater part of


mankind they are so. They may likewise, though this more rarely


happens, be too low. We denominate the excess, weakness and fury:


and we call the defect stupidity, insensibility, and want of


spirit. We can enter into neither of them, but are astonished and


confounded to see them.


    This mediocrity, however, in which the point of propriety


consists, is different in different passions. It is high in some,


and low in others. There are some passions which it is indecent


to express very strongly, even upon those occasions, in which it


is acknowledged that we cannot avoid feeling them in the highest


degree. And there are others of which the strongest expressions


are upon many occasions extremely graceful, even though the


passions themselves do not, perhaps, arise so necessarily. The


first are those passions with which, for certain reasons, there


is little or no sympathy: the second are those with which, for


other reasons, there is the greatest. And if we consider all the


different passions of human nature, we shall find that they are


regarded as decent, or indecent, just in proportion as mankind


are more or less disposed to sympathize with them.





Chap. I





Of the Passions which take their origin from the body








    1. It is indecent to express any strong degree of those


passions which arise from a certain situation or disposition of


the body; because the company, not being in the same disposition,


cannot be expected to sympathize with them. Violent hunger, for


example, though upon many occasions not only natural, but


unavoidable, is always indecent, and to eat voraciously is


universally regarded as a piece of ill manners. There is,


however, some degree of sympathy, even with hunger. It is


agreeable to see our companions eat with a good appetite, and all


expressions of loathing are offensive. The disposition of body


which is habitual to a man in health, makes his stomach easily


keep time, if I may be allowed so coarse an expression, with the


one, and not with the other. We can sympathize with the distress


it in the which excessive hunger occasions when we read the


description of journal of a siege, or of a sea voyage. We imagine


ourselves in the situation of the sufferers, and thence readily


conceive the grief, the fear and consternation, which must


necessarily distract them. We feel, ourselves, some degree of


those passions, and therefore sympathize with them: but as we do


not grow hungry by reading the description, we cannot properly,


even in this case, be said to sympathize with their hunger.


    It is the same case with the passion by which Nature unites


the two sexes. Though naturally the most furious of all the


passions, all strong expressions of it are upon every occasion


indecent, even between persons in whom its most complete


indulgence is acknowledged by all laws, both human and divine, to


be perfectly innocent. There seems, however, to be some degree of


sympathy even with this passion. To talk to a woman as we would


to a man is improper: it is expected that their company should


inspire us with more gaiety, more pleasantry, and more attention;


and an intire insensibility to the fair sex, renders a man


contemptible in some measure even to the men.


    Such is our aversion for all the appetites which take their


origin from the body: all strong expressions of them are


loathsome and disagreeable. According to some ancient


philosophers, these are the passions which we share in common


with the brutes, and which having no connexion with the


characteristical qualities of human nature, are upon that account


beneath its dignity. But there are many other passions which we


share in common with the brutes, such as resentment, natural


affection, even gratitude, which do not, upon that account,


appear to be so brutal. The true cause of the peculiar disgust


which we conceive for the appetites of the body when we see them


in other men, is that we cannot enter into them. To the person


himself who feels them, as soon as they are gratified, the object


that excited them ceases to be agreeable: even its presence often


becomes offensive to him; he looks round to no purpose for the


charm which transported him the moment before, and he can now as


little enter into his own passion as another person. When we have


dined, we order the covers to be removed; and we should treat in


the same manner the objects of the most ardent and passionate


desires, if they were the objects of no other passions but those


which take their origin from the body.


    In the command of those appetites of the body consists that


virtue which is properly called temperance. To restrain them


within those bounds, which regard to health and fortune


prescribes, is the part of prudence. But to confine them within


those limits, which grace, which propriety, which delicacy, and


modesty require, is the office of temperance.


    2. It is for the same reason that to cry out with bodily


pain, how intolerable soever, appears always unmanly and


unbecoming. There is, however, a good deal of sympathy even with


bodily pain. If, as has already been observed, I see a stroke


aimed, and just ready to fall upon the leg, or arm, of another


person, I naturally shrink and draw back my own leg, or my own


arm: and when it does fall, I feel it in some measure, and am


hurt by it as well as the sufferer. My hurt, however, is, no


doubt, excessively slight, and, upon that account, if he makes


any violent out-cry, as I cannot go along with him, I never fail


to despise him. And this is the case of all the passions which


take their origin from the body: they excite either no sympathy


at all, or such a degree of it, as is altogether disproportioned


to the violence of what is felt by the sufferer.


    It is quite otherwise with those passions which take their


origin from the imagination. The frame of my body can be but


little affected by the alterations which are brought about upon


that of my companion: but my imagination is more ductile, and


more readily assumes, if I may say so, the shape and


configuration of the imaginations of those with whom I am


familiar. A disappointment in love, or ambition, will, upon this


account, call forth more sympathy than the greatest bodily evil.


Those passions arise altogether from the imagination. The person


who has lost his whole fortune, if he is in health, feels nothing


in his body. What he suffers is from the imagination only, which


represents to him the loss of his dignity, neglect from his


friends, contempt from his enemies, dependance, want, and misery,


coming fast upon him; and we sympathize with him more strongly


upon this account, because our imaginations can more readily


mould themselves upon his imagination, than our bodies can mould


themselves upon his body.


    The loss of a leg may generally be regarded as a more real


calamity than the loss of a mistress. It would be a ridiculous


tragedy, however, of which the catastrophe was to turn upon a


loss of that kind. A misfortune of the other kind, how frivolous


soever it may appear to be, has given occasion to many a fine


one.


    Nothing is so soon forgot as pain. The moment it is gone the


whole agony of it is over, and the thought of it can no longer


give us any sort of disturbance. We ourselves cannot then enter


into the anxiety and anguish which we had before conceived. An


unguarded word from a friend will occasion a more durable


uneasiness. The agony which this creates is by no means over with


the word. What at first disturbs us is not the object of the


senses, but the idea of the imagination. As it is an idea,


therefore, which occasions our uneasiness, till time and other


accidents have in some measure effaced it from our memory, the


imagination continues to fret and rankle within, from the thought


of it.


    Pain never calls forth any very lively sympathy unless it is


accompanied with danger. We sympathize with the fear, though not


with the agony of the sufferer. Fear, however, is a passion


derived altogether from the imagination, which represents, with


an uncertainty and fluctuation that increases our anxiety, not


what we really feel, but what we may hereafter possibly suffer.


The gout or the tooth-ach, though exquisitely painful, excite


very little sympathy; more dangerous diseases, though accompanied


with very little pain, excite the highest.


    Some people faint and grow sick at the sight of a chirurgical


operation, and that bodily pain which is occasioned by tearing


the flesh, seems, in them, to excite the most excessive sympathy.


We conceive in a much more lively and distinct manner the pain


which proceeds from an external cause, than we do that which


arises from an internal disorder. I can scarce form an idea of


the agonies of my neighbour when he is tortured with the gout, or


the stone; but I have the clearest conception of what he must


suffer from an incision, a wound, or a fracture. The chief cause,


however, why such objects produce such violent effects upon us,


is their novelty. One who has been witness to a dozen


dissections, and as many amputations, sees, ever after, all


operations of this kind with great indifference, and often with


perfect insensibility. Though we have read or seen represented


more than five hundred tragedies, we shall seldom feel so entire


an abatement of our sensibility to the objects which they


represent to us.


    In some of the Greek tragedies there is an attempt to excite


compassion, by the representation of the agonies of bodily pain.


Philoctetes cries out and faints from the extremity of his


sufferings. Hippolytus and Hercules are both introduced as


expiring under the severest tortures, which, it seems, even the


fortitude of Hercules was incapable of supporting. In all these


cases, however, it is not the pain which interests us, but some


other circumstances. It is not the sore foot, but the solitude,


of Philoctetes which affects us, and diffuses over that charming


tragedy, that romantic wildness, which is so agreeable to the


imagination. The agonies of Hercules and Hippolytus are


interesting only because we foresee that death is to be the


consequence. If those heroes were to recover, we should think the


representation of their sufferings perfectly ridiculous. What a


tragedy would that be of which the distress consisted in a colic.


Yet no pain is more exquisite. These attempts to excite


compassion by the representation of bodily pain, may be regarded


as among the greatest breaches of decorum of which the Greek


theatre has set the example.


    The little sympathy which we feel with bodily pain is the


foundation of the propriety of constancy and patience in enduring


it. The man, who under the severest tortures allows no weakness


to escape him, vents no groan, gives way to no passion which we


do not entirely enter into, commands our highest admiration. His


firmness enables him to keep time with our indifference and


insensibility. We admire and entirely go along with the


magnanimous effort which he makes for this purpose. We approve of


his behaviour, and from our experience of the common weakness of


human nature, we are surprised, and wonder how he should be able


to act so as to deserve approbation. Approbation, mixed and


animated by wonder and surprise, constitutes the sentiment which


is properly called admiration, of which, applause is the natural


expression, as has already been observed. 





Chap. II





Of those Passions which take their origin from a particular turn


or habit of the Imagination





    Even of the passions derived from the imagination, those


which take their origin from a peculiar turn or habit it has


acquired, though they may be acknowledged to be perfectly


natural, are, however, but little sympathized with. The


imaginations of mankind, not having acquired that particular


turn, cannot enter into them; and such passions, though they may


be allowed to be almost unavoidable in some part of life, are


always, in some measure, ridiculous. This is the case with that


strong attachment which naturally grows up between two persons of


different sexes, who have long fixed their thoughts upon one


another. Our imagination not having run in the same channel with


that of the lover, we cannot enter into the eagerness of his


emotions. If our friend has been injured, we readily sympathize


with his resentment, and grow angry with the very person with


whom he is angry. If he has received a benefit, we readily enter


into his gratitude, and have a very high sense of the merit of


his benefactor. But if he is in love, though we may think his


passion just as reasonable as any of the kind, yet we never think


ourselves bound to conceive a passion of the same kind, and for


the same person for whom he has conceived it. The passion appears


to every body, but the man who feels it, entirely disproportioned


to the value of the object; and love, though it is pardoned in a


certain age because we know it is natural, is always laughed at,


because we cannot enter into it. All serious and strong


expressions of it appear ridiculous to a third person; and though


a lover may be good company to his mistress, he is so to nobody


else. He himself is sensible of this; and as long as he continues


in his sober senses, endeavours to treat his own passion with


raillery and ridicule. It is the only style in which we care to


hear of it; because it is the only style in which we ourselves


are disposed to talk of it. We grow weary of the grave, pedantic,


and long-sentenced love of Cowley and Petrarca, who never have


done with exaggerating the violence of their attachments; but the


gaiety of Ovid, and the gallantry of Horace, are always


agreeable.


    But though we feel no proper sympathy with an attachment of


this kind, though we never approach even in imagination towards


conceiving a passion for that particular person, yet as we either


have conceived, or may be disposed to conceive, passions of the


same kind, we readily enter into those high hopes of happiness


which are proposed from its gratification, as well as into that


exquisite distress which is feared from its disappointment. It


interests us not as a passion, but as a situation that gives


occasion to other passions which interest us; to hope, to fear,


and to distress of every kind: in the same manner as in a


description of a sea voyage, it is not the hunger which interests


us, but the distress which that hunger occasions. Though we do


not properly enter into the attachment of the lover, we readily


go along with those expectations of romantic happiness which he


derives from it. We feel how natural it is for the mind, in a


certain situation, relaxed with indolence, and fatigued with the


violence of desire, to long for serenity and quiet, to hope to


find them in the gratification of that passion which distracts


it, and to frame to itself the idea of that life of pastoral


tranquillity and retirement which the elegant, the tender, and


the passionate Tibullus takes so much pleasure in describing; a


life like what the poets describe in the Fortunate Islands, a


life of friendship, liberty, and repose; free from labour, and


from care, and from all the turbulent passions which attend them.


Even scenes of this kind interest us most, when they are painted


rather as what is hoped, than as what is enjoyed. The grossness


of that passion, which mixes with, and is, perhaps, the


foundation of love, disappears when its gratification is far off


and at a distance; but renders the whole offensive, when


described as what is immediately possessed. The happy passion,


upon this account, interests us much less than the fearful and


the melancholy. We tremble for whatever can disappoint such


natural and agreeable hopes: and thus enter into all the anxiety,


and concern, and distress of the lover.


    Hence it is, that, in some modern tragedies and romances,


this passion appears so wonderfully interesting. It is not so


much the love of Castalio and Monimia which attaches us in the


Orphan, as the distress which that love occasions. The author who


should introduce two lovers, in a scene of perfect security,


expressing their mutual fondness for one another, would excite


laughter, and not sympathy. If a scene of this kind is ever


admitted into a tragedy, it is always, in some measure, improper,


and is endured, not from any sympathy with the passion that is


expressed in it, but from concern for the dangers and


difficulties with which the audience foresee that its


gratification is likely to be attended.


    The reserve which the laws of society impose upon the fair


sex, with regard to this weakness, renders it more peculiarly


distressful in them, and, upon that very account, more deeply


interesting. We are charmed with the love of Phaedra, as it is


expressed in the French tragedy of that name, notwithstanding all


the extravagance and guilt which attend it. That very


extravagance and guilt may be said, in some measure, to recommend


it to us. Her fear, her shame, her remorse, her horror, her


despair, become thereby more natural and interesting. All the


secondary passions, if I may be allowed to call them so, which


arise from the situation of love, become necessarily more furious


and violent; and it is with these secondary passions only that we


can properly be said to sympathize.


    Of all the passions, however, which are so extravagantly


disproportioned to the value of their objects, love is the only


one that appears, even to the weakest minds, to have any thing in


it that is either graceful or agreeable. In itself, first of all,


though it may be ridiculous, it is not naturally odious; and


though its consequences are often fatal and dreadful, its


intentions are seldom mischievous. And then, though there is


little propriety in the passion itself, there is a good deal in


some of those which always accompany it. There is in love a


strong mixture of humanity, generosity, kindness, friendship,


esteem; passions with which, of all others, for reasons which


shall be explained immediately, we have the greatest propensity


to sympathize, even notwithstanding we are sensible that they


are, in some measure, excessive. The sympathy which we feel with


them, renders the passion which they accompany less disagreeable,


and supports it in our imagination, notwithstanding all the vices


which commonly go along with it; though in the one sex it


necessarily leads to the last ruin and infamy; and though in the


other, where it is apprehended to be least fatal, it is almost


always attended with an incapacity for labour, a neglect of duty,


a contempt of fame, and even of common reputation.


Notwithstanding all this, the degree of sensibility and


generosity with which it is supposed to be accompanied, renders


it to many the object of vanity. and they are fond of appearing


capable of feeling what would do them no honour if they had


really felt it.


    It is for a reason of the same kind, that a certain reserve


is necessary when we talk of our own friends, our own studies,


our own professions. All these are objects which we cannot expect


should interest our companions in the same degree in which they


interest us. And it is for want of this reserve, that the one


half of mankind make bad company to the other. A philosopher is


company to a philosopher, only. the member of a club, to his own


little knot of companions. 





Chap. III





Of the unsocial Passions





    There is another set of passions, which, though derived from


the imagination, yet before we can enter into them, or regard


them as graceful or becoming, must always be brought down to a


pitch much lower than that to which undisciplined nature would


raise them. These are, hatred and resentment, with all their


different modifications. With regard to all such passions, our


sympathy is divided between the person who feels them, and the


person who is the object of them. The interests of these two are


directly opposite. What our sympathy with the person who feels


them would prompt us to wish for, our fellow-feeling with the


other would lead us to fear. As they are both men, we are


concerned for both, and our fear for what the one may suffer,


damps our resentment for what the other has suffered. Our


sympathy, therefore, with the man who has received the


provocation, necessarily falls short of the passion which


naturally animates him, not only upon account of those general


causes which render all sympathetic passions inferior to the


original ones, but upon account of that particular cause which is


peculiar to itself, our opposite sympathy with another person.


Before resentment, therefore, can become graceful and agreeable,


it must be more humbled and brought down below that pitch to


which it would naturally rise, than almost any other passion.


    Mankind, at the same time, have a very strong sense of the


injuries that are done to another. The villain, in a tragedy or


romance, is as much the object of our indignation, as the hero is


that of our sympathy and affection. We detest Iago as much as we


esteem Othello; and delight as much in the punishment of the one,


as we are grieved at the distress of the other. But though


mankind have so strong a fellow-feeling with the injuries that


are done to their brethren, they do not always resent them the


more that the sufferer appears to resent them. Upon most


occasions, the greater his patience, his mildness, his humanity,


provided it does not appear that he wants spirit, or that fear


was the motive of his forbearance, the higher their resentment


against the person who injured him. The amiableness of the


character exasperates their sense of the atrocity of the injury.


    Those passions, however, are regarded as necessary parts of


the character of human nature. A person becomes contemptible who


tamely sits still, and submits to insults, without attempting


either to repel or to revenge them. We cannot enter into his


indifference and insensibility. we call his behaviour


mean-spiritedness, and are as really provoked by it as by the


insolence of his adversary. Even the mob are enraged to see any


man submit patiently to affronts and ill usage. They desire to


see this insolence resented, and resented by the person who


suffers from it. They cry to him with fury, to defend, or to


revenge himself. If his indignation rouses at last, they heartily


applaud, and sympathize with it. It enlivens their own


indignation against his enemy, whom they rejoice to see him


attack in his turn, and are as really gratified by his revenge,


provided it is not immoderate, as if the injury had been done to


themselves.


    But though the utility of those passions to the individual,


by rendering it dangerous to insult or injure him, be


acknowledged; and though their utility to the public, as the


guardians of justice, and of the equality of its administration,


be not less considerable, as shall be shewn hereafter; yet there


is still something disagreeable in the passions themselves, which


makes the appearance of them in other men the natural object of


our aversion. The expression of anger towards any body present,


if it exceeds a bare intimation that we are sensible of his ill


usage, is regarded not only as an insult to that particular


person, but as a rudeness to the whole company. Respect for them


ought to have restrained us from giving way to so boisterous and


offensive an emotion. It is the remote effects of these passions


which are agreeable; the immediate effects are mischief to the


person against whom they are directed. But it is the immediate,


and not the remote effects of objects which render them agreeable


or disagreeable to the imagination. A prison is certainly more


useful to the public than a palace; and the person who founds the


one is generally directed by a much juster spirit of patriotism,


than he who builds the other. But the immediate effects of a


prison, the confinement of the wretches shut up in it, are


disagreeable; and the imagination either does not take time to


trace out the remote ones, or sees them at too great a distance


to be much affected by them. A prison, therefore, will always be


a disagreeable object; and the fitter it is for the purpose for


which it was intended, it will be the more so. A palace, on the


contrary, will always be agreeable; yet its remote effects may


often be inconvenient to the public. It may serve to promote


luxury, and set the example of the dissolution of manners. Its


immediate effects, however, the conveniency, the pleasure, and


the gaiety of the people who live in it, being all agreeable, and


suggesting to the imagination a thousand agreeable ideas, that


faculty generally rests upon them, and seldom goes further in


tracing its more distant consequences. Trophies of the


instruments of music or of agriculture, imitated in painting or


in stucco, make a common and an agreeable ornament of our halls


and dining-rooms. A trophy of the same kind, composed of the


instruments of surgery, of dissecting and amputation-knives, of


saws for cutting the bones, of trepanning instruments, etc. would


be absurd and shocking. Instruments of surgery, however, are


always more finely polished, and generally more nicely adapted to


the purposes for which they are intended, than instruments of


agriculture. The remote effects of them too, the health of the


patient, is agreeable; yet as the immediate effect of them is


pain and suffering, the sight of them always displeases us.


Instruments of war are agreeable, though their immediate effect


may seem to be in the same manner pain and suffering. But then it


is the pain and suffering of our enemies, with whom we have no


sympathy. With regard to us, they are immediately connected with


the agreeable ideas of courage, victory, and honour. They are


themselves, therefore, supposed to make one of the noblest parts


of dress, and the imitation of them one of the finest ornaments


of architecture. It is the same case with the qualities of the


mind. The ancient stoics were of opinion, that as the world was


governed by the all-ruling providence of a wise, powerful, and


good God, every single event ought to be regarded, as making a


necessary part of the plan of the universe, and as tending to


promote the general order and happiness of the whole: that the


vices and follies of mankind, therefore, made as necessary a part


of this plan as their wisdom or their virtue; and by that eternal


art which educes good from ill, were made to tend equally to the


prosperity and perfection of the great system of nature. No


speculation of this kind, however, how deeply soever it might be


rooted in the mind, could diminish our natural abhorrence for


vice, whose immediate effects are so destructive, and whose


remote ones are too distant to be traced by the imagination.


    It is the same case with those passions we have been just now


considering. Their immediate effects are so disagreeable, that


even when they are most justly provoked, there is still something


about them which disgusts us. These, therefore, are the only


passions of which the expressions, as I formerly observed, do not


dispose and prepare us to sympathize with them, before we are


informed of the cause which excites them. The plaintive voice of


misery, when heard at a distance, will not allow us to be


indifferent about the person from whom it comes. As soon as it


strikes our ear, it interests us in his fortune, and, if


continued, forces us almost involuntarily to fly to his


assistance. The sight of a smiling countenance, in the same


manner, elevates even the pensive into that gay and airy mood,


which disposes him to sympathize with, and share the joy which it


expresses; and he feels his heart, which with thought and care


was before that shrunk and depressed, instantly expanded and


elated. But it is quite otherwise with the expressions of hatred


and resentment. The hoarse, boisterous, and discordant voice of


anger, when heard at a distance, inspires us either with fear or


aversion. We do not fly towards it, as to one who cries out with


pain and agony. Women, and men of weak nerves, tremble and are


overcome with fear, though sensible that themselves are not the


objects of the anger. They conceive fear, however, by putting


themselves in the situation of the person who is so. Even those


of stouter hearts are disturbed; not indeed enough to make them


afraid, but enough to make them angry; for anger is the passion


which they would feel in the situation of the other person. It is


the same case with hatred. Mere expressions of spite inspire it


against nobody, but the man who uses them. Both these passions


are by nature the objects of our aversion. Their disagreeable and


boisterous appearance never excites, never prepares, and often


disturbs our sympathy. Grief does not more powerfully engage and


attract us to the person in whom we observe it, than these, while


we are ignorant of their cause, disgust and detach us from him.


It was, it seems, the intention of Nature, that those rougher and


more unamiable emotions, which drive men from one another, should


be less easily and more rarely communicated.


    When music imitates the modulations of grief or joy, it


either actually inspires us with those passions, or at least puts


us in the mood which disposes us to conceive them. But when it


imitates the notes of anger, it inspires us with fear. Joy,


grief, love, admiration, devotion, are all of them passions which


are naturally musical. Their natural tones are all soft, clear,


and melodious; and they naturally express themselves in periods


which are distinguished by regular pauses, and which upon that


account are easily adapted to the regular returns of the


correspondent airs of a tune. The voice of anger, on the


contrary, and of all the passions which are akin to it, is harsh


and discordant. Its periods too are all irregular, sometimes very


long, and sometimes very short, and distinguished by no regular


pauses. It is with difficulty, therefore, that music can imitate


any of those passions; and the music which does imitate them is


not the most agreeable. A whole entertainment may consist,


without any impropriety, of the imitation of the social and


agreeable passions. It would be a strange entertainment which


consisted altogether of the imitations of hatred and resentment.


    If those passions are disagreeable to the spectator, they are


not less so to the person who feels them. Hatred and anger are


the greatest poison to the happiness of a good mind. There is, in


the very feeling of those passions, something harsh, jarring, and


convulsive, something that tears and distracts the breast, and is


altogether destructive of that composure and tranquillity of mind


which is so necessary to happiness, and which is best promoted by


the contrary passions of gratitude and love. It is not the value


of what they lose by the perfidy and ingratitude of those they


live with, which the generous and humane are most apt to regret.


Whatever they may have lost, they can generally be very happy


without it. What most disturbs them is the idea of perfidy and


ingratitude exercised towards themselves; and the discordant and


disagreeable passions which this excites, constitute, in their


own opinion, the chief part of the injury which they suffer.


    How many things are requisite to render the gratification of


resentment completely agreeable, and to make the spectator


thoroughly sympathize with our revenge? The provocation must


first of all be such that we should become contemptible, and be


exposed to perpetual insults, if we did not, in some measure,


resent it. Smaller offences are always better neglected; nor is


there any thing more despicable than that froward and captious


humour which takes fire upon every slight occasion of quarrel. We


should resent more from a sense of the propriety of resentment,


from a sense that mankind expect and require it of us, than


because we feel in ourselves the furies of that disagreeable


passion. There is no passion, of which the human mind is capable,


concerning whose justness we ought to be so doubtful, concerning


whose indulgence we ought so carefully to consult our natural


sense of propriety, or so diligently to consider what will be the


sentiments of the cool and impartial spectator. Magnanimity, or a


regard to maintain our own rank and dignity in society, is the


only motive which can ennoble the expressions of this


disagreeable passion. This motive must characterize our whole


stile and deportment. These must be plain, open, and direct;


determined without positiveness, and elevated without insolence;


not only free from petulance and low scurrility, but generous,


candid, and full of all proper regards, even for the person who


has offended us. It must appear, in short, from our whole manner,


without our labouring affectedly to express it, that passion has


not extinguished our humanity; and that if we yield to the


dictates of revenge, it is with reluctance, from necessity, and


in consequence of great and repeated provocations. When


resentment is guarded and qualified in this manner, it may be


admitted to be even generous and noble.





Chap. IV





Of the social Passions





    As it is a divided sympathy which renders the whole set of


passions just now mentioned, upon most occasions, so ungraceful


and disagreeable; so there is another set opposite to these,


which a redoubled sympathy renders almost always peculiarly


agreeable and becoming. Generosity, humanity, kindness,


compassion, mutual friendship and esteem, all the social and


benevolent affections, when expressed in the countenance or


behaviour, even towards those who are not peculiarly connected


with ourselves, please the indifferent spectator upon almost


every occasion. His sympathy with the person who feels those


passions, exactly coincides with his concern for the person who


is the object of them. The interest, which, as a man, he is


obliged to take in the happiness of this last, enlivens his


fellow-feeling with the sentiments of the other, whose emotions


are employed about the same object. We have always, therefore,


the strongest disposition to sympathize with the benevolent


affections. They appear in every respect agreeable to us. We


enter into the satisfaction both of the person who feels them,


and of the person who is the object of them. For as to be the


object of hatred and indignation gives more pain than all the


evil which a brave man can fear from his enemies; so there is a


satisfaction in the consciousness of being beloved, which, to a


person of delicacy and sensibility, is of more importance to


happiness, than all the advantage which he can expect to derive


from it. What character is so detestable as that of one who takes


pleasure to sow dissension among friends, and to turn their most


tender love into mortal hatred? Yet wherein does the atrocity of


this so much abhorred injury consist? Is it in depriving them of


the frivolous good offices, which, had their friendship


continued, they might have expected from one another? It is in


depriving them of that friendship itself, in robbing them of each


other's affections, from which both derived so much satisfaction;


it is in disturbing the harmony of their hearts, and putting an


end to that happy commerce which had before subsisted between


them. These affections, that harmony, this commerce, are felt,


not only by the tender and the delicate, but by the rudest vulgar


of mankind, to be of more importance to happiness than all the


little services which could be expected to flow from them.


    The sentiment of love is, in itself, agreeable to the person


who feels it. It sooths and composes the breast, seems to favour


the vital motions, and to promote the healthful state of the


human constitution; and it is rendered still more delightful by


the consciousness of the gratitude and satisfaction which it must


excite in him who is the object of it. Their mutual regard


renders them happy in one another, and sympathy, with this mutual


regard, makes them agreeable to every other person. With what


pleasure do we look upon a family, through the whole of which


reign mutual love and esteem, where the parents and children are


companions for one another, without any other difference than


what is made by respectful affection on the one side, and kind


indulgence on the other. where freedom and fondness, mutual


raillery and mutual kindness, show that no opposition of interest


divides the brothers, nor any rivalship of favour sets the


sisters at variance, and where every thing presents us with the


idea of peace, cheerfulness, harmony, and contentment? On the


contrary, how uneasy are we made when we go into a house in which


jarring contention sets one half of those who dwell in it against


the other; where amidst affected smoothness and complaisance,


suspicious looks and sudden starts of passion betray the mutual


jealousies which burn within them, and which are every moment


ready to burst out through all the restraints which the presence


of the company imposes?


    Those amiable passions, even when they are acknowledged to be


excessive, are never regarded with aversion. There is something


agreeable even in the weakness of friendship and humanity. The


too tender mother, the too indulgent father, the too generous and


affectionate friend, may sometimes, perhaps, on account of the


softness of their natures, be looked upon with a species of pity,


in which, however, there is a mixture of love, but can never be


regarded with hatred and aversion, nor even with contempt, unless


by the most brutal and worthless of mankind. It is always with


concern, with sympathy and kindness, that we blame them for the


extravagance of their attachment. There is a helplessness in the


character of extreme humanity which more than any thing interests


our pity. There is nothing in itself which renders it either


ungraceful or disagreeable. We only regret that it is unfit for


the world, because the world is unworthy of it, and because it


must expose the person who is endowed with it as a prey to the


perfidy and ingratitude of insinuating falsehood, and to a


thousand pains and uneasinesses, which, of all men, he the least


deserves to feel, and which generally too he is, of all men, the


least capable of supporting. It is quite otherwise with hatred


and resentment. Too violent a propensity to those detestable


passions, renders a person the object of universal dread and


abhorrence, who, like a wild beast, ought, we think, to be hunted


out of all civil society. 





Chap. V





Of the selfish Passions





    Besides those two opposite sets of passions, the social and


unsocial, there is another which holds a sort of middle place


between them; is never either so graceful as is sometimes the one


set, nor is ever so odious as is sometimes the other. Grief and


joy, when conceived upon account of our own private good or bad


fortune, constitute this third set of passions. Even when


excessive, they are never so disagreeable as excessive


resentment, because no opposite sympathy can ever interest us


against them: and when most suitable to their objects, they are


never so agreeable as impartial humanity and just benevolence;


because no double sympathy can ever interest us for them. There


is, however, this difference between grief and joy, that we are


generally most disposed to sympathize with small joys and great


sorrows. The man who, by some sudden revolution of fortune, is


lifted up all at once into a condition of life, greatly above


what he had formerly lived in, may be assured that the


congratulations of his best friends are not all of them perfectly


sincere. An upstart, though of the greatest merit, is generally


disagreeable, and a sentiment of envy commonly prevents us from


heartily sympathizing with his joy. If he has any judgment, he is


sensible of this, and instead of appearing to be elated with his


good fortune, he endeavours, as much as he can, to smother his


joy, and keep down that elevation of mind with which his new


circumstances naturally inspire him. He affects the same


plainness of dress, and the same modesty of behaviour, which


became him in his former station. He redoubles his attention to


his old friends, and endeavours more than ever to be humble,


assiduous, and complaisant. And this is the behaviour which in


his situation we most approve of; because we expect, it seems,


that he should have more sympathy with our envy and aversion to


his happiness, than we have with his happiness. It is seldom that


with all this he succeeds. We suspect the sincerity of his


humility, and he grows weary of this constraint. In a little


time, therefore, he generally leaves all his old friends behind


him, some of the meanest of them excepted, who may, perhaps,


condescend to become his dependents: nor does he always acquire


any new ones; the pride of his new connections is as much


affronted at finding him their equal, as that of his old ones had


been by his becoming their superior: and it requires the most


obstinate and persevering modesty to atone for this mortification


to either. He generally grows weary too soon, and is provoked, by


the sullen and suspicious pride of the one, and by the saucy


contempt of the other, to treat the first with neglect, and the


second with petulance, till at last he grows habitually insolent,


and forfeits the esteem of all. If the chief part of human


happiness arises from the consciousness of being beloved, as I


believe it does, those sudden changes of fortune seldom


contribute much to happiness. He is happiest who advances more


gradually to greatness, whom the public destines to every step of


his preferment long before he arrives at it, in whom, upon that


account, when it comes, it can excite no extravagant joy, and


with regard to whom it cannot reasonably create either any


jealousy in those he overtakes, or any envy in those he leaves


behind.


    Mankind, however, more readily sympathize with those smaller


joys which flow from less important causes. It is decent to be


humble amidst great prosperity; but we can scarce express too


much satisfaction in all the little occurrences of common life,


in the company with which we spent the evening last night, in the


entertainment that was set before us, in what was said and what


was done, in all the little incidents of the present


conversation, and in all those frivolous nothings which fill up


the void of human life. Nothing is more graceful than habitual


cheerfulness, which is always founded upon a peculiar relish for


all the little pleasures which common occurrences afford. We


readily sympathize with it: it inspires us with the same joy, and


makes every trifle turn up to us in the same agreeable aspect in


which it presents itself to the person endowed with this happy


disposition. Hence it is that youth, the season of gaiety, so


easily engages our affections. That propensity to joy which seems


even to animate the bloom, and to sparkle from the eyes of youth


and beauty, though in a person of the same sex, exalts, even the


aged, to a more joyous mood than ordinary. They forget, for a


time, their infirmities, and abandon themselves to those


agreeable ideas and emotions to which they have long been


strangers, but which, when the presence of so much happiness


recalls them to their breast, take their place there, like old


acquaintance, from whom they are sorry to have ever been parted,


and whom they embrace more heartily upon account of this long


separation.


    It is quite otherwise with grief. Small vexations excite no


sympathy, but deep affliction calls forth the greatest. The man


who is made uneasy by every little disagreeable incident, who is


hurt if either the cook or the butler have failed in the least


article of their duty, who feels every defect in the highest


ceremonial of politeness, whether it be shewn to himself or to


any other person, who takes it amiss that his intimate friend did


not bid him good-morrow when they met in the forenoon, and that


his brother hummed a tune all the time he himself was telling a


story; who is put out of humour by the badness of the weather


when in the country, by the badness of the roads when upon a


journey, and by the want of company, and dulness of all public


diversions when in town; such a person, I say, though he should


have some reason, will seldom meet with much sympathy. Joy is a


pleasant emotion, and we gladly abandon ourselves to it upon the


slightest occasion. We readily, therefore, sympathize with it in


others, whenever we are not prejudiced by envy. But grief is


painful, and the mind, even when it is our own misfortune,


naturally resists and recoils from it. We would endeavour either


not to conceive it at all, or to shake it off as soon as we have


conceived it. Our aversion to grief will not, indeed, always


hinder us from conceiving it in our own case upon very trifling


occasions, but it constantly prevents us from sympathizing with


it in others when excited by the like frivolous causes: for our


sympathetic passions are always less irresistible than our


original ones. There is, besides, a malice in mankind, which not


only prevents all sympathy with little uneasinesses, but renders


them in some measure diverting. Hence the delight which we all


take in raillery, and in the small vexation which we observe in


our companion, when he is pushed, and urged, and teased upon all


sides. Men of the most ordinary good-breeding dissemble the pain


which any little incident may give them; and those who are more


thoroughly formed to society, turn, of their own accord, all such


incidents into raillery, as they know their companions will do


for them. The habit which a man, who lives in the world, has


acquired of considering how every thing that concerns himself


will appear to others, makes those frivolous calamities turn up


in the same ridiculous light to him, in which he knows they will


certainly be considered by them.


    Our sympathy, on the contrary, with deep distress, is very


strong and very sincere. It is unnecessary to give an instance.


We weep even at the feigned representation of a tragedy. If you


labour, therefore, under any signal calamity, if by some


extraordinary misfortune you are fallen into poverty, into


diseases, into disgrace and disappointment; even though your own


fault may have been, in part, the occasion, yet you may generally


depend upon the sincerest sympathy of all your friends, and, as


far as interest and honour will permit, upon their kindest


assistance too. But if your misfortune is not of this dreadful


kind, if you have only been a little baulked in your ambition, if


you have only been jilted by your mistress, or are only


hen-pecked by your wife, lay your account with the raillery of


all your acquaintance. 





Section III





Of the Effects of Prosperity and Adversity upon the Judgment of


Mankind with regard to the Propriety of Action; and why it is


more easy to obtain their Aprobation in the one state than in the


other





Chap. I





That though our sympathy with sorrow is generally a more lively


sensation than our sympathy with joy, it commonly falls much more


short of the violence of what is naturally felt by the person


principally concerned





    Our sympathy with sorrow, though not more real, has been more


taken notice of than our sympathy with joy. The word sympathy, in


its most proper and primitive signification, denotes our


fellow-feeling with the sufferings, not that with the enjoyments,


of others. A late ingenious and subtile philosopher thought it


necessary to prove, by arguments, that we had a real sympathy


with joy, and that congratulation was a principle of human


nature. Nobody, I believe, ever thought it necessary to prove


that compassion was such.


    First of all, our sympathy with sorrow is, in some sense,


more universal than that with joy. Though sorrow is excessive, we


may still have some fellow-feeling with it. What we feel does


not, indeed, in this case, amount to that complete sympathy, to


that perfect harmony and correspondence of sentiments which


constitutes approbation. We do not weep, and exclaim, and lament,


with the sufferer. We are sensible, on the contrary, of his weak


ness and of the extravagance of his passion, and yet often feel a


very sensible concern upon his account. But if we do not entirely


enter into, and go along with, the joy of another, we have no


sort of regard or fellow-feeling for it. The man who skips and


dances about with that intemperate and senseless joy which we


cannot accompany him in, is the object of our contempt and


indignation.


    Pain besides, whether of mind or body, is a more pungent


sensation than pleasure, and our sympathy with pain, though it


falls greatly short of what is naturally felt by the sufferer, is


generally a more lively and distinct perception than our sympathy


with pleasure, though this last often approaches more nearly, as


I shall shew immediately, to the natural vivacity of the original


passion.


    Over and above all this, we often struggle to keep down our


sympathy with the sorrow of others. Whenever we are not under the


observation of the sufferer, we endeavour, for our own sake, to


suppress it as much as we can, and we are not always successful.


The opposition which we make to it, and the reluctance with which


we yield to it, necessarily oblige us to take more particular


notice of it. But we never have occasion to make this opposition


to our sympathy with joy. If there is any envy in the case, we


never feel the least propensity towards it; and if there is none,


we give way to it without any reluctance. On the contrary, as we


are always ashamed of our own envy, we often pretend, and


sometimes really wish to sympathize with the joy of others, when


by that disagreeable sentiment we are disqualified from doing so.


We are glad, we say on account of our neighbour's good fortune,


when in our hearts, perhaps, we are really sorry. We often feel a


sympathy with sorrow when we would wish to be rid of it; and we


often miss that with joy when we would be glad to have it. The


obvious observation, therefore, which it naturally falls in our


way to make, is, that our propensity to sympathize with sorrow


must be very strong, and our inclination to sympathize with joy


very weak.


    Notwithstanding this prejudice, however, I will venture to


affirm, that, when there is no envy in the case, our propensity


to sympathize with joy is much stronger than our propensity to


sympathize with sorrow; and that our fellow-feeling for the


agreeable emotion approaches much more nearly to the vivacity of


what is naturally felt by the persons principally concerned, than


that which we conceive for the painful one.


    We have some indulgence for that excessive grief which we


cannot entirely go along with. We know what a prodigious effort


is requisite before the sufferer can bring down his emotions. to


complete harmony and concord with those of the spectator. Though


he fails, therefore, we easily pardon him. But we have no such


indulgence for the intemperance of joy; because we are not


conscious that any such vast effort is requisite to bring it down


to what we can entirely enter into. The man who, under the


greatest calamities, can command his sorrow, seems worthy of the


highest admiration; but he who, in the fulness of prosperity, can


in the same manner master his joy, seems hardly to deserve any


praise. We are sensible that there is a much wider interval in


the one case than in the other, between what is naturally felt by


the person principally concerned, and what the spectator can


entirely go along with. 


    What can he added to the happiness of the man who is in


health, who is out of debt, and has a clear conscience? To one in


this situation, all accessions of fortune may properly be said to


be superfluous; and if he is much elevated upon account of them,


it must be the effect of the most frivolous levity. This


situation, however, may very well be called the natural and


ordinary state of mankind. Notwithstanding the present misery and


depravity of the world, so justly lamented, this really is the


state of the greater part of men. The greater part of men,


therefore, cannot find any great difficulty in elevating


themselves to all the joy which any accession to this situation


can well excite in their companion.


    But though little can be added to this state, much may be


taken from it. Though between this condition and the highest


pitch of human prosperity, the interval is but a trifle; between


it and the lowest depth of misery the distance is immense and


prodigious. Adversity, on this account, necessarily depresses the


mind of the sufferer much more below its natural state, than


prosperity can elevate him above it. The spectator therefore,


must find it much more difficult to sympathize entirely, and keep


perfect time, with his sorrow, than thoroughly to enter into his


joy, and must depart much further from his own natural and


ordinary temper of mind in the one case than in the other. It is


on this account, that though our sympathy with sorrow is often a


more pungent sensation than our sympathy with joy, it always


falls much more short of the violence of what is naturally felt


by the person principally concerned.


    It is agreeable to sympathize with, joy; and wherever envy


does not oppose it, our heart abandons itself with satisfaction


to the highest transports of that delightful sentiment. But it is


painful to go along with grief, and we always enter into it with


reluctance.(*) When we attend to the representation of a tragedy,


we struggle against that sympathetic sorrow which the


entertainment inspires as long as we can, and we give way to it


at last only when we can no longer avoid it: we even then


endeavour to cover our concern from the company. If we shed any


tears, we carefully conceal them, and are afraid, lest the


spectators, not entering into this excessive tenderness, should


regard it as effeminacy and weakness. The wretch whose


misfortunes call upon our compassion feels with what reluctance


we are likely to enter into his sorrow, and therefore proposes


his grief to us with fear and hesitation: he even smothers the


half of it, and is ashamed, upon account of this hard-heartedness


of mankind, to give vent to the fulness of his affliction. It is


otherwise with the man who riots in joy and success. Wherever


envy does not interest us against him, he expects our completest


sympathy. He does not fear, therefore, to announce himself with


shouts of exultation, in full confidence that we are heartily


disposed to go along with him.


    Why should we be more ashamed to weep than to laugh before


company? We may often have as real occasion to do the one as to


do the other. but we always feel that the spectators are more


likely to go along with us in the agreeable, than in the painful


emotion. It is always miserable to complain, even when we are


oppressed by the most dreadful calamities. But the triumph of


victory is not always ungraceful. Prudence, indeed, would often


advise us to bear our prosperity with more moderation; because


prudence would teach us to avoid that envy which this very


triumph is, more than any thing, apt to excite.


    How hearty are the acclamations of the mob, who never bear


any envy to their superiors, at a triumph or a public entry? And


how sedate and moderate is commonly their grief at an execution?


Our sorrow at a funeral generally amounts to no more than an


affected gravity. but our mirth at a christening or a marriage,


is always from the heart, and without any affectation. Upon


these, and all such joyous occasions, our satisfaction, though


not so durable, is often as lively as that of the persons


principally concerned. Whenever we cordially congratulate our


friends, which, however, to the disgrace of human nature, we do


but seldom, their joy literally becomes our joy. we are, for the


moment, as happy as they are: our heart swells and overflows with


real pleasure: joy and complacency sparkle from our eyes, and


animate every feature of our countenance, and every gesture of


our body.


    But, on the contrary, when we condole with our friends in


their afflictions, how little do we feel, in comparison of what


they feel? We sit down by them, we look at them, and while they


relate to us the circumstances of their misfortune, we listen to


them with gravity and attention. But while their narration is


every moment interrupted by those natural bursts of passion which


often seem almost to choak them in the midst of it; how far are


the languid emotions of our hearts from keeping time to the


transports of theirs? We may be sensible, at the same time, that


their passion is natural, and no greater than what we ourselves


might feel upon the like occasion. We may even inwardly reproach


ourselves with our own want of sensibility, and perhaps, on that


account, work ourselves up into an artificial sympathy, which,


however, when it is raised, is always the slightest and most


transitory imaginable; and generally, as soon as we have left the


room, vanishes, and is gone for ever. Nature, it seems, when she


loaded us with our own sorrows, thought that they were enough,


and therefore did not command us to take any further share in


those of others, than what was necessary to prompt us to relieve


them.


    It is on account of this dull sensibility to the afflictions


of others, that magnanimity amidst great distress appears always


so divinely graceful. His behaviour is genteel and agreeable who


can maintain his cheerfulness amidst a number of frivolous


disasters. But he appears to be more than mortal who can support


in the same manner the most dreadful calamities. We feel what an


immense effort is requisite to silence those violent emotions


which naturally agitate and distract those in his situation. We


are amazed to find that he can command himself so entirely. His


firmness, at the same time, perfectly coincides with our


insensibility. He makes no demand upon us for that more exquisite


degree of sensibility which we find, and which we are mortified


to find, that we do not possess. There is the most perfect


correspondence between his sentiments and ours, and on that


account the most perfect propriety in his behaviour. It is a


propriety too, which, from our experience of the usual weakness


of human nature, we could not reasonably have expected he should


be able to maintain. We wonder with surprise and astonishment at


that strength of mind which is capable of so noble and generous


an effort. The sentiment of complete sympathy and approbation,


mixed and animated with wonder and surprise, constitutes what is


properly called admiration, as has already been more than once


taken notice of Cato, surrounded on all sides by his enemies,


unable to resist them, disdaining to submit to them, and reduced,


by the proud maxims of that age, to the necessity of destroying


himself; yet never shrinking from his misfortunes, never


supplicating with the lamentable voice of wretchedness, those


miserable sympathetic tears which we are always so unwilling to


give; but on the contrary, arming himself with manly fortitude,


and the moment before he executes his fatal resolution, giving,


with his usual tranquillity, all necessary orders for the safety


of his friends; appears to Seneca, that great preacher of


insensibility, a spectacle which even the gods themselves might


behold with pleasure and admiration.


    Whenever we meet, in common life, with any examples of such


heroic magnanimity, we are always extremely affected. We are more


apt to weep and shed tears for such as, in this manner, seem to


feel nothing for them. and in selves, than for those who give way


to all the weakness of sorrow: this particular case, the


sympathetic grief of the spectator appears to go beyond the


original passion in the person principally concerned. The friends


of Socrates all wept when he drank the last potion, while he


himself expressed the gayest and most cheerful tranquillity. Upon


all such occasions the spectator makes no effort, and has no


occasion to make any, in order to conquer his sympathetic sorrow.


He is under no fear that it will transport him to any thing that


is extravagant and improper; he is rather pleased with the


sensibility of his own heart, and gives way to it with


complacence and self-approbation. He gladly indulges, therefore,


the most melancholy views which can naturally occur to him,


concerning the calamity of his friend, for whom, perhaps, he


never felt so exquisitely before, the tender and tearful passion


of love. But it is quite otherwise with the person principally


concerned. He is obliged, as much as possible, to turn away his


eyes from whatever is either naturally terrible or disagreeable


in his situation. Too serious an attention to those


circumstances, he fears, might make so violent an impression upon


him, that he could no longer keep within the bounds of


moderation, or render himself the object of the complete sympathy


and approbation of the spectators. He fixes his thoughts,


therefore, upon those only which are agreeable, the applause and


admiration which he is about to deserve by the heroic magnanimity


of his behaviour. To feel that he is capable of so noble and


generous an effort, to feel that in this dreadful situation he


can still act as he would desire to act, animates and transports


him with joy, and enables him to support that triumphant gaiety


which seems to exult in the victory he thus gains over his


misfortunes.


    On the contrary, he always appears, in some measure, mean and


despicable, who is sunk in sorrow and dejection upon account of


any calamity of his own. We cannot bring ourselves to feel for


him what he feels for himself, and what, perhaps, we should feel


for ourselves if in his situation: we, therefore, despise him;


unjustly, perhaps, if any sentiment could be regarded as unjust,


to which we are by nature irresistibly determined. The weakness


of sorrow never appears in any respect agreeable, except when it


arises from what we feel for others more than from what we feel


for ourselves. A son, upon the death of an indulgent and


respectable father, may give way to it without much blame. His


sorrow is chiefly founded upon a sort of sympathy with his


departed parent and we readily enter into this humane emotion.


But if he should indulge the same weakness upon account of any


misfortune which affected himself only, he would no longer meet


with any such indulgence. If he should be reduced to beggary and


ruin, if he should be exposed to the most dreadful dangers, if he


should even be led out to a public execution, and there shed one


single tear upon the scaffold, he would disgrace himself for ever


in the opinion of all the gallant and generous part of mankind.


Their compassion for him, however, would be very strong, and very


sincere; but as it would still fall short of this excessive


weakness, they would have no pardon for the man who could thus


expose himself in the eyes of the world. His behaviour would


affect them with shame rather than with sorrow; and the dishonour


which he had thus brought upon himself would appear to them the


most lamentable circumstance in his misfortune. How did it


disgrace the memory of the intrepid Duke of Biron, who had so


often braved death in the field, that he wept upon the scaffold,


when he beheld the state to which he was fallen, and remembered


the favour and the glory from which his own rashness had so


unfortunately thrown him! 





Chap. II





Of the origin of Ambition, and of the distinction of Ranks





    It is because mankind are disposed to sympathize more


entirely with our joy than with our sorrow, that we make parade


of our riches, and conceal our poverty. Nothing is so mortifying


as to be obliged to expose our distress to the view of the


public, and to feel, that though our situation is open to the


eyes of all mankind, no mortal conceives for us the half of what


we suffer. Nay, it is chiefly from this regard to the sentiments


of mankind, that we pursue riches and avoid poverty. For to what


purpose is all the toil and bustle of this world? what is the end


of avarice and ambition, of the pursuit of wealth, of power, and


preheminence? Is it to supply the necessities of nature? The


wages of the meanest labourer can supply them. We see that they


afford him food and clothing, the comfort of a house, and of a


family. If we examined his oeconomy with rigour, we should find


that he spends a great part of them upon conveniencies, which may


be regarded as superfluities, and that, upon extraordinary


occasions, he can give something even to vanity and distinction.


What then is the cause of our aversion to his situation, and why


should those who have been educated in the higher ranks of life,


regard it as worse than death, to be reduced to live, even


without labour, upon the same simple fare with him, to dwell


under the same lowly roof, and to be clothed in the same humble.


attire? Do they imagine that their stomach is better, or their


sleep sounder in a palace than in a cottage? The contrary has


been so often observed, and, indeed, is so very obvious, though


it had never been observed, that there is nobody ignorant of it.


From whence, then, arises that emulation which runs through all


the different ranks of men, and what are the advantages which we


propose by that great purpose of human life which we call


bettering our condition? To be observed, to be attended to, to be


taken notice of with sympathy, complacency, and approbation, are


all the advantages which we can propose to derive from it. It is


the vanity, not the ease, or the pleasure, which interests us.


But vanity is always founded upon the belief of our being the


object of attention and approbation. The rich man glories in his


riches, because he feels that they naturally draw upon him the


attention of the world, and that mankind are disposed to go along


with him in all those agreeable emotions with which the


advantages of his situation so readily inspire him. At the


thought of this, his heart seems to swell and dilate itself


within him, and he is fonder of his wealth, upon this account,


than for all the other advantages it procures him. The poor man,


on the contrary, is ashamed of his poverty. He feels that it


either places him out of the sight of mankind, or, that if they


take any notice of him, they have, however, scarce any


fellow-feeling with the misery and distress which he suffers. He


is mortified upon both accounts. for though to be overlooked, and


to be disapproved of, are things entirely different, yet as


obscurity covers us from the daylight of honour and approbation,


to feel that we are taken no notice of, necessarily damps the


most agreeable hope, and disappoints the most ardent desire, of


human nature. The poor man goes out and comes in unheeded, and


when in the midst of a crowd is in the same obscurity as if shut


up in his own hovel. Those humble cares and painful attentions


which occupy those in his situation, afford no amusement to the


dissipated and the gay. They turn away their eyes from him, or if


the extremity of his distress forces them to look at him, it is


only to spurn so disagreeable an object from among them. The


fortunate and the proud wonder at the insolence of human


wretchedness, that it should dare to present itself before them,


and with the loathsome aspect of its misery presume to disturb


the serenity of their happiness. The man of rank and distinction,


on the contrary, is observed by all the world. Every body is


eager to look at him, and to conceive, at least by sympathy, that


joy and exultation with which his circumstances naturally inspire


him. His actions are the objects of the public care. Scarce a


word, scarce a gesture, can fall from him that is altogether


neglected. In a great assembly he is the person upon whom all


direct their eyes; it is upon him that their passions seem all to


wait with expectation, in order to receive that movement and


direction which he shall impress upon them; and if his behaviour


is not altogether absurd, he has, every moment, an opportunity of


interesting mankind, and of rendering himself the object of the


observation and fellow-feeling of every body about him. It is


this, which, notwithstanding the restraint it imposes,


notwithstanding the loss of liberty with which it is attended,


renders greatness the object of envy, and compensates, in the


opinion of all those mortifications which must mankind, all that


toil, all that anxiety, be undergone in the pursuit of it; and


what is of yet more consequence, all that leisure, all that ease,


all that careless security, which are forfeited for ever by the


acquisition.


    When we consider the condition of the great, in those


delusive colours in which the imagination is apt to paint it. it


seems to be almost the abstract idea of a perfect and happy


state. It is the very state which, in all our waking dreams and


idle reveries, we had sketched out to ourselves as the final


object of all our desires. We feel, therefore, a peculiar


sympathy with the satisfaction of those who are in it. We favour


all their inclinations, and forward all their wishes. What pity,


we think, that any thing should spoil and corrupt so agreeable a


situation! We could even wish them immortal; and it seems hard to


us, that death should at last put an end to such perfect


enjoyment. It is cruel, we think, in Nature to compel them from


their exalted stations to that humble, but hospitable home, which


she has provided for all her children. Great King, live for ever!


is the compliment, which, after the manner of eastern adulation,


we should readily make them, if experience did not teach us its


absurdity. Every calamity that befals them, every injury that is


done them, excites in the breast of the spectator ten times more


compassion and resentment than he would have felt, had the same


things happened to other men. It is the misfortunes of Kings only


which afford the proper subjects for tragedy. They resemble, in


this respect, the misfortunes of lovers. Those two situations are


the chief which interest us upon the theatre; because, in spite


of all that reason and experience can tell us to the contrary,


the prejudices of the imagination attach to these two states a


happiness superior to any other. To disturb, or to put an end to


such perfect enjoyment, seems to be the most atrocious of all


injuries. The traitor who conspires against the life of his


monarch, is thought a greater monster than any other murderer.


All the innocent blood that was shed in the civil wars, provoked


less indignation than the death of Charles I. A stranger to human


nature, who saw the indifference of men about the misery of their


inferiors, and the regret and indignation which they feel for the


misfortunes and sufferings of those above them, would be apt to


imagine, that pain must be more agonizing, and the convulsions of


death more terrible to persons of higher rank, than to those of


meaner stations.


    Upon this disposition of mankind, to go along with all the


passions of the rich and the powerful, is founded the distinction


of ranks, and the order of society. Our obsequiousness to our


superiors more frequently arises from our admiration for the


advantages of their situation, than from any private expectations


of benefit from their good-will. Their benefits can extend but to


a few. but their fortunes interest almost every body. We are


eager to assist them in completing a system of happiness that


approaches so near to perfection; and we desire to serve them for


their own sake, without any other recompense but the vanity or


the honour of obliging them. Neither is our deference to their


inclinations founded chiefly, or altogether, upon a regard to the


utility of such submission, and to the order of society, which is


best supported by it. Even when the order of society seems to


require that we should oppose them, we can hardly bring ourselves


to do it. That kings are the servants of the people, to be


obeyed, resisted, deposed, or punished, as the public conveniency


may require, is the doctrine of reason and philosophy; but it is


not the doctrine of Nature. Nature would teach us to submit to


them for their own sake, to tremble and bow down before their


exalted station, to regard their smile as a reward sufficient to


compensate any services, and to dread their displeasure, though


no other evil were to follow from it, as the severest of all


mortifications. To treat them in any respect as men, to reason


and dispute with them upon ordinary occasions, requires such


resolution, that there are few men whose magnanimity can support


them in it, unless they are likewise assisted by familiarity and


acquaintance. The strongest motives, the most furious passions,


fear, hatred, and resentment, are scarce sufficient to balance


this natural disposition to respect them: and their conduct must,


either justly or unjustly, have excited the highest degree of all


those passions, before the bulk of the people can be brought to


oppose them with violence, or to desire to see them either


punished or deposed. Even when the people have been brought this


length, they are apt to relent every moment, and easily relapse


into their habitual state of deference to those whom they have


been accustomed to look upon as their natural superiors. They


cannot stand the mortification of their monarch. Compassion soon


takes the place of resentment, they forget all past provocations,


their old principles of loyalty revive, and they run to


re-establish the ruined authority of their old masters, with the


same violence with which they had opposed it. The death of


Charles I brought about the Restoration of the royal family.


Compassion for James II when he was seized by the populace in


making his escape on ship-board, had almost prevented the


Revolution, and made it go on more heavily than before.


    Do the great seem insensible of the easy price at which they


may acquire the public admiration; or do they seem to imagine


that to them, as to other men, it must be the purchase either of


sweat or of blood? By what important accomplishments is the young


nobleman instructed to support the dignity of his rank, and to


render himself worthy of that superiority over his


fellow-citizens, to which the virtue of his ancestors had raised


them? Is it by knowledge, by industry, by patience, by


self-denial, or by virtue of any kind? As all his words, as all


his motions are attended to, he learns an habitual regard to


every circumstance of ordinary behaviour, and studies to perform


all those small duties with the most exact propriety. As he is


conscious how much he is observed, and how much mankind are


disposed to favour all his inclinations, he acts, upon the most


indifferent occasions, with that freedom and elevation which the


thought of this naturally inspires. His air, his manner, his


deportment, all mark that elegant and graceful sense of his own


superiority, which those who are born to inferior stations can


hardly ever arrive at. These are the arts by which he proposes to


make mankind more easily submit to his authority, and to govern


their inclinations according to his own pleasure: and in this he


is seldom disappointed. These arts, supported by rank and


preheminence, are, upon ordinary occasions, sufficient to govern


the world. Lewis XIV during the greater part of his reign, was


regarded, not only in France, but over all Europe, as the most


perfect model of a great prince. But what were the talents and


virtues by which he acquired this great reputation? Was it by the


scrupulous and inflexible justice of all his undertakings, by the


immense dangers and difficulties with which they were attended,


or by the unwearied and unrelenting application with which he


pursued them? Was it by his extensive knowledge, by his exquisite


judgment, or by his heroic valour? It was by none of these


qualities. But he was, first of all, the most powerful prince in


Europe, and consequently held the highest rank among kings; and


then, says his historian, 'he surpassed all his courtiers in the


gracefulness of his shape, and the majestic beauty of his


features. The sound of his voice, noble and affecting, gained


those hearts which his presence intimidated. He had a step and a


deportment which could suit only him and his rank, and which


would have been ridiculous in any other person. The embarrassment


which he occasioned to those who spoke to him, flattered that


secret satisfaction with which he felt his own superiority. The


old officer, who was confounded and faultered in asking him a


favour, and not being able to conclude his discourse, said to


him: Sir, your majesty, I hope, will believe that I do not


tremble thus before your enemies: had no difficulty to obtain


what he demanded.' These frivolous accomplishments, supported by


his rank, and, no doubt too, by a degree of other talents and


virtues, which seems, however, not to have been much above


mediocrity, established this prince in the esteem of his own age,


and have drawn, even from posterity, a good deal of respect for


his memory. Compared with these, in his own times, and in his own


presence, no other virtue, it seems, appeared to have any merit.


Knowledge, industry, valour, and beneficence, trembled, were


abashed, and lost all dignity before them.


    But it is not by accomplishments of this kind, that the man


of inferior rank must hope to distinguish himself. Politeness is


so much the virtue of the great, that it will do little honour to


any body but themselves. The coxcomb, who imitates their manner,


and affects to be eminent by the superior propriety of his


ordinary behaviour, is rewarded with a double share of contempt


for his folly and presumption. Why should the man, whom nobody


thinks it worth while to look at, be very anxious about the


manner in which he holds up his head, or disposes of his arms


while he walks through a room? He is occupied surely with a very


superfluous attention, and with an attention too that marks a


sense of his own importance, which no other mortal can go along


with. The most perfect modesty and plainness, joined to as much


negligence as is consistent with the respect due to the company,


ought to be the chief characteristics of the behaviour of a


private man. If ever he hopes to distinguish himself, it must be


by more important virtues. He must acquire dependants to balance


the dependants of the great, and he has no other fund to pay them


from, but the labour of his body, and the activity of his mind.


He must cultivate these therefore: he must acquire superior


knowledge in his profession, and superior industry in the


exercise of it. He must be patient in labour, resolute in danger,


and firm in distress. These talents he must bring into public


view, by the difficulty, importance, and, at the same time, good


judgment of his undertakings, and by the severe and unrelenting


application with which he pursues them. Probity and prudence,


generosity and frankness, must characterize his behaviour upon


all ordinary occasions; and he must, at the same time, be forward


to engage in all those situations, in which it requires the


greatest talents and virtues to act with propriety, but in which


the greatest applause is to be acquired by those who can acquit


themselves with honour. With what impatience does the man of


spirit and ambition, who is depressed by his situation, look


round for some great opportunity to distinguish himself? No


circumstances, which can afford this, appear to him undesirable.


He even looks forward with satisfaction to the prospect of


foreign war, or civil dissension; and, with secret transport and


delight, sees through all the confusion and bloodshed which


attend them, the probability of those wished-for occasions


presenting themselves, in which he may draw upon himself the


attention and admiration of mankind. The man of rank and


distinction, on the contrary, whose whole glory consists in the


propriety of his ordinary behaviour, who is contented with the


humble renown which this can afford him, and has no talents to


acquire any other, is unwilling to embarrass himself with what


can be attended either with difficulty or distress. To figure at


a ball is his great triumph, and to succeed in an intrigue of


gallantry, his highest exploit. He has an aversion to all public


confusions, not from the love of mankind, for the great never


look upon their inferiors as their fellow-creatures; nor yet from


want of courage, for in that he is seldom defective; but from a


consciousness that he possesses none of the virtues which are


required in such situations, and that the public attention will


certainly be drawn away from him by others. He may be willing to


expose himself to some little danger, and to make a campaign when


it happens to be the fashion. But he shudders with horror at the


thought of any situation which demands the continual and long


exertion of patience, industry, fortitude, and application of


thought. These virtues are hardly ever to be met with in men who


are born to those high stations. In all governments accordingly,


even in monarchies, the highest offices are generally possessed,


and the whole detail of the administration conducted, by men who


were educated in the middle and inferior ranks of life, who have


been carried forward by their own industry and abilities, though


loaded with the jealousy, and opposed by the resentment, of all


those who were born their superiors, and to whom the great, after


having regarded them first with contempt, and afterwards with


envy, are at last contented to truckle with the same abject


meanness with which they desire that the rest of mankind should


behave to themselves.


    It is the loss of this easy empire over the affections of


mankind which renders the fall from greatness so insupportable.


When the family of the king of Macedon was led in triumph by


Paulus Aemilius, their misfortunes, it is said, made them divide


with their conqueror the attention of the Roman people. The sight


of the royal children, whose tender age rendered them insensible


of their situation, struck the spectators, amidst the public


rejoicings and prosperity, with the tenderest sorrow and


compassion. The king appeared next in the procession; and seemed


like one confounded and astonished, and bereft of all sentiment,


by the greatness of his calamities. His friends and ministers


followed after him. As they moved along, they often cast their


eyes upon their fallen sovereign, and always burst into tears at


the sight; their whole behaviour demonstrating that they thought


not of their own misfortunes, but were occupied entirely by the


superior greatness of his. The generous Romans, on the contrary,


beheld him with disdain and indignation, and regarded as unworthy


of all compassion the man who could be so mean-spirited as to


bear to live under such calamities. Yet what did those calamities


amount to? According to the greater part of historians, he was to


spend the remainder of his days, under the protection of a


powerful and humane people, in a state which in itself should


seem worthy of envy, a state of plenty, ease, leisure, and


security, from which it was impossible for him even by his own


folly to fall. But he was no longer to be surrounded by that


admiring mob of fools, flatterers, and dependants, who had


formerly been accustomed to attend upon all his motions. He was


no longer to be gazed upon by multitudes, nor to have it in his


power to render himself the object of their respect, their


gratitude, their love, their admiration. The passions of nations


were no longer to mould themselves upon his inclinations. This


was that insupportable calamity which bereaved the king of all


sentiment; which made his friends forget their own misfortunes;


and which the Roman magnanimity could scarce conceive how any man


could be so mean-spirited as to bear to survive. 


    'Love,' says my Lord Rochfaucault, 'is commonly succeeded by


ambition; but ambition is hardly ever succeeded by love.' That


passion, when once it has got entire possession of the breast,


will admit neither a rival nor a successor. To those who have


been accustomed to the possession, or even to the hope of public


admiration, all other pleasures sicken and decay. Of all the


discarded statesmen who for their own ease have studied to get


the better of ambition, and to despise those honours which they


could no longer arrive at, how few have been able to succeed? The


greater part have spent their time in the most listless and


insipid indolence, chagrined at the thoughts of their own


insignificancy, incapable of being interested i n the occupations


of private life, without enjoyment, except when they talked of


their former greatness, and without satisfaction, except when


they were employed in some vain project to recover it. Are you in


earnest resolved never to barter your liberty for the lordly


servitude of a court, but to live free, fearless, and


independent? There seems to be one way to continue in that


virtuous resolution; and perhaps but one. Never enter the place


from whence so few have been able to return; never come within


the circle of ambition; nor ever bring yourself into comparison


with those masters of the earth who have already engrossed the


attention of half mankind before you.


    Of such mighty importance does it appear to be, in the


imaginations of men, to stand in that situation which sets them


most in the view of general sympathy and attention. And thus,


place, that great object which divides the wives of aldermen, is


the end of half the labours of human life; and is the cause of


all the tumult and bustle, all the rapine and injustice, which


avarice and ambition have introduced into this world. People of


sense, it is said, indeed despise place; that is, they despise


sitting at the head of the table, and are indifferent who it is


that is pointed out to the company by that frivolous


circumstance, which the smallest advantage is capable of


overbalancing. But rank, distinction pre-eminence, no man


despises, unless he is either raised very much above, or sunk


very much below, the ordinary standard of human nature; unless he


is either so confirmed in wisdom and real philosophy, as to be


satisfied that, while the propriety of his conduct renders him


the just object of approbation, it is of little consequence


though he be neither attended to, nor approved of; or so


habituated to the idea of his own meanness, so sunk in slothful


and sottish indifference, as entirely to have forgot the desire,


and almost the very wish, for superiority.


    As to become the natural object of the joyous congratulations


and sympathetic attentions of mankind is, in this manner, the


circumstance which gives to prosperity all its dazzling


splendour; so nothing darkens so much the gloom of adversity as


to feel that our misfortunes are the objects, not of the


fellow-feeling, but of the contempt and aversion of our brethren.


It is upon this account that the most dreadful calamities are not


always those which it is most difficult to support. It is often


more mortifying to appear in public under small disasters, than


under great misfortunes. The first excite no sympathy; but the


second, though they may excite none that approaches to the


anguish of the sufferer, call forth, however, a very lively


compassion. The sentiments of the spectators are, in this last


case, less wide of those of the sufferer, and their imperfect


fellow-feeling lends him some assistance in supporting his


misery. Before a gay assembly, a gentleman would be more


mortified to appear covered with filth and rags than with blood


and wounds. This last situation would interest their pity; the


other would provoke their laughter. The judge who orders a


criminal to be set in the pillory, dishonours him more than if he


had condemned him to the scaffold. The great prince, who, some


years ago, caned a general officer at the head of his army,


disgraced him irrecoverably. The punishment would have been much


less had he shot him through the body. By the laws of honour, to


strike with a cane dishonours, to strike with a sword does not,


for an obvious reason. Those slighter punishments, when inflicted


on a gentleman, to whom dishonour is the greatest of all evils,


come to be regarded among a humane and generous people, as the


most dreadful of any. With regard to persons of that rank,


therefore, they are universally laid aside, and the law, while it


takes their life upon many occasions, respects their honour upon


almost all. To scourge a person of quality, or to set him in the


pillory, upon account of any crime whatever, is a brutality of


which no European government, except that of Russia, is capable.


    A brave man is not rendered contemptible by being brought to


the scaffold; he is, by being set in the pillory. His behaviour


in the one situation may gain him universal esteem and


admiration. No behaviour in the other can render him agreeable.


The sympathy of the spectators supports him in the one case, and


saves him from that shame, that consciousness that his misery is


felt by himself only, which is of all sentiments the most


unsupportable. There is no sympathy in the other; or, if there is


any, it is not with his pain, which is a trifle, but with his


consciousness of the want of sympathy with which this pain is


attended. It is with his shame, not with his sorrow. Those who


pity him, blush and hang down their heads for him. He droops in


the same manner, and feels himself irrecoverably degraded by the


punishment, though not by the crime. The man, on the contrary,


who dies with resolution, as he is naturally regarded with the


erect aspect of esteem and approbation, so he wears himself the


same undaunted countenance; and, if the crime does not deprive


him of the respect of others, the punishment never will. He has


no suspicion that his situation is the object of contempt or


derision to any body, and he can, with propriety, assume the air,


not only of perfect serenity, but of triumph and exultation.


    'Great dangers,' says the Cardinal de Retz, 'have their


charms, because there is some glory to be got, even when we


miscarry. But moderate dangers have nothing but what is horrible,


because the loss of reputation always attends the want of


success.' His maxim has the same foundation with what we have


been just now observing with regard to punishments.


    Human virtue is superior to pain, to poverty, to danger, and


to death; nor does it even require its utmost efforts do despise


them. But to have its misery exposed to insult and derision, to


be led in triumph, to be set up for the hand of scorn to point


at, is a situation in which its constancy is much more apt to


fail. Compared with the contempt of mankind, all other external


evils are easily supported. 





Chap. III





Of the corruption of our moral sentiments, which is occasioned by


this disposition to admire the rich and the great, and to despise


or neglect persons of poor and mean condition





    This disposition to admire, and almost to worship, the rich


and the powerful, and to despise, or, at least, to neglect


persons of poor and mean condition, though necessary both to


establish and to maintain the distinction of ranks and the order


of society, is, at the same time, the great and most universal


cause of the corruption of our moral sentiments. That wealth and


greatness are often regarded with the respect and admiration


which are due only to wisdom and virtue; and that the contempt,


of which vice and folly are the only proper objects, is often


most unjustly bestowed upon poverty and weakness, has been the


complaint of moralists in all ages.


    We desire both to be respectable and to be respected. We


dread both to be contemptible and to be contemned. But, upon


coming into the world, we soon find that wisdom and virtue are by


no means the sole objects of respect; nor vice and folly, of


contempt. We frequently see the respectful attentions of the


world more strongly directed towards the rich and the great, than


towards the wise and the virtuous. We see frequently the vices


and follies of the powerful much less despised than the poverty


and weakness of the innocent. To deserve, to acquire, and to


enjoy the respect and admiration of mankind, are the great


objects of ambition and emulation. Two different roads are


presented to us, equally leading to the attainment of this so


much desired object; the one, by the study of wisdom and the


practice of virtue; the other, by the acquisition of wealth and


greatness. Two different characters are presented to our


emulation; the one, of proud ambition and ostentatious avidity.


the other, of humble modesty and equitable justice. Two different


models, two different pictures, are held out to us, according to


which we may fashion our own character and behaviour; the one


more gaudy and glittering in its colouring; the other more


correct and more exquisitely beautiful in its outline: the one


forcing itself upon the notice of every wandering eye; the other,


attracting the attention of scarce any body but the most studious


and careful observer. They are the wise and the virtuous chiefly,


a select, though, I am afraid, but a small party, who are the


real and steady admirers of wisdom and virtue. The great mob of


mankind are the admirers and worshippers, and, what may seem more


extraordinary, most frequently the disinterested admirers and


worshippers, of wealth and greatness.


    The respect which we feel for wisdom and virtue is, no doubt,


different from that which we conceive for wealth and greatness;


and it requires no very nice discernment to distinguish the


difference. But, notwithstanding this difference, those


sentiments bear a very considerable resemblance to one another.


In some particular features they are, no doubt, different, but,


in the general air of the countenance, they seem to be so very


nearly the same, that inattentive observers are very apt to


mistake the one for the other.


    In equal degrees of merit there is scarce any man who does


not respect more the rich and the great, than the poor and the


humble. With most men the presumption and vanity of the former


are much more admired, than the real and solid merit of the


latter. It is scarce agreeable to good morals, or even to good


language, perhaps, to say, that mere wealth and greatness,


abstracted from merit and virtue, deserve our respect. We must


acknowledge, however, that they almost constantly obtain it; and


that they may, therefore, be considered as, in some respects, the


natural objects of it. Those exalted stations may, no doubt, be


completely degraded by vice and folly. But the vice and folly


must be very great, before they can operate this complete


degradation. The profligacy of a man of fashion is looked upon


with much less contempt and aversion, than that of a man of


meaner condition. In the latter, a single transgression of the


rules of temperance and propriety, is commonly more resented,


than the constant and avowed contempt of them ever is in the


former.


    In the middling and inferior stations of life, the road to


virtue and that to fortune, to such fortune, at least, as men in


such stations can reasonably expect to acquire, are, happily in


most cases, very nearly the same. In all the middling and


inferior professions, real and solid professional abilities,


joined to prudent, just, firm, and temperate conduct, can very


seldom fail of success. Abilities will even sometimes prevail


where the conduct is by no means correct. Either habitual


imprudence, however, or injustice, or weakness, or profligacy,


will always clouD, and sometimes Depress altogether, the most


splendid professional abilities. Men in the inferior and middling


stations of life, besides, can never be great enough to be above


the law, which must generally overawe them into some sort of


respect for, at least, the more important rules of justice. The


success of such people, too, almost always depends upon the


favour and good opinion of their neighbours and equals; and


without a tolerably regular conduct these can very seldom be


obtained. The good old proverb, therefore, That honesty is the


best policy, holds, in such situations, almost always perfectly


true. In such situations, therefore, we may generally expect a


considerable degree of virtue; and, fortunately for the good


morals of society, these are the situations of by far the greater


part of mankind.


    In the superior stations of life the case is unhappily not


always the same. In the courts of princes, in the drawing-rooms


of the great, where success and preferment depend, not upon the


esteem of intelligent and well-informed equals, but upon the


fanciful and foolish favour of ignorant, presumptuous, and proud


superiors; flattery and falsehood too often prevail over merit


and abilities. In such societies the abilities to please, are


more regarded than the abilities to serve. In quiet and peaceable


times, when the storm is at a distance, the prince, or great man,


wishes only to be amused, and is even apt to fancy that he has


scarce any occasion for the service of any body, or that those


who amuse him are sufficiently able to serve him. The external


graces, the frivolous accomplishments of that impertinent and


foolish thing called a man of fashion, are commonly more admired


than the solid and masculine virtues of a warrior, a statesman, a


philosopher, or a legislator. All the great and awful virtues,


all the virtues which can fit, either for the council, the


senate, or the field, are, by the insolent and insignificant


flatterers, who commonly figure the most in such corrupted


societies, held in the utmost contempt and derision. When the


duke of Sully was called upon by Lewis the Thirteenth, to give


his advice in some great emergency, he observed the favourites


and courtiers whispering to one another, and smiling at his


unfashionable appearance. 'Whenever your majesty's father,' said


the old warrior and statesman, 'did me the honour to consult me,


he ordered the buffoons of the court to retire into the


antechamber.'


    It is from our disposition to admire, and consequently to


imitate, the rich and the great, that they are enabled to set, or


to lead what is called the fashion. Their dress is the


fashionable dress; the language of their conversation, the


fashionable style; their air and deportment, the fashionable


behaviour. Even their vices and follies are fashionable; and the


greater part of men are proud to imitate and resemble them in the


very qualities which dishonour and degrade them. Vain men often


give themselves airs of a fashionable profligacy, which, in their


hearts, they do not approve of, and of which, perhaps, they are


really not guilty. They desire to be praised for what they


themselves do not think praise-worthy, and are ashamed of


unfashionable virtues which they sometimes practise in secret,


and for which they have secretly some degree of real veneration.


There are hypocrites of wealth and greatness, as well as of


religion and virtue; and a vain man is as apt to pretend to be


what he is not, in the one way, as a cunning man is in the other.


He assumes the equipage and splendid way of living of his


superiors, without considering that whatever may be praise-worthy


in any of these, derives its whole merit and propriety from its


suitableness to that situation and fortune which both require and


can easily support the expence. Many a poor man places his glory


in being thought rich, without considering that the duties (if


one may call such follies by so very venerable a name) which that


reputation imposes upon him, must soon reduce him to beggary, and


render his situation still more unlike that of those whom he


admires and imitates, than it had been originally.


    To attain to this envied situation, the candidates for


fortune too frequently abandon the paths of virtue; for


unhappily, the road which leads to the one, and that which leads


to the other, lie sometimes in very opposite directions. But the


ambitious man flatters himself that, in the splendid situation to


which he advances, he will have so many means of commanding the


respect and admiration of mankind, and will be enabled to act


with such superior propriety and grace, that the lustre of his


future conduct will entirely cover, or efface, the foulness of


the steps by which he arrived at that elevation. In many


governments the candidates for the highest stations are above the


law; and, if they can attain the object of their ambition, they


have no fear of being called to account for the means by which


they acquired it. They often endeavour, therefore, not only by


fraud and falsehood, the ordinary and vulgar arts of intrigue and


cabal; but sometimes by the perpetration of the most enormous


crimes, by murder and assassination, by rebellion and civil war,


to supplant and destroy those who oppose or stand in the way of


their greatness. They more frequently miscarry than succeed; and


commonly gain nothing but the disgraceful punishment which is due


to their crimes. But, though they should be so lucky as to attain


that wished-for greatness, they are always most miserably


disappointed in the happiness which they expect to enjoy in it.


It is not ease or pleasure, but always honour, of one kind or


another, though frequently an honour very ill understood, that


the ambitious man really pursues. But the honour of his exalted


station appears, both in his own eyes and in those of other


people, polluted and defiled by the baseness of the means through


which he rose to it. Though by the profusion of every liberal


expence; though by excessive indulgence in every profligate


pleasure, the wretched, but usual, resource of ruined characters;


though by the hurry of public business, or by the prouder and


more dazzling tumult of war, he may endeavour to efface, both


from his own memory and from that of other people, the


remembrance of what he has done; that remembrance never fails to


pursue him. He invokes in vain the dark and dismal powers of


forgetfulness and oblivion. He remembers himself what he has


done, and that remembrance tells him that other people must


likewise remember it. Amidst all the gaudy pomp of the most


ostentatious greatness; amidst the venal and vile adulation of


the great and of the learned; amidst the more innocent, though


more foolish, acclamations of the common people; amidst all the


pride of conquest and the triumph of successful war, he is still


secretly pursued by the avenging furies of shame and remorse;


and, while glory seems to surround him on all sides, he himself,


in his own imagination, sees black and foul infamy fast pursuing


him, and every moment ready to overtake him from behind. Even the


great Caesar, though he had the magnanimity to dismiss his


guards, could not dismiss his suspicions. The remembrance of


Pharsalia still haunted and pursued him. When, at the request of


the senate, he had the generosity to pardon Marcellus, he told


that assembly, that he was not unaware of the designs which were


carrying on against his life; but that, as he had lived long


enough both for nature and for glory, he was contented to die,


and therefore despised all conspiracies. He had, perhaps, lived


long enough for nature. But the man who felt himself the object


of such deadly resentment, from those whose favour he wished to


gain, and whom he still wished to consider as his friends, had


certainly lived too long for real glory; or for all the happiness


which he could ever hope to enjoy in the love and esteem of his


equals. 




