


The Theory of Business Enterprise
by Thorstein Veblen
1904

Chapter 10

The Natural Decay of Business Enterprise

    Broadly, the machine discipline acts to disintegrate the
institutional heritage, of all degrees of antiquity and
authenticity - whether it be the institutions that embody the
principles of natural liberty or those that comprise the residue
of more archaic principles of conduct still current in civilized
life. It thereby cuts away that ground of law and order on which
business enterprise is founded. The further cultural bearing of
this disintegration of the received order is no doubt
sufficiently serious and far-reaching, but it does not directly
concern the present inquiry. It comes in question here only in so
far as such a deterioration of the general cultural tissues
involves a setback to the continued vigor of business enterprise.
But the future of business enterprise is bound up with the future
of civilization, since the cultural scheme is, after all, a
single one, comprising many interlocking elements, no one of
which can be greatly disturbed without disturbing the working of
all the rest.
    In its bearing on the question in hand, the "social problem"
at large presents this singular situation. The growth of business
enterprise rests on the machine technology as its material
foundation. The machine industry is indispensable to it; it
cannot get along without the machine process, But the discipline
of the machine process cuts away the spiritual, institutional
foundations of business enterprise; the machine industry is
incompatible with its continued growth; it cannot, in the long
run, get along with the machine process. In their struggle
against the cultural effects of the machine process, therefore,
business principles cannot win in the long run; since an
effectual mutilation or inhibition of the machine system would
gradually push business enterprise to the wall; whereas with a
free growth of the machine system business principles would
presently fall into abeyance.
    The institutional basis of business enterprise the system of
natural rights - appears to be a peculiarly instable affair.
There is no way of retaining it under changing circumstances, and
there is no way of returning to it after circumstances have
changed. It is a hybrid growth, a blend of personal freedom and
equality on the one hand and of prescriptive rights on the other
hand. The institutions and points of law under the natural-rights
scheme appear to be of an essentially provisional character.
There is relatively great flexibility and possibility of growth
and change; natural rights are singularly insecure under any
change of circumstances. The maxim is well approved that eternal
vigilance is the price of (natural) liberty. When, as now, this
system is endangered by socialistic or anarchistic disaffection
there is no recourse that will carry the institutional apparatus
back to a secure natural-rights basis. The system of natural
liberty was the product of a peaceful regime of handicraft and
petty trade; but continued peace and industry presently carried
the cultural growth beyond the phase of natural rights by giving
rise to the machine process and the large business; and these are
breaking down the structure of natural rights by making these
rights nugatory on the one hand and by cutting away the spiritual
foundations of them on the other hand. Natural rights being a
by-product of peaceful industry, they cannot be reinstated by a
recourse to warlike habits and a coercive government, since
warlike habits and coercion are alien to the natural-rights
spirit. Nor can they be reinstated by a recourse to settled peace
and freedom, since an era of settled peace and freedom would push
on the dominance of the machine process and the large business,
which break down the system of natural liberty.
    When the question is cast up as to what will come of this
conflict of institutional forces - called the Social Problem - it
is commonly made a question of remedies: What can be done to save
civilized mankind from the vulgarization and disintegration
wrought by the machine industry?
    Now, business enterprise and the machine process are the two
prime movers in modern culture; and the only recourse that holds
a promise of being effective, therefore, is a recourse to the
workings of business traffic. And this is a question, not of what
is conceivably, ideally, idyllically possible for the business
community to do if they will take thought and act advisedly and
concertedly toward a chosen cultural outcome, but of what is the
probable cultural outcome to be achieved through business traffic
carried on for business ends, not for cultural ends. It is a
question not of what ought to be done, but of what is to take
place.
    Persons who are solicitous for the cultural future commonly
turn to speculative advice as to what ought to be done toward
holding fast that which is good in the cultural heritage, and
what ought further to be done to increase the talent that has
been intrusted to this generation. The practical remedy offered
is commonly some proposal for palliative measures, some appeal to
philanthropic, aesthetic, or religious sentiment, some endeavor
to conjure with the name of one or another of the epiphenomena of
modern culture. Something must be done, it is conceived, and this
something takes the shape of charity organizations, clubs and
societies for social "purity", for amusement, education, and
manual training of the indigent classes, for colonization of the
poor, for popularization of churches, for clean politics, for
cultural missionary work by social settlements, and the like.
These remedial measures whereby it is proposed to save or to
rehabilitate certain praiseworthy but obsolescent habits of life
and of thought are, all and several, beside the point so far as
touches the question in hand. Not that it is hereby intended to
cast a slur on these meritorious endeavors to save mankind by
treating symptoms. The symptoms treated are no doubt evil, as
they are said to be; or if they are not evil, the merits of that
particular question do not concern the present inquiry. The
endeavors in question are beside the point in that they do not
fall into the shape of a business proposition. They are, on the
whole, not so profitable a line of investment as certain other
ventures that are open to modern enterprise. Hence, if they
traverse the course of business enterprise and of industrial
exigencies, they are nugatory, being in the same class with the
labor of Sisyphus; whereas if they coincide in effect with the
line along which business and industrial exigencies move, they
are a work of supererogation, except so far as they may be
conceived to accelerate a change that is already under way.
Nothing can deflect the sweep of business enterprise, unless it
be an outgrowth of this enterprise itself or of the industrial
means by which business enterprise works.
    Nothing can serve as a corrective of the cultural trend given
by the machine discipline except what can be put in the form of a
business proposition. The question of neutralizing the untoward
effects of the machine discipline resolves itself into a question
as to the cultural work and consequences of business enterprise,
and of the cultural value of business principles in so far as
they guide such human endeavor as lies outside the range of
business enterprise proper. It is not a question of what ought to
be done, but of what is the course laid out by business
principles; the discretion rests with the business men, not with
the moralists, and the business men's discretion is bounded by
the exigencies of business enterprise. Even the business men
cannot allow themselves to play fast and loose with business
principles in response to a call from humanitarian motives. The
question, therefore, remains, on the whole, a question of what
the business men may be expected to do for cultural growth on the
motive of profits.
    Something they are doing, as others are, from motives of
benevolence, with a well-advised endeavor to maintain the
cultural gains of the past and to make the way of life smoother
for mankind in the future. But the more secure and substantial
results to be looked for in this direction are those that follow
incidentally, as byproducts of business enterprise, because these
are not dependent on the vagaries of personal preference, tastes,
and prejudices, but rest on a broad institutional basis.
    The effects of business enterprise upon the habits and temper
of the people, and so upon institutional growth, are chiefly of
the nature of sequelae, It has already been noted that the
discipline of business employments is of a conservative nature,
tending to sustain the conventions that rest on natural-rights
dogma, because these employments train the men engaged in them to
think in terms of natural rights. It is unnecessary to return to
this topic here, except to notice that, in its severer, more
unmitigated form, this discipline in pecuniary habits of thought
falls on a gradually lessening proportion of the population. The
absolute number of business men, counting principals and
subordinates, is, of course, not decreasing, The number of men in
business pursuits, in proportion to the population, is also
apparently not decreasing; but within the business employments a
larger proportion are occupied with office routine, and so are
withdrawn from the more effectual training given by business
management proper. If such a decrease occurs in any country, it
is almost certainly not to be found in any other country than
America.
    This business discipline is somewhat closely limited both in
scope and range. (1) It acts to conserve, or to rehabilitate, a
certain restricted line of institutional habits of thought, viz.
those preconceptions of natural rights which have to do with
property. What it conserves, therefore, is the bourgeois virtues
of solvency, thrift, and dissimulation. The nobler and more
spectacular aristocratic virtues, with their correlative
institutional furniture, are not in any sensible degree fortified
by the habits of business life. Business life does not further
the growth of manner and breeding, pride of Caste, punctilios of
"honor," or even religious fervor. (2) The salutary discipline of
business life touches the bulk of the population, the working
classes, in a progressively less intimate and less exacting
manner. It can, therefore, not serve to correct or even greatly
to mitigate the matter-of-fact bias given these classes by the
discipline of the machine process.
    As a direct disciplinary factor the machine process holds
over the business employments, in that it touches larger classes
of the community and inculcates its characteristic habits of
thought more unremittingly, And any return to more archaic
methods of industry, such as is sometimes advocated on artistic
grounds, seems hopeless, since business interests do not
countenance a discontinuance of machine methods, The machine
methods that are corrupting the hearts and manners of the workmen
are profitable to the business men, and that fact seems to be
decisive on the point. A direct, advised return to handicraft, or
any similar discontinuance of the machine industry, is out of the
question; although something in the way of a partial return to
more primitive methods of industry need not be impracticable as a
remote and indirect consequence of the working of business
enterprise.

    The indirect or incidental cultural bearing of business
principles and business practice is wide-reaching and forceful.
Business principles have a peculiar hold upon the affections of
the people as something intrinsically right and good. They are
therefore drawn on for guidance and conviction even in concerns
that are not conceived to be primarily business concerns. So,
e.g., they have permeated the educational system, thoroughly and
intimately. Their presence, as an element of common sense, in the
counsels of the "educators" shows itself in a naive insistence on
the "practical" whenever the scheme of instruction is under
advisement. "Practical" means useful for private gain. Any new
departure in public instruction, whether in the public schools or
in private endowed establishments, is scrutinized with this test
in mind; which results in a progressive, though not wholly
consistent, narrowing of instruction to such learning as is
designed to give a ready application of results rather than a
systematic organization of knowledge. The primary test is
usefulness for getting an income. The secondary test, practically
applied where latitude is allowed in the way of "culture"
studies, is the aptness of the instruction in question to fit the
learners for spending income in a decorous manner. Hence
quasi-scholarly accomplishments. Much of the current controversy
as to the inclusion or exclusion of one thing and another from
the current curriculum of secondary and higher schools might be
reduced to terms of one or the other of these two purposes
without doing violence to the arguments put forth and with a
great gain in conciseness and lucidity.
    There is also a large resort to business methods in the
conduct of the schools; with the result that a system of
scholastic accountancy is enforced both as regards the work of
the teachers and the progress of the pupils; whence follows a
mechanical routine, with mechanical tests of competency in all
directions. This lowers the value of the instruction for purposes
of intellectual initiative and a reasoned grasp of the
subject-matter. This class of erudition is rather a hindrance
than a help to habits of thinking. It conduces to conviction
rather than to inquiry, and is therefore a conservative factor.
    In the endowed schools there is, moreover, an increasing
introduction of business men and business methods into the
personnel and the administrative work. This is necessarily so
since these schools are competitors for students and endowments.
The policy of these schools necessarily takes on some thing of
the complexion of competitive business; which throws the emphasis
on those features of school life that will best attract students
and donors. The features which count most directly in these
directions are not the same as would count most effectively
toward the avowed ends of these schools. The standards which it
is found Operative to live up to are not the highest standards of
scholarly work. Courtesy as well as expediency inclines these
schools to cultivate such appearances and such opinions as may be
expected to find favor with men of wealth. These men of wealth
are business men, for the most part elderly men, who are, as is
well known, prevailingly of a conservative temper in all cultural
matters, and more especially as touches those institutions that
bear on business affairs.
    A more far-reaching department of the educational system,
though not technically rated as such, is the periodical press,
both newspapers and magazines. This is a field of business
enterprise, and business principles may be expected to work more
consistently and to a more unqualified result in this field than
in the school system, where these principles come in
incidentally.
    The current periodical press, whether ephemeral or other, is
a vehicle for advertisements. This is its raison d'etre, as a
business proposition, and this decides the lines of its
management without material qualification. Exceptions to the rule
are official and minor propagandist periodicals, and, in an
uncertain measure, scientific journals. The profits of
publication come from the sale of advertising space. The direct
returns from sales and subscriptions are now a matter of wholly
secondary consequence. Publishers of periodicals, of all grades
of transiency, aim to make their product as salable as may he, in
order to pass their advertising pages under the eyes of as many
readers as may be. The larger the circulation the greater, other
things equal, the market value of the advertising space. The
highest product of this development is the class of American
newspapers called "independent." These in particular - and they
are followed at no great interval by the rest edit all items of
news, comment, or gossip with a view to what the news ought to be
and what opinions ought to be expressed on passing events.(1*)
    The first duty of an editor is to gauge the sentiments of his
readers, and then tell them what they like to believe. By this
means he maintains or increases the circulation. His second duty
is to see that nothing is said in the news items or editorials
which may discountenance any claims or announcements made by his
advertisers, discredit their standing or good faith, or expose
any weakness or deception in any business venture that is or may
become a valuable advertiser. By this means he increases the
advertising value of his circulation.(2*) The net result is that
both the news columns and the editorial columns are commonly
meretricious in a high degree.
    Systematic insincerity on the part of the ostensible
purveyors of information and leaders of opinion may be deplored
by persons who stickle for truth and pin their hopes of social
salvation on the spread of accurate information. But the ulterior
cultural effect of the insincerity which is in this way required
by the business situation may, of course, as well be salutary as
the reverse. Indeed, the effect is quite as likely to be
salutary, if "salutary" be taken to mean favorable to the
maintenance of the established order, since the insincerity is
guided by a wish to avoid any lesion of the received
preconceptions and prejudices. The insincerity of the newspapers
and magazines seems, on the whole, to be of a conservative trend.
    The periodical press is not only a purveyor of news,
opinions, and admonitions; it also supplies the greater part of
the literature currently read. And in this part of its work the
same underlying business principles are in force. The endeavor is
to increase the circulation at any cost that will result in an
increased net return from the sale of the advertising space. The
literary output of the magazines is of use for carrying the
advertising pages, and as a matter of business, as seen from the
standpoint of the business man's interest, that is its only use.
    The standards of excellence that govern this periodical
literature seem fairly to be formulated as follows: (1) In each
given case it must conform to the tastes and the most ready
comprehension of the social strata which the particular
periodical is designed to reach; (2) it should conduce to a
quickened interest in the various lines of services and
commodities offered in the advertising pages, and should direct
the attention of readers along such lines of investment and
expenditure as may benefit the large advertisers particularly. At
least it must in no way hamper the purposes of the advertisers.
Nothing should go in a popular magazine which would cast a
sinister shadow over any form of business venture that advertises
or might be induced to advertise.(3*)
    Taken in the aggregate, the literary output is desired to
meet the tastes of that large body of people who are in the habit
of buying freely. The successful magazine writers are those who
follow the taste of the class to whom they speak, in any
aberration (fad, mannerism, or misapprehension) and in any
shortcoming of insight or force which may beset that class. They
must also conform to the fancies and prejudices of this class as
regards the ideals - artistic, moral, religious, or social - for
which they speak. The class to which the successful periodicals
turn, and which gives tone to periodical literature, is that
great body of people who are in moderately easy circumstances.
Culturally this means the respectable middle class (largely the
dependent business class) of various shades of conservatism,
affectation, and snobbery. (4*)
    On the whole, the literature provided in this way and to this
end seems to run on a line of slightly more pronounced
conservatism and affectation than the average sentiment of the
readers appealed to. This is true for the following reason.
Readers who are less conservative and less patient of
affectations, snobbery, and illiberality than the average are in
the position of doubters and dissentients. They are less
confident in their convictions of what is right and good in all
matters, and are also not unwilling to make condescending
allowances for those who are less "advanced," and who must be
humored since they know no better; whereas those who rest
undoubting in the more conservative views and a more intolerant
affectation of gentility are readier, because more naive, in
their rejection of whatever does not fully conform to their
habits of thought.
    So it comes about that the periodical literature is, on the
whole, somewhat more scrupulously devout in tone, somewhat more
given to laud and dilate upon the traffic of the upper leisure
class and to carry on the discussion in the terms and tone
imputed to that class, somewhat more prone to speak deprecatingly
of the vulgar innovations of modern culture, than the average of
the readers to whom it is addressed. The trend of its teaching,
therefore, is, on the whole, conservative and conciliatory. It is
also under the necessity of adapting itself to a moderately low
average of intelligence and information; since on this head,
again, it is those who possess intelligence and information that
are readiest to make allowances; they are, indeed, mildly
flattered to do so, besides being the only ones who can. It is a
prime requisite to conciliate a large body of readers.
    This latter characteristic is particularly evident in the
didactic portion of the periodical literature. This didactic
literature, running on discussions of a quasi-artistic and
quasi-scientific character, is, by force of the business
exigencies of the case, de signed to favor the sensibilities of
the weaker among its readers by adroitly suggesting that the
readers are already possessed of the substance of what purports
to be taught and need only be fortified with certain general
results. There follows a great spread of quasi-technical terms
and fanciful conceits. The sophisticated animal stories and the
half-mythical narratives of industrial processes which now have
the vogue illustrate the results achieved in this direction.
    The literary output issued under the surveillance of the
advertising office is excellent in workmanship and deficient in
intelligence and substantial originality. What is encouraged and
cultivated is adroitness of style and a piquant presentation of
commonplaces. Harmlessness, not to say pointlessness, and an
edifying, gossipy optimism are the substantial characteristics,
which persist through all ephemeral mutations of style, manner,
and subject-matter.
    Business enterprise, therefore, it is believed, gives a
salutary bent to periodical literature. It conduces mildly to the
maintenance of archaic ideals and philistine affectations, and
inculcates the crasser forms of patriotic, sportsmanlike, and
spendthrift aspirations.

    The largest and most promising factor of cultural discipline
- most promising as a corrective of iconoclastic vagaries - over
which business principles rule is national politics. The purposes
and the material effects of business politics have already been
spoken of above, but in the present connection their incidental,
disciplinary effects are no less important. Business interests
urge an aggressive national policy and business men direct it.
Such a policy is warlike as well as patriotic. The direct
cultural value of a warlike business policy is unequivocal. It
makes for a conservative animus on the part of the populace.
During war time, and within the military organization at all
times, under martial law, civil rights are in abeyance; and the
more warfare and armament the more abeyance. Military training is
a training in ceremonial precedence, arbitrary command, and
unquestioning obedience. A military organization is essentially a
servile organization. Insubordination is the deadly sin. The more
consistent and the more comprehensive this military training, the
more effectually will the members of the community be trained
into habits of subordination and away from that growing
propensity to make light of personal authority that is the chief
infirmity of democracy. This applies first and most decidedly, of
course, to the soldiery, but it applies only in a less degree to
the rest of the population. They learn to think in warlike terms
of rank, authority, and subordination, and so grow progressively
more patient of encroachments upon their civil rights. Witness
the change that has latterly been going on in the temper of the
German people.(5*)
    The modern warlike policies are entered upon for the sake of
peace, with a view to the orderly pursuit of business. In their
initial motive they differ from the warlike dynastic politics of
the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries. But the
disciplinary effects of warlike pursuits and of warlike
preoccupations are much the same what ever may be their initial
motive or ulterior aim. The end sought in the one case was
warlike mastery and high repute in the matter of ceremonial
precedence; in the other, the modern case, it is pecuniary
mastery and high repute in the matter of commercial solvency. But
in both cases alike the pomp and circumstance of war and
armaments, and the sensational appeals to patriotic pride and
animosity made by victories, defeats, or comparisons of military
and naval strength, act to rehabilitate lost ideals and weakened
convictions of the chauvinistic or dynastic order. At the same
stroke they direct the popular interest to other, nobler,
institutionally less hazardous matters than the unequal
distribution of wealth or of creature comforts. Warlike and
patriotic preoccupations fortify the barbarian virtues of
subordination and prescriptive authority. Habituation to a
warlike, predatory scheme of life is the strongest disciplinary
factor that can be brought to counteract the vulgarization of
modern life wrought by peaceful industry and the machine process,
and to rehabilitate the decaying sense of status and differential
dignity. Warfare, with the stress on subordination and mastery
and the insistence on gradations of dignity and honor incident to
a militant organization, has always proved an effective school in
barbarian methods of thought.
    In this direction, evidently, lies the hope of a corrective
for "social unrest" and similar disorders of civilized life.
There can, indeed, be no serious question but that a consistent
return to the ancient virtues of allegiance, piety, servility,
graded dignity, class prerogative, and prescriptive authority
would greatly conduce to popular content and to the facie
management of affairs. Such is the promise held out by a
strenuous national policy.
    The reversional trend given by warlike experience and warlike
preoccupations, it is plain, does not set backward to the regime
of natural liberty. Modern business principles and the modern
scheme of civil rights and constitutional government rest on
natural-rights ground. But the system of natural rights is a
halfway house. The warlike culture takes back to a more archaic
situation that preceded the scheme of natural rights, viz. the
system of absolute government, dynastic politics, devolution of
rights and honors, ecclesiastical authority, and popular
submission and squalor. It makes not for a reinstatement of the
Natural Rights of Man but for a reversion to the Grace of God.
    The barbarian virtues of fealty and patriotism run on
national or dynastic exploit and aggrandizement, and these
archaic virtues are not dead. In those modern communities whose
hearts beat with the pulsations of the world-market they find
expression in an enthusiasm for the commercial aggrandizement of
the nation's business men, But when once the policy of warlike
enterprise has been entered upon for business ends, these loyal
affections gradually shift from the business interests to the
warlike and dynastic interests, as witness the history of
imperialism in Germany and England. The eventual outcome should
be a rehabilitation of the ancient patriotic animosity and
dynastic loyalty, to the relative neglect of business interests.
This may easily be carried so far as to sacrifice the profits of
the business men to the exigencies of the higher politics.(6*)
    The disciplinary effect of war and armaments and imperialist
politics is complicated with a selective effect. War not only
affords a salutary training, but it also acts to eliminate
certain elements of the population. The work of campaigning and
military tenure, such as is carried on by England, America, or
the other civilizing powers, lies, in large part, in the low
latitudes, where the European races do not find a favorable
habitat. The low latitudes are particularly unwholesome for that
dolicho-blond racial stock that seems to be the chief bearer of
the machine industry. It results that the viability and the
natural increase of the soldiery is perceptibly lowered. The
service in the low latitudes, as contrasted with Europe, for
instance, is an extrahazardous occupation. The death rate,
indeed, exceeds the birth rate. But in the more advanced
industrial communities, of which the English and American are
typical, the service is a volunteer service; which means that
those who go to the wars seek this employment by their own
choice. That is to say, the human material so drawn off is
automatically selected on the basis of a peculiar spiritual
fitness for this predatory employment; they are, on the whole, of
a more malevolent and vagabond temper, have more of the ancient
barbarian animus, than those who are left at home to carry on the
work of the home community and propagate the home population. And
since the troops and ships are officered by the younger sons of
the conservative leisure class and by the buccaneering scions of
the class of professional politicians, a natural election of the
same character takes effect also as regards the officers. There
results a gradual selective elimination of that old-fashioned
element of the population that is by temperament best suited for
the old-fashioned institutional system of status and servile
organization.(7*)
    This selective elimination of conservative elements would in
the long run leave each succeeding generation of the community
less predatory and less emulative in temper, less well endowed
for carrying on its life under the servile institutions proper to
a militant regime. But, for the present and the nearer future,
there can be little doubt but that this selective shaping of the
community's animus is greatly outweighed by the contrary trend
given by the discipline of warlike preoccupations. What helps to
keep the balance in favor of the reversional trend is the
cultural leaven carried back into the home community by the
veterans. These presumptive past masters in the archaic virtues
keep themselves well in the public eye and serve as exemplars to
the impressionable members of the community, particularly to the
less mature.(8*)
    The net outcome of the latter-day return to warlike
enterprise is, no doubt, securely to be rated as fostering a
reversion to national ideals of servile status and to
institutions of a despotic character. On the whole and for the
present, it makes for conservatism, ultimately for reversion.
    The quest of profits leads to a predatory national policy.
The resulting large fortunes call for a massive government
apparatus to secure the accumulations, on the one hand, and for
large and conspicuous opportunities to spend the resulting
income, on the other hand; which means a militant, coercive home
administration and something in the way of an imperial court life
a dynastic fountain of honor and a courtly bureau of ceremonial
amenities. Such an ideal is not simply a moralist's day-dream; it
is a sound business proposition, in that it lies on the line of
policy along which the business interests are moving in their own
behalf. If national (that is to say dynastic) ambitions and
warlike aims, achievements, spectacles, and discipline be given a
large place in the community's life, together with the
concomitant coercive police surveillance, then there is a fair
hope that the disintegrating trend of the machine discipline may
be corrected. The regime of status, fealty, prerogative, and
arbitrary command would guide the institutional growth back into
the archaic conventional ways and give the cultural structure
something of that secure dignity and stability which it had
before the times, not only of socialistic vapors, but of natural
rights as well. Then, too, the rest of the spiritual furniture of
the ancient regime shall presumably he reinstated; materialistic
scepticism may yield the ground to a romantic philosophy, and the
populace and the scientists alike may regain something of that
devoutness and faith in preternatural agencies which they have
recently been losing. As the discipline of prowess again comes to
its own, conviction and contentment with whatever is authentic
may return to distracted Christendom, and may once more give
something of a sacramental serenity to men's outlook on the
present and the future.
    But authenticity and sacramental dignity belong neither with
the machine technology, nor with modern science, nor with
business traffic. In so far as the aggressive politics and the
aristocratic ideals currently furthered by the business community
are worked out freely, their logical outcome is an abatement of
those cultural features that distinguish modem times from what
went before, including a decline of business enterprise
itself.(9*)
    How imminent such a consummation is to be accounted is a
question of how far the unbusinesslike and unscientific
discipline brought in by aggressive politics may be expected to
prevail over the discipline of the machine industry. It is
difficult to believe that the machine technology and the pursuit
of the material sciences will be definitively superseded, for the
reason, among others, that any community which loses these
elements of its culture thereby loses that brute material force
that gives it strength against its rivals. And it is equally
difficult to imagine how any one of the communities of
Christendom can avoid entering the funnel of business and
dynastic politics, and so running through the process whereby the
materialistic animus is eliminated. Which of the two antagonistic
factors may prove the stronger in the long run is something of a
blind guess; but the calculable future seems to belong to the one
or the other. It seems possible to say this much, that the full
dominion of business enterprise is necessarily a transitory
dominion. It stands to lose in the end whether the one or the
other of the two divergent cultural tendencies wins, because it
is incompatible with the ascendancy of either.

NOTES:

1. "Ought", is of course here used to denote business expediency,
not moral restraint.

2. As a side line, which affords play for the staff's creative
talent, whatever is exceptionally sensational at the same time
that it is harmless to the advertisers' interests should, in
newspaper slang be "played up".

3. Business enterprises that are not notable advertisers may be
roundly eken to task, as, e.g., the Standard Oil Company or the
American Sugar Refining Company; and, indeed, it may be shrewd
management to abuse these concerns, since such abuse redounds to
the periodical's reputation for popular sympathy and
independence. 

4. "Snobbery" is here used without disrespect, as a convenient
term to denote the element of strain involved in the quest of
gentility on the Part of persons whose accustomed social sending
is less high or less authentic than their aspirations. 

5. Cf., e.g., Maurice Lair, l'Imperialism allemand, especially
ch. II and III. The like change of sentiment is visible in the
British community. Cf. Hobson, Imperialism, especially pt II, ch.
I and III.

6. Cf., e.g., Hobson, Imperialism, p. II, chap. VII.

7. The selective effect of warfare, both ancient and modern, has
been discussed by various writers. Protracted wars Or a warlike
policy always have some such effect, no doubt, and in old times
this has shown itself to be a serious cultural factor. It is
commonly regarded that the selection results in an elimination of
the "best" human material. Perhaps the most cogent spokesman for
this view is D.S. Jordan, The Blood of the Nation. The "best" in
this case must be taken to mean the best for the prupose, not
necessarily for other purposes. In such a case as the Chinese or
the Jewish peoples, e.g., a very long-continued, though not in
both cases a close, selective elimination of the peace-dturbing
elements has left a residue that is highly efficient ("good") in
certain directions, but not good war material. The case of the
North-European peoples, however, in the present juncture is
somewhat different from these. Racially, the most efficient war
material among them seems to be those elements that contain an
appreciable admixture of the dolicho-blond stock. These elements
at the same time are apparently, on the whole, also the ones most
generally endowed with industrial initiative and a large,
aptitude for the machine technology and scientific research.
Selective elinination by war and military tenure in the case of
these peoples should, therefore, apparently lower both their
fighting capacity and their industrial and intellectual capacity;
so that, by force of this double and cumulative effect, the
resulting national decline should in their case be comprehensive
and relatively precipitate. 

8. With the complement of archaic virtues that invests these
adepts there is also associated a fair complement of those more
elemental vices that are growing obsolete in the peaceable
civilized communities. Such debaucheries, extravagances of
cruelty, and general superfluity of naughtiness as are nameless
or impossible in civil life are blameless matters of course in
the service. In the nature of the case they are inseparable from
the service. The service commonly leaves the veterans physical,
intellectual, and moral invalids (as witness the records of the
Pension Office). But these less handsome concomitants of the
service should scarcely be made a point of reproach to those
brave men whose devotion to the flag and the business interests
has led them by the paths of disease and depravity. Nor are the
accumulated vices to be lightly condemned, since their weight
also falls on the conservative side; being archaic and
authenticated, their cultural bearing is, on the whole, salutary.

9. See Chapter VIII, pp. 347-350.





The End