





Hellenica



by Xenophon



Translation by H. G. Dakyns






Xenophon the Athenian was born 431 B.C. He was a

pupil of Socrates. He marched with the Spartans,

and was exiled from Athens. Sparta gave him land

and property in Scillus, where he lived for many

years before having to move once more, to settle

in Corinth. He died in 354 B.C.





The Hellenica is his chronicle of the history of

the Hellenes from 411 to 359 B.C., starting as a

continuation of Thucydides, and becoming his own

brand of work from Book III onwards.







HELLENICA







BOOK I





I



B.C. 411. To follow the order of events[1]. A few days later

Thymochares arrived from Athens with a few ships, when another sea

fight between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians at once took place, in

which the former, under the command of Agesandridas, gained the victory.



[1] Lit. "after these events"; but is hard to conjecture to what

    events the author refers. For the order of events and the

    connection between the closing chapter of Thuc. viii. 109, and the

    opening words of the "Hellenica," see introductory remarks above.

    The scene of this sea-fight is, I think, the Hellespont.



Another short interval brings us to a morning in early winter, when

Dorieus, the son of Diagoras, was entering the Hellespont with

fourteen ships from Rhodes at break of day. The Athenian day-watch

descrying him, signalled to the generals, and they, with twenty sail,

put out to sea to attack him. Dorieus made good his escape, and, as he

shook himself free of the narrows,[2] ran his triremes aground off

Rhoeteum. When the Athenians had come to close quarters, the fighting

commenced, and was sustained at once from ships and shore, until at

length the Athenians retired to their main camp at Madytus, having

achieved nothing.



[2] Lit. "as he opened" {os enoige}. This is still a mariner's phrase

    in modern Greek, if I am rightly informed.



Meanwhile Mindarus, while sacrificing to Athena at Ilium, had observed

the battle. He at once hastened to the sea, and getting his own

triremes afloat, sailed out to pick up the ships with Dorieus. The

Athenians on their side put out to meet him, and engaged him off

Abydos. From early morning till the afternoon the fight was kept up

close to the shore.[3] Victory and defeat hung still in even balance,

when Alcibiades came sailing up with eighteen ships. Thereupon the

Peloponnesians fled towards Abydos, where, however, Pharnabazus

brought them timely assistance.[4] Mounted on horseback, he pushed

forward into the sea as far as his horse would let him, doing battle

himself, and encouraging his troopers and the infantry alike to play

their parts. Then the Peloponnesians, ranging their ships in close-

packed order, and drawing up their battle line in proximity to the

land, kept up the fight. At length the Athenians, having captured

thirty of the enemy's vessels without their crews, and having

recovered those of their own which they had previously lost, set sail

for Sestos. Here the fleet, with the exception of forty vessels,

dispersed in different directions outside the Hellespont, to collect

money; while Thrasylus, one of the generals, sailed to Athens to

report what had happened, and to beg for a reinforcement of troops and

ships. After the above incidents, Tissaphernes arrived in the

Hellespont, and received a visit from Alcibiades, who presented him

with a single ship, bringing with him tokens of friendship and gifts,

whereupon Tissaphernes seized him and shut him up in Sardis, giving

out that the king's orders were to go to war with the Athenians.

Thirty days later Alcibiades, accompanied by Mantitheus, who had been

captured in Caria, managed to procure horses and escaped by night to

Clazomenae.



[3] The original has a somewhat more poetical ring. The author uses

    the old Attic or Ionic word {eona}. This is a mark of style, of

    which we shall have many instances. One might perhap produce

    something of the effect here by translating: "the battle hugged

    the strand."



[4] Or, "came to their aid along the shore."



B.C. 410. And now the Athenians at Sestos, hearing that Mindarus was

meditating an attack upon them with a squadron of sixty sail, gave him

the slip, and under cover of night escaped to Cardia. Hither also

Alcibiades repaired from Clazomenae, having with him five triremes and

a light skiff; but on learning that the Peloponnesian fleet had left

Abydos and was in full sail for Cyzicus, he set off himself by land to

Sestos, giving orders to the fleet to sail round and join him there.

Presently the vessels arrived, and he was on the point of putting out

to sea with everything ready for action, when Theramenes, with a fleet

of twenty ships from Macedonia, entered the port, and at the same

instant Thrasybulus, with a second fleet of twenty sail from Thasos,

both squadrons having been engaged in collecting money. Bidding these

officers also follow him with all speed, as soon as they had taken out

their large sails and cleared for action, Alcibiades set sail himself

for Parium. During the following night the united squadron, consisting

now of eighty-six vessels, stood out to sea from Parium, and reached

Proconnesus next morning, about the hour of breakfast. Here they

learnt that Mindarus was in Cyzicus, and that Pharnabazus, with a body

of infantry, was with him. Accordingly they waited the whole of this

day at Proconnesus. On the following day Alcibiades summoned an

assembly, and addressing the men in terms of encouragement, warned

them that a threefold service was expected of them; that they must be

ready for a sea fight, a land fight, and a wall fight all at once,

"for look you," said he, "we have no money, but the enemy has

unlimited supplies from the king."



Now, on the previous day, as soon as they were come to moorings, he

had collected all the sea-going craft of the island, big and little

alike, under his own control, that no one might report the number of

his squadron to the enemy, and he had further caused a proclamation to

be made, that any one caught sailing across to the opposite coast

would be punished with death. When the meeting was over, he got his

ships ready for action, and stood out to sea towards Cyzicus in

torrents of rain. Off Cyzicus the sky cleared, and the sun shone out

and revealed to him the spectacle of Mindarus's vessels, sixty in

number, exercising at some distance from the harbour, and, in fact,

intercepted by himself. The Peloponnesians, perceiving at a glance the

greatly increased number of the Athenian galleys, and noting their

proximity to the port, made haste to reach the land, where they

brought their vessels to anchor in a body, and prepared to engage the

enemy as he sailed to the attack. But Alcibiades, sailing round with

twenty of his vessels, came to land and disembarked. Seeing this,

Mindarus also landed, and in the engagement which ensued he fell

fighting, whilst those who were with him took to flight. As for the

enemy's ships, the Athenians succeeded in capturing the whole of them

(with the exception of the Syracusan vessels, which were burnt by

their crews), and made off with their prizes to Proconnesus. From

thence on the following day they sailed to attack Cyzicus. The men of

that place, seeing that the Peloponnesians and Pharnabazus had

evacuated the town, admitted the Athenians. Here Alcibiades remained

twenty days, obtaining large sums of money from the Cyzicenes, but

otherwise inflicting no sort of mischief on the community. He then

sailed back to Proconnesus, and from there to Perinthus and Selybria.

The inhabitants of the former place welcomed his troops into their

city, but the Selybrians preferred to give money, and so escape the

admission of the troops. Continuing the voyage the squadron reached

Chrysopolis in Chalcedonia,[5] where they built a fort, and

established a custom-house to collect the tithe dues which they levied

on all merchantmen passing through the Straights from the Black Sea.

Besides this, a detachment of thirty ships was left there under the

two generals, Theramenes and Eubulus, with instructions not only to

keep a look-out on the port itself and on all traders passing through

the channel, but generally to injure the enemy in any way which might

present itself. This done, the rest of the generals hastened back to

the Hellespont.



[5] This is the common spelling, but the coins of Calchedon have the

    letters {KALKH}, and so the name is written in the best MSS. of

    Herodotus, Xenophon, and other writers, by whom the place is

    named. See "Dict. of Greek and Roman Geog." "Chalcedon."



Now a despatch from Hippocrates, Mindarus's vice-admiral,[6] had been

intercepted on its way to Lacedaemon, and taken to Athens. It ran as

follows (in broad Doric):[7] "Ships gone; Mindarus dead; the men

starving; at our wits' end what to do."



[6] "Epistoleus," i.e. secretary or despatch writer, is the Spartan

    title of the officer second in command to the admiral.



[7] Reading {'Errei ta kala} (Bergk's conjecture for {kala}) =

    "timbers," i.e. "ships" (a Doric word). Cf. Aristoph., "Lys."

    1253, {potta kala}. The despatch continues: {Mindaros apessoua}

    (al. {apessua}), which is much more racy than the simple word

    "dead." "M. is gone off." I cannot find the right English or

    "broad Scotch" equivalent. See Thirlwall, "Hist. Gr." IV. xxix. 88

    note.



Pharnabazus, however, was ready to meet with encouragement the

despondency which afflicted the whole Peloponnesian army and their

allies. "As long as their own bodies were safe and sound, why need

they take to heart the loss of a few wooden hulls? Was there not

timber enough and to spare in the king's territory?" And so he

presented each man with a cloak and maintenance for a couple of

months, after which he armed the sailors and formed them into a

coastguard for the security of his own seaboard.



He next called a meeting of the generals and trierarchs of the

different States, and instructed them to build just as many new ships

in the dockyards of Antandrus as they had respectively lost. He

himself was to furnish the funds, and he gave them to understand that

they might bring down timber from Mount Ida. While the ships were

building, the Syracusans helped the men of Antandrus to finish a

section of their walls, and were particularly pleasant on garrison

duty; and that is why the Syracusans to this day enjoy the privilege

of citizenship, with the title of "benefactors," at Antandrus. Having

so arranged these matters, Pharnabazus proceeded at once to the rescue

of Chalcedon.



It was at this date that the Syracusan generals received news from

home of their banishment by the democratic party. Accordingly they

called a meeting of their separate divisions, and putting forward

Hermocrates[8] as their spokesman, proceeded to deplore their

misfortune, insisting upon the injustice and the illegality of their

banishment. "And now let us admonish you," they added, "to be eager

and willing in the future, even as in the past: whatever the word of

command may be, show yourselves good men and true: let not the memory

of those glorious sea fights fade. Think of those victories you have

won, those ships you have captured by your own unaided efforts; forget

not that long list of achievements shared by yourselves with others,

in all which you proved yourselves invincible under our generalship.

It was to a happy combination of our merit and your enthusiasm,

displayed alike on land and sea, that you owe the strength and

perfection of your discipline."



[8] Hermocrates, the son of Hermon. We first hear of him in Thuc. iv.

    58 foll. as the chief agent in bringing the Sicilian States

    together in conference at Gela B.C. 424, with a view to healing

    their differences and combining to frustrate the dangerous designs

    of Athens. In 415 B.C., when the attack came, he was again the

    master spirit in rendering it abortive (Thuc. vi. 72 foll.) In 412

    B.C. it was he who urged the Sicilians to assist in completing the

    overthrow of Athens, by sending a squadron to co-operate with the

    Peloponnesian navy--for the relief of Miletus, etc. (Thuc. viii.

    26, 27 foll.) At a later date, in 411 B.C., when the Peloponnesian

    sailors were ready to mutiny, and "laid all their grievances to

    the charge of Astyochus (the Spartan admiral), who humoured

    Tissaphernes for his own gain" (Thuc. viii. 83), Hermocrates took

    the men's part, and so incurred the hatred of Tissaphernes.



With these words they called upon the men to choose other commanders,

who should undertake the duties of their office, until the arrival of

their successors. Thereupon the whole assembly, and more particularly

the captains and masters of vessels and marines, insisted with loud

cries on their continuance in command. The generals replied, "It was

not for them to indulge in faction against the State, but rather it

was their duty, in case any charges were forthcoming against

themselves, at once to render an account." When, however, no one had

any kind of accusation to prefer, they yielded to the general demand,

and were content to await the arrival of their successors. The names

of these were--Demarchus, the son of Epidocus; Myscon, the son of

Mencrates; and Potamis, the son of Gnosis.



The captains, for their part, swore to restore the exiled generals as

soon as they themselves should return to Syracuse. At present with a

general vote of thanks they despatched them to their several

destinations. It particular those who had enjoyed the society of

Hermocrates recalled his virtues with regret, his thoroughness and

enthusiasm, his frankness and affability, the care with which every

morning and evening he was wont to gather in his quarters a group of

naval captains and mariners whose ability he recognised. These were

his confidants, to whom he communicated what he intended to say or do:

they were his pupils, to whom he gave lessons in oratory, now calling

upon them to speak extempore, and now again after deliberation. By

these means Hermocrates had gained a wide reputation at the council

board, where his mastery of language was no less felt than the wisdom

of his advice. Appearing at Lacedaemon as the accuser of

Tissaphernes,[9] he had carried his case, not only by the testimony of

Astyochus, but by the obvious sincerity of his statements, and on the

strength of this reputation he now betook himself to Pharnabazus. The

latter did not wait to be asked, but at once gave him money, which

enabled him to collect friends and triremes, with a view to his

ultimate recall to Syracuse. Meanwhile the successors of the

Syracusans had arrived at Miletus, where they took charge of the ships

and the army.



[9] The matter referred to is fully explained Thuc. viii. 85.



It was at this same season that a revolution occurred in Thasos,

involving the expulsion of the philo-Laconian party, with the Laconian

governor Eteonicus. The Laconian Pasippidas was charged with having

brought the business about in conjunction with Tissaphernes, and was

banished from Sparta in consequence. The naval force which he had been

collecting from the allies was handed over to Cratesippidas, who was

sent out to take his place in Chios.



About the same period, while Thrasylus was still in Athens, Agis[10]

made a foraging expedition up to the very walls of the city. But

Thrasylus led out the Athenians with the rest of the inhabitants of

the city, and drew them up by the side of the Lyceum Gymnasium, ready

to engage the enemy if they approached; seeing which, Agis beat a

hasty retreat, not however without the loss of some of his supports, a

few of whom were cut down by the Athenian light troops. This success

disposed the citizens to take a still more favourable view of the

objects for which Thrasylus had come; and they passed a decree

empowering him to call out a thousand hoplites, one hundred cavalry,

and fifty triremes.



[10] The reader will recollect that we are giving in "the Deceleian"

    period of the war, 413-404 B.C. The Spartan king was in command of

    the fortress of Deceleia, only fourteen miles distant from Athens,

    and erected on a spot within sight of the city. See Thuc. vii. 19,

    27, 28.



Meanwhile Agis, as he looked out from Deceleia, and saw vessel after

vessel laden with corn running down to Piraeus, declared that it was

useless for his troops to go on week after week excluding the

Athenians from their own land, while no one stopped the source of

their corn supply by sea: the best plan would be to send

Clearchus,[11] the son of Rhamphius, who was proxenos[12] of the

Byzantines, to Chalcedon and Byzantium. The suggestion was approved,

and with fifteen vessels duly manned from Megara, or furnished by

other allies, Clearchus set out. These were troop-ships rather than

swift-sailing men-of-war. Three of them, on reaching the Hellespont,

were destroyed by the Athenian ships employed to keep a sharp look-out

on all merchant craft in those waters. The other twelve escaped to

Sestos, and thence finally reached Byzantium in safety.



[11] Of Clearchus we shall hear more in the sequel, and in the

    "Anabasis."



[12] The Proxenus answered pretty nearly to our "Consul," "Agent,"

    "Resident"; but he differed in this respect, that he was always a

    member of the foreign State. An Athenian represented Sparta at

    Athens; a Laconian represented Athens at Sparta, and so forth. See

    Liddell and Scott.



So closed the year--a year notable also for the expedition against

Sicily of the Carthaginians under Hannibal with one hundred thousand

men, and the capture, within three months, of the two Hellenic cities

of Selinus and Himera.







II



B.C. 409. Next year[1] . . . the Athenians fortified Thoricus; and

Thrasylus, taking the vessels lately voted him and five thousand of

his seamen armed to serve as peltasts,[2] set sail for Samos at the

beginning of summer. At Samos he stayed three days, and then continued

his voyage to Pygela, where he proceeded to ravage the territory and

attack the fortress. Presently a detachment from Miletus came to the

rescue of the men of Pygela, and attacking the scattered bands of the

Athenian light troops, put them to flight. But to the aid of the light

troops came the naval brigade of peltasts, with two companies of heavy

infantry, and all but annihilated the whole detachment from Miletus.

They captured about two hundred shields, and set up a trophy. Next day

they sailed to Notium, and from Notium, after due preparation, marched

upon Colophon. The Colophonians capitulated without a blow. The

following night they made an incursion into Lydia, where the corn

crops were ripe, and burnt several villages, and captured money,

slaves, and other booty in large quantity. But Stages, the Persian,

who was employed in this neighbourhood, fell in with a reinforcement

of cavalry sent to protect the scattered pillaging parties from the

Athenian camp, whilst occupied with their individual plunder, and took

one trooper prisoner, killing seven others. After this Thrasylus led

his troops back to the sea, intending to sail to Ephesus. Meanwhile

Tissaphernes, who had wind of this intention, began collecting a large

army and despatching cavalry with a summons to the inhabitants one and

all to rally to the defence of the goddess Artemis at Ephesus.



[1] The MSS. here give a suspected passage, which may be rendered

    thus: "The first of Olympiad 93, celebrated as the year in which

    the newly-added two-horse race was won by Evagorias the Eleian,

    and the stadion (200 yards foot-race) by the Cyrenaean Eubotas,

    when Evarchippus was ephor at Sparta and Euctemon archon at

    Athens." But Ol. 93, to which these officers,and the addition of

    the new race at Olympia belong, is the year 408. We must therefore

    suppose either that this passage has been accidentally inserted in

    the wrong place by some editor or copyist, or that the author was

    confused in his dates. The "stadium" is the famous foot-race at

    Olympia, 606 3/4 English feet in length, run on a course also

    called the "Stadion," which was exactly a stade long.



[2] Peltasts, i.e. light infantry armed with the "pelta" or light

    shield, instead of the heavy {aspis} of the hoplite or heavy

    infantry soldiers.



On the seventeenth day after the incursion above mentioned Thrasylus

sailed to Ephesus. He disembarked his troops in two divisions, his

heavy infantry in the neighbourhood of Mount Coressus; his cavalry,

peltasts, and marines, with the remainder of his force, near the marsh

on the other side of the city. At daybreak he pushed forward both

divisions. The citizens of Ephesus, on their side, were not slow to

protect themselves. They had to aid them the troops brought up by

Tissaphernes, as well as two detachments of Syracusans, consisting of

the crews of their former twenty vessels and those of five new vessels

which had opportunely arrived quite recently under Eucles, the son of

Hippon, and Heracleides, the son of Aristogenes, together with two

Selinuntian vessels. All these several forces first attacked the heavy

infantry near Coressus; these they routed, killing about one hundred

of them, and driving the remainder down into the sea. They then turned

to deal with the second division on the marsh. Here, too, the

Athenians were put to flight, and as many as three hundred of them

perished. On this spot the Ephesians erected a trophy, and another at

Coressus. The valour of the Syracusans and Selinuntians had been so

conspicuous that the citizens presented many of them, both publicly

and privately, with prizes for distinction in the field, besides

offering the right of residence in their city with certain immunities

to all who at any time might wish to live there. To the Selinuntians,

indeed, as their own city had lately been destroyed, they offered full

citizenship.



The Athenians, after picking up their dead under a truce, set sail for

Notium, and having there buried the slain, continued their vogage

towards Lesbos and the Hellespont. Whilst lying at anchor in the

harbour of Methymna, in that island, they caught sight of the

Syracusan vessels, five-and-twenty in number, coasting along from

Ephesus. They put out to sea to attack them, and captured four ships

with their crews, and chased the remainder back to Ephesus. The

prisoners were sent by Thrasylus to Athens, with one exception. This

was an Athenian, Alcibiades, who was a cousin and fellow-exile of

Alcibiades. Him Thrasylus released.[3] From Methymna Thrasylus set

sail to Sestos to join the main body of the army, after which the

united forces crossed to Lampsacus. And now winter was approaching. It

was the winter in which the Syracusan prisoners who had been immured

in the stone quarries of Piraeus dug through the rock and escaped one

night, some to Decelia and others to Megara. At Lampsacus Alcibiades

was anxious to marshal the whole military force there collected in one

body, but the old troops refused to be incorporated with those of

Thrasylus. "They, who had never yet been beaten, with these newcomers

who had just suffered a defeat." So they devoted the winter to

fortifying Lampsacus. They also made an expedition against Abydos,

where Pharnabazus, coming to the rescue of the place, encountered them

with numerous cavalry, but was defeated and forced to flee, Alcibiades

pursuing hard with his cavalry and one hundred and twenty infantry

under the command of Menander, till darkness intervened. After this

battle the soldiers came together of their own accord, and freely

fraternised with the troops of Thrasylus. This expedition was followed

by other incursions during the winter into the interior, where they

found plenty to do ravaging the king's territory.



[3] Reading {apelusen}. Wolf's conjecture for the MSS. {katelousen} =

    stoned. See Thirlwall, "Hist. Gr." IV. xxix. 93 note.



It was at this period also that the Lacedaemonians allowed their

revolted helots from Malea, who had found an asylum at Coryphasium, to

depart under a flag of truce. It was also about the same period that

the Achaeans betrayed the colonists of Heracleia Trachinia, when they

were all drawn up in battle to meet the hostile Oetaeans, whereby as

many as seven hundred of them were lost, together with the governor[4]

from Lacedaemon, Labotas. Thus the year came to its close--a year

marked further by a revolt of the Medes from Darius, the king of

Persia, followed by renewed submission to his authority.



[4] Technically {armostes} (harmost), i.e. administrator.







III



B.C. 408. The year following is the year in which the temple of

Athena, in Phocaea, was struck by lightning and set on fire.[1] With

the cessation of winter, in early spring, the Athenians set sail with

the whole of their force to Proconnesus, and thence advanced upon

Chalcedon and Byzantium, encamping near the former town. The men of

Chalcedon, aware of their approach, had taken the precaution to

deposit all their pillageable property with their neighbours, the

Bithynian Thracians; whereupon Alcibiades put himself at the head of a

small body of heavy infantry with the cavalry, and giving orders to

the fleet to follow along the coast, marched against the Bithynians

and demanded back the property of the Chalcedonians, threatening them

with war in case of refusal. The Bithynians delivered up the property.

Returning to camp, not only thus enriched, but with the further

satisfaction of having secured pledges of good behaviour from the

Bithynians, Alcibiades set to work with the whole of his troops to

draw lines of circumvallation round Chalcedon from sea to sea, so as

to include as much of the river as possible within his wall, which was

made of timber. Thereupon the Lacedaemonian governor, Hippocrates, let

his troops out of the city and offered battle, and the Athenians, on

their side, drew up their forces opposite to receive him; while

Pharnabazus, from without the lines of circumvallation, was still

advancing with his army and large bodies of horse. Hippocrates and

Thrasylus engaged each other with their heavy infantry for a long

while, until Alcibiades, with a detachment of infantry and the

cavalry, intervened. Presently Hippocrates fell, and the troops under

him fled into the city; at the same instant Pharnabazus, unable to

effect a junction with the Lacedaemonian leader, owing to the

circumscribed nature of the ground and the close proximity of the

river to the enemy's lines, retired to the Heracleium,[2] belonging to

the Chalcedonians, where his camp lay. After this success Alcibiades

set off to the Hellespont and the Chersonese to raise money, and the

remaining generals came to terms with Pharnabazus in respect of

Chalcedon; according to these, the Persian satrap agreed to pay the

Athenians twenty talents[3] in behalf of the town, and to grant their

ambassadors a safe conduct up country to the king. It was further

stipulated by mutual consent and under oaths provided, that the

Chalcedonians should continue the payment of their customary tribute

to Athens, being also bound to discharge all outstanding debts. The

Athenians, on their side, were bound to desist from all hostilities

until the return of their ambassadors from the king. These oaths were

not witnessed by Alcibiades, who was now in the neighbourhood of

Selybria. Having taken that place, he presently appeared before the

walls of Byzantium at the head of the men of Chersonese, who came out

with their whole force; he was aided further by troops from Thrace and

more than three hundred horse. Accordingly Pharnabazus, insisting that

he too must take the oath, decided to remain in Chalcedon, and to

await his arrival from Byzantium. Alcibiades came, but was not

prepared to bind himself by any oaths, unless Pharnabazus would, on

his side, take oaths to himself. After this, oaths were exchanged

between them by proxy. Alcibiades took them at Chrysopolis in the

presence of two representatives sent by Pharnabazus--namely,

Mitrobates and Arnapes. Pharnabazus took them at Chalcedon in the

presence of Euryptolemus and Diotimus, who represented Alcibiades.

Both parties bound themselves not only by the general oath, but also

interchanged personal pledges of good faith.



[1] The MSS. here give the words, "in the ephorate of Pantacles and

    the archonship of Antigenes, two-and-twenty years from the

    beginning of the war," but the twenty-second year of the war =

    B.C. 410; Antigenes archon, B.C. 407 = Ol. 93, 2; the passage must

    be regarded as a note mis-inserted by some editor or copyist (vide

    supra, I. 11.)



[2] I.e. sacred place or temple of Heracles.



[3] Twenty talents = 4800 pounds; or, more exactly, 4875 pounds.



This done, Pharnabazus left Chalcedon at once, with injunctions that

those who were going up to the king as ambassadors should meet him at

Cyzicus. The representatives of Athens were Dorotheus, Philodices,

Theogenes, Euryptolemus, and Mantitheus; with them were two Argives,

Cleostratus and Pyrrholochus. An embassy of the Lacedaemonians was

also about to make the journey. This consisted of Pasippidas and his

fellows, with whom were Hermocrates, now an exile from Syracuse, and

his brother Proxenus. So Pharnabazus put himself at their head.

Meanwhile the Athenians prosecuted the siege of Byzantium; lines of

circumvallation were drawn; and they diversified the blockade by

sharpshooting at long range and occasional assaults upon the walls.

Inside the city lay Clearchus, the Lacedaemonian governor, and a body

of Perioci with a small detachment of Neodamodes.[4] There was also a

body of Megarians under their general Helixus, a Megarian, and another

body of Boeotians, with their general Coeratadas. The Athenians,

finding presently that they could effect nothing by force, worked upon

some of the inhabitants to betray the place. Clearchus, meanwhile,

never dreaming that any one would be capable of such an act, had

crossed over to the opposite coast to visit Pharnabazus; he had left

everything in perfect order, entrusting the government of the city to

Coeratadas and Helixus. His mission was to obtain pay for the soldiers

from the Persian satrap, and to collect vessels from various quarters.

Some were already in the Hellespont, where they had been left as

guardships by Pasippidas, or else at Antandrus. Others formed the

fleet which Agesandridas, who had formerly served as a marine[5] under

Mindarus, now commanded on the Thracian coast. Others Clearchus

purposed to have built, and with the whole united squadron to so

injure the allies of the Athenians as to draw off the besieging army

from Byzantium. But no sooner was he fairly gone than those who were

minded to betray the city set to work. Their names were Cydon,

Ariston, Anaxicrates, Lycurgus, and Anaxilaus. The last-named was

afterwards impeached for treachery in Lacedaemon on the capital

charge, and acquitted on the plea that, to begin with, he was not a

Lacedaemonian, but a Byzantine, and, so far from having betrayed the

city, he had saved it, when he saw women and children perishing of

starvation; for Clearchus had given away all the corn in the city to

the Lacedaemonian soldiers. It was for these reasons, as Anaxilaus

himself admitted, he had introduced the enemy, and not for the sake of

money, nor out of hatred to Lacedaemon.



[4] According to the constitution of Lacedaemon the whole government

    was in Dorian hands. The subject population was divided into (1)

    Helots, who were State serfs. The children of Helots were at times

    brought up by Spartans and called "Mothakes"; Helots who had

    received their liberty were called "Neodamodes" ({neodamodeis}).

    After the conquest of Messenia this class was very numerous. (2)

    Perioeci. These were the ancient Achaean inhabitants, living in

    towns and villages, and managing their own affairs, paying

    tribute, and serving in the army as heavy-armed soldiers. In 458

    B.C. they were said to number thirty thousand. The Spartans

    themselves were divided, like all Dorians, into three tribes,

    Hylleis, Dymanes, and Pamphyli, each of which tribes was divided

    into ten "obes," which were again divided into {oikoi} or families

    possessed of landed properties. In 458 B.C. there were said to be

    nine thousand such families; but in course of time, through

    alienation of lands, deaths in war, and other causes, their

    numbers were much diminished; and in many cases there was a loss

    of status, so that in the time of Agis III., B.C. 244, we hear of

    two orders of Spartans, the {omoioi} and the {upomeiones}

    (inferiors); seven hundred Spartans (families) proper and one

    hundred landed proprietors. See Mullers "Dorians," vol. ii. bk.

    iii. ch. x. S. 3 (Eng. trans.); Arist. "Pol." ii. 9, 15; Plut.

    ("Agis").



[5] The greek word is {epibates}, which some think was the title of an

    inferior naval officer in the Spartan service, but there is no

    proof of this. Cf. Thuc. viii. 61, and Prof. Jowett's note; also

    Grote, "Hist. of Greece," viii. 27 (2d ed.)



As soon as everything was ready, these people opened the gates leading

to the Thracian Square, as it is called, and admitted the Athenian

troops with Alcibiades at their head. Helixus and Coeratadas, in

complete ignorance of the plot, hastened to the Agora with the whole

of the garrison, ready to confront the danger; but finding the enemy

in occupation, they had nothing for it but to give themselves up. They

were sent off as prisoners to Athens, where Coeratadas, in the midst

of the crowd and confusion of debarkation at Piraeus, gave his guards

the slip, and made his way in safety to Decelia.







IV



B.C. 407. Pharnabazus and the ambassadors were passing the winter at

Gordium in Phrygia, when they heard of the occurrences at Byzantium.

Continuing their journey to the king's court in the commencement of

spring, they were met by a former embassy, which was now on its return

journey. These were the Lacedaemonian ambassadors, Boeotius and his

party, with the other envoys; who told them that the Lacedaemonians

had obtained from the king all they wanted. One of the company was

Cyrus, the new governor of all the seaboard districts, who was

prepared to co-operate with the Lacedaemonians in war. He was the

bearer, moreover, of a letter with the royal seal attached. It was

addressed to all the populations of Lower Asia, and contained the

following words: "I send down Cyrus as 'Karanos'"[1]--that is to say,

supreme lord--"over all those who muster at Castolus." The ambassadors

of the Athenians, even while listening to this announcement, and

indeed after they had seen Cyrus, were still desirous, if possible, to

continue their journey to the king, or, failing that, to return home.

Cyrus, however, urged upon Pharnabazus either to deliver them up to

himself, or to defer sending them home at present; his object being to

prevent the Athenians learning what was going on. Pharnabazus, wishing

to escape all blame, for the time being detained them, telling them,

at one time, that he would presently escort them up country to the

king, and at another time that he would send them safe home. But when

three years had elapsed, he prayed Cyrus to let them go, declaring

that he had taken an oath to bring them back to the sea, in default of

escorting them up to the king. Then at last they received safe conduct

to Ariobarzanes, with orders for their further transportation. The

latter conducted them a stage further, to Cius in Mysia; and from Cius

they set sail to join their main armament.



[1] {Karanos.} Is this a Greek word, a Doric form, {karanos}, akin to

    {kara} (cf. {karenon}) = chief? or is it not more likely a Persian

    or native word, Karanos? and might not the title be akin

    conceivably to the word {korano}, which occurs on many Indo-

    Bactrian coins (see A. von Sallet, "Die Nachfolger Alexanders des

    Grossen," p. 57, etc.)? or is {koiranos} the connecting link? The

    words translated "that is to say, supreme lord," {to de karanon

    esti kurion}, look very like a commentator's gloss.



Alcibiades, whose chief desire was to return home to Athens with the

troops, immediately set sail for Samos; and from that island, taking

twenty of the ships, he sailed to the Ceramic Gulf of Caria, where he

collected a hundred talents, and so returned to Samos.



Thrasybulus had gone Thrace-wards with thirty ships. In this quarter

he reduced various places which had revolted to Lacedaemon, including

the island of Thasos, which was in a bad plight, the result of wars,

revolutions, and famine.



Thrasylus, with the rest of the army, sailed back straight to Athens.

On his arrival he found that the Athenians had already chosen as their

general Alcibiades, who was still in exile, and Thrasybulus, who was

also absent, and as a third, from among those at home, Conon.



Meanwhile Alcibiades, with the moneys lately collected and his fleet

of twenty ships, left Samos and visited Paros. From Paros he stood out

to sea across to Gytheum,[2] to keep an eye on the thirty ships of war

which, as he was informed, the Lacedaemonians were equipping in that

arsenal. Gytheum would also be a favourable point of observation from

which to gauge the disposition of his fellow-countrymen and the

prospects of his recall. When at length their good disposition seemed

to him established, not only by his election as general, but by the

messages of invitation which he received in private from his friends,

he sailed home, and entered Piraeus on the very day of the festival of

the Plunteria,[3] when the statue of Athena is veiled and screened

from public gaze. This was a coincidence, as some thought, of evil

omen, and unpropitious alike to himself and the State, for no Athenian

would transact serious business on such a day.



[2] Gytheum, the port and arsenal of Sparta, situated near the head of

    the Laconian Gulf (now Marathonisi).



[3] {ta Plunteria}, or feast of washings, held on the 25th of the

    month Thargelion, when the image of the goddess Athena was

    stripped in order that her clothes might be washed by the

    Praxiergidae; neither assembly nor court was held on that day, and

    the Temple was closed.



As he sailed into the harbour, two great crowds--one from the Piraeus,

the other from the city[4]--flocked to meet the vessels. Wonderment,

mixed with a desire to see Alcibiades, was the prevailing sentiment of

the multitude. Of him they spoke: some asserting that he was the best

of citizens, and that in his sole instance banishment had been ill-

deserved. He had been the victim of plots, hatched in the brains of

people less able than himself, however much they might excel in

pestilent speech; men whose one principle of statecraft was to look to

their private gains; whereas this man's policy had ever been to uphold

the common weal, as much by his private means as by all the power of

the State. His own choice, eight years ago, when the charge of impiety

in the matter of the mysteries was still fresh, would have been to

submit to trial at once. It was his personal foes, who had succeeded

in postponing that undeniably just procedure; who waited till his back

was turned, and then robbed him of his fatherland. Then it was that,

being made the very slave of circumstance, he was driven to court the

men he hated most; and at a time when his own life was in daily peril,

he must see his dearest friends and fellow-citizens, nay, the very

State itself, bent on a suicidal course, and yet, in the exclusion of

exile, be unable to lend a helping hand. "It is not men of this

stamp," they averred, "who desire changes in affairs and revolution:

had he not already guaranteed to him by the Democracy a position

higher than that of his equals in age, and scarcely if at all inferior

to his seniors? How different was the position of his enemies. It had

been the fortune of these, though they were known to be the same men

they had always been, to use their lately acquired power for the

destruction in the first instance of the better classes; and then,

being alone left surviving, to be accepted by their fellow-citizens in

the absence of better men."



[4] Or, "collected to meet the vessels from curiosity and a desire to

    see Alcibiades."



Others, however, insisted that for all their past miseries and

misfortunes Alcibiades alone was responsible: "If more trials were

still in store for the State, here was the master mischief-maker ready

at his post to precipitate them."



When the vessels came to their moorings, close to the land,

Alcibiades, from fear of his enemies, was unwilling to disembark at

once. Mounting on the quarterdeck, he scanned the multitude,[5]

anxious to make certain of the presence of his friends. Presently his

eyes lit upon Euryptolemus, the son of Peisianax, who was his cousin,

and then on the rest of his relations and other friends. Upon this he

landed, and so, in the midst of an escort ready to put down any

attempt upon his person, made his way to the city.



[5] Or, "he looked to see if his friends were there."



In the Senate and Public Assembly[6] he made speeches, defending

himself against the charge of impiety, and asserting that he had been

the victim of injustice, with other like topics, which in the present

temper of the assembly no one ventured to gainsay.



[6] Technically the "Boule" ({Boule}) or Senate, and "Ecclesia" or

    Popular Assembly.



He was then formally declared leader and chief of the State, with

irresponsible powers, as being the sole individual capable of

recovering the ancient power and prestige of Athens. Armed with this

authority, his first act was to institute anew the processional march

to Eleusis; for of late years, owing to the war, the Athenians had

been forced to conduct the mysteries by sea. Now, at the head of the

troops, he caused them to be conducted once again by land. This done,

his next step was to muster an armament of one thousand five hundred

heavy infantry, one hundred and fifty cavalry, and one hundred ships;

and lastly, within three months of his return, he set sail for Andros,

which had revolted from Athens.



The generals chosen to co-operate with him on land were Aristocrates

and Adeimantus, the son of Leucophilides. He disembarked his troops on

the island of Andros at Gaurium, and routed the Andrian citizens who

sallied out from the town to resist the invader; forcing them to

return and keep close within their walls, though the number who fell

was not large. This defeat was shared by some Lacedaemonians who were

in the place. Alcibiades erected a trophy, and after a few days set

sail himself for Samos, which became his base of operations in the

future conduct of the war.







V



At a date not much earlier than that of the incidents just described,

the Lacedaemonians had sent out Lysander as their admiral, in the

place of Cratesippidas, whose period of office had expired. The new

admiral first visited Rhodes, where he got some ships, and sailed to

Cos and Miletus, and from the latter place to Ephesus. At Ephesus he

waited with seventy sail, expecting the advent of Cyrus in Sardis,

when he at once went up to pay the prince a visit with the ambassadors

from Lacedaemon. And now an opportunity was given to denounce the

proceedings of Tissaphernes, and at the same time to beg Cyrus himself

to show as much zeal as possible in the prosecution of the war. Cyrus

replied that not only had he received express injunction from his

father to the same effect, but that his own views coincided with their

wishes, which he was determined to carry out to the letter. He had, he

informed them, brought with him five hundred talents;[1] and if that

sum failed, he had still the private revenue, which his father allowed

him, to fall back upon, and when this resource was in its turn

exhausted, he would coin the gold and silver throne on which he sat,

into money for their benefit.[2]



[1] About 120,000 pounds. One Euboic or Attic talent = sixty minae =

    six thousand drachmae = 243 pounds 15 shillings of our money.



[2] Cf. the language of Tissaphernes, Thuc. viii. 81.



His audience thanked him for what he said, and further begged him to

fix the rate of payment for the seamen at one Attic drachma per

man,[3] explaining that should this rate of payment be adopted, the

sailors of the Athenians would desert, and in the end there would be a

saving of expenditure. Cyrus complimented them on the soundness of

their arguments, but said that it was not in his power to exceed the

injunctions of the king. The terms of agreement were precise, thirty

minae[4] a month per vessel to be given, whatever number of vessels

the Lacedaemonians might choose to maintain.



[3] About 9 3/4 pence; a drachma (= six obols) would be very high pay

    for a sailor--indeed, just double the usual amount. See Thuc. vi.

    8 and viii. 29, and Prof. Jowett ad loc. Tissaphernes had, in the

    winter of 412 B.C., distributed one month's pay among the

    Peloponnesian ships at this high rate of a drachma a day, "as his

    envoy had promised at Lacedaemon;" but this he proposed to reduce

    to half a drachma, "until he had asked the king's leave, promising

    that if he obtained it, he would pay the entire drachma. On the

    remonstrance, however, of Hermocrates, the Syracusan general, he

    promised to each man a payment of somewhat more than three obols."



[4] Nearly 122 pounds; and thirty minae a month to each ship (the crew

    of each ship being taken at two hundred) = three obols a day to

    each man. The terms of agreement to which Cyrus refers may have

    been specified in the convention mentioned above in chap. iv,

    which Boeotius and the rest were so proud to have obtained. But

    see Grote, "Hist. of Greece," vol. viii. p. 192 note (2d ed.)



To this rejoinder Lysander at the moment said nothing. But after

dinner, when Cyrus drank to his health, asking him "What he could do

to gratify him most?" Lysander replied, "Add an obol[5] to the

sailors' pay." After this the pay was raised to four instead of three

obols, as it hitherto had been. Nor did the liberality of Cyrus end

here; he not only paid up all arrears, but further gave a month's pay

in advance, so that, if the enthusiasm of the army had been great

before, it was greater than ever now. The Athenians when they heard

the news were proportionately depressed, and by help of Tissaphernes

despatched ambassadors to Cyrus. That prince, however, refused to

receive them, nor were the prayers of Tissaphernes of any avail,

however much he insisted that Cyrus should adopt the policy which he

himself, on the advice of Alcibiades, had persistently acted on. This

was simply not to suffer any single Hellenic state to grow strong at

the expense of the rest, but to keep them all weak alike, distracted

by internecine strife.



[5] An obol = one-sixth of a drachma; the Attic obol = rather more

    than 1 1/2 pence.



Lysander, now that the organisation of his navy was arranged to his

satisfaction, beached his squadron of ninety vessels at Ephesus, and

sat with hands folded, whilst the vessels dried and underwent repairs.

Alcibiades, being informed that Thrasybulus had come south of the

Hellespont and was fortifying Phocaea, sailed across to join him,

leaving his own pilot Antiochus in command of the fleet, with orders

not to attack Lysander's fleet. Antiochus, however, was tempted to

leave Notium and sail into the harbour of Ephesus with a couple of

ships, his own and another, past the prows of Lysander's squadron. The

Spartan at first contented himself with launching a few of his ships,

and started in pursuit of the intruder; but when the Athenians came

out with other vessels to assist Antiochus, he formed his whole

squadron into line of battle, and bore down upon them, whereupon the

Athenians followed suit, and getting their remaining triremes under

weigh at Notium, stood out to sea as fast as each vessel could clear

the point.[6] Thus it befell in the engagement which ensued, that

while the enemy was in due order, the Athenians came up in scattered

detachments and without concert, and in the end were put to flight

with the loss of fifteen ships of war. Of the crews, indeed, the

majority escaped, though a certain number fell into the hands of the

enemy. Then Lysander collected his vessels, and having erected a

trophy on Cape Notium, sailed across to Ephesus, whilst the Athenians

retired to Samos.



[6] {os ekastos enoixen}, for this nautical term see above.



On his return to Samos a little later, Alcibiades put out to sea with

the whole squadron in the direction of the harbour of Ephesus. At the

mouth of the harbour he marshalled his fleet in battle order, and

tried to tempt the enemy to an engagement; but as Lysander, conscious

of his inferiority in numbers, refused to accept the challenge, he

sailed back again to Samos. Shortly after this the Lacedaemonians

captured Delphinium and Eion.[7]



[7] This should probably be Teos, in Ionia, in spite of the MSS.

    {'Eiona}. The place referred to cannot at any rate be the well-

    known Eion at the mouth of the Strymon in Thrace.



But now the news of the late disaster at Notium had reached the

Athenians at home, and in their indignation they turned upon

Alcibiades, to whose negligence and lack of self-command they

attributed the destruction of the ships. Accordingly they chose ten

new generals--namely Conon, Diomedon, Leon, Pericles, Erasinides,

Aristocrates, Archestratus, Protomachus, Thrasylus, and Aristogenes.

Alcibiades, who was moreover in bad odour in the camp, sailed away

with a single trireme to his private fortress in the Chersonese.



After this Conon, in obedience to a decree of the Athenian people, set

sail from Andros with the twenty vessels under his command in that

island to Samos, and took command of the whole squadron. To fill the

place thus vacated by Conon, Phanosthenes was sent to Andros with four

ships. That captain was fortunate enough to intercept and capture two

Thurian ships of war, crews and all, and these captives were all

imprisoned by the Athenians, with the exception of their leader

Dorieus. He was the Rhodian, who some while back had been banished

from Athens and from his native city by the Athenians, when sentence

of death was passed upon him and his family. This man, who had once

enjoyed the right of citizenship among them, they now took pity on and

released him without ransom.



When Conon had reached Samos he found the armament in a state of great

despondency. Accordingly his first measure was to man seventy ships

with their full complement, instead of the former hundred and odd

vessels. With this squadron he put to sea accompanied by the other

generals, and confined himself to making descents first at one point

and then at another of the enemy's territory, and to collecting

plunder.



And so the year drew to its close: a year signalled further by an

invasion of Sicily by the Carthaginians, with one hundred and twenty

ships of war and a land force of one hundred and twenty thousand men,

which resulted in the capture of Agrigentum. The town was finally

reduced to famine after a siege of seven months, the invaders having

previously been worsted in battle and forced to sit down before its

walls for so long a time.







VI



B.C. 406. In the following year--the year of the evening eclipse of

the moon, and the burning of the old temple of Athena[1] at Athens[2]

--the Lacedaemonians sent out Callicratidas to replace Lysander, whose

period of office had now expired.[3] Lysander, when surrendering the

squadron to his successor, spoke of himself as the winner of a sea

fight, which had left him in undisputed mastery of the sea, and with

this boast he handed over the ships to Callicratidas, who retorted,

"If you will convey the fleet from Ephesus, keeping Samos[4] on your

right" (that is, past where the Athenian navy lay), "and hand it over

to me at Miletus, I will admit that you are master of the sea." But

Lysander had no mind to interfere in the province of another officer.

Thus Callicratidas assumed responsibility. He first manned, in

addition to the squadron which he received from Lysander, fifty new

vessels furnished by the allies from Chios and Rhodes and elsewhere.

When all these contingents were assembled, they formed a total of one

hundred and forty sail, and with these he began making preparations

for engagement with the enemy. But it was impossible for him not to

note the strong current of opposition which he encountered from the

friends of Lysander. Not only was there lack of zeal in their service,

but they openly disseminated an opinion in the States, that it was the

greatest possible blunder on the part of the Lacedaemonians so to

change their admirals. Of course, they must from time to time get

officers altogether unfit for the post--men whose nautical knowledge

dated from yesterday, and who, moreover, had no notion of dealing with

human beings. It would be very odd if this practice of sending out

people ignorant of the sea and unknown to the folk of the country did

not lead to some catastrophe. Callicratidas at once summoned the

Lacedaemonians there present, and addressed them in the following

terms:--



[1] I.e. as some think, the Erechtheion, which was built partly on the

    site of the old temple of Athena Polias, destroyed by the

    Persians. According to Dr. Dorpfeld, a quite separate building of

    the Doric order, the site of which (S. of the Erechtheion) has

    lately been discovered.



[2] The MSS. here add "in the ephorate of Pityas and the archonship of

    Callias at Athens;" but though the date is probably correct (cf.

    Leake, "Topography of Athens," vol. i. p. 576 foll.), the words

    are almost certainly a gloss.



[3] Here the MSS. add "with the twenty-fourth year of the war,"

    probably an annotator's gloss; the correct date should be twenty-

    fifth. Pel. war 26 = B.C. 406. Pel. war 25 ended B.C. 407.



[4] Lit. on the left (or east) of Samos, looking south from Ephesus.



"For my part," he said, "I am content to stay at home: and if Lysander

or any one else claim greater experience in nautical affairs than I

possess, I have no desire to block his path. Only, being sent out by

the State to take command of this fleet, I do not know what is left to

me, save to carry out my instructions to the best of my ability. For

yourselves, all I beg of you, in reference to my personal ambitions

and the kind of charges brought against our common city, and of which

you are as well aware as I am, is to state what you consider to be the

best course: am I to stay where I am, or shall I sail back home, and

explain the position of affairs out here?"



No one ventured to suggest any other course than that he should obey

the authorities, and do what he was sent to do. Callicratidas then

went up to the court of Cyrus to ask for further pay for the sailors,

but the answer he got from Cyrus was that he should wait for two days.

Callicratidas was annoyed at the rebuff: to dance attendance at the

palace gates was little to his taste. In a fit of anger he cried out

at the sorry condition of the Hellenes, thus forced to flatter the

barbarian for the sake of money. "If ever I get back home," he added,

"I will do what in me lies to reconcile the Athenians and the

Lacedaemonians." And so he turned and sailed back to Miletus. From

Miletus he sent some triremes to Lacedaemon to get money, and

convoking the public assembly of the Milesians, addressed them thus:--



"Men of Miletus, necessity is laid upon me to obey the rulers at home;

but for yourselves, whose neighbourhood to the barbarians has exposed

you to many evils at their hands, I only ask you to let your zeal in

the war bear some proportion to your former sufferings. You should set

an example to the rest of the allies, and show us how to inflict the

sharpest and swiftest injury on our enemy, whilst we await the return

from Lacedaemon of my envoys with the necessary funds. Since one of

the last acts of Lysander, before he left us, was to hand back to

Cyrus the funds already on the spot, as though we could well dispense

with them. I was thus forced to turn to Cyrus, but all I got from him

was a series of rebuffs; he refused me an audience, and, for my part,

I could not induce myself to hang about his gates like a mendicant.

But I give you my word, men of Miletus, that in return for any

assistance which you can render us while waiting for these aids, I

will requite you richly. Only by God's help let us show these

barbarians that we do not need to worship them, in order to punish our

foes."



The speech was effective; many members of the assembly arose, and not

the least eagerly those who were accused of opposing him. These, in

some terror, proposed a vote of money, backed by offers of further

private contributions. Furnished with these sums, and having procured

from Chios a further remittance of five drachmas[5] a piece as outfit

for each seaman, he set sail to Methyma in Lesbos, which was in the

hands of the enemy. But as the Methymnaeans were not disposed to come

over to him (since there was an Athenian garrison in the place, and

the men at the head of affairs were partisans of Athens), he assaulted

and took the place by storm. All the property within accordingly

became the spoil of the soldiers. The prisoners were collected for

sale by Callicratidas in the market-place, where, in answer to the

demand of the allies, who called upon him to sell the Methymnaeans

also, he made answer, that as long as he was in command, not a single

Hellene should be enslaved if he could help it. The next day he set at

liberty the free-born captives; the Athenian garrison with the

captured slaves he sold.[6] To Conon he sent word:--He would put a

stop to his strumpeting the sea.[7] And catching sight of him, as he

put out to sea, at break of day, he gave chase, hoping to cut him off

from his passage to Samos, and prevent his taking refuge there.



[5] About 4d.



[6] Grote, "Hist. of Greece," vol. viii. p. 224 (2d ed.), thinks that

    Callicratidas did not even sell the Athenian garrison, as if the

    sense of the passage were: "The next day he set at liberty the

    free-born captives with the Athenian garrison, contenting himself

    with selling the captive slaves." But I am afraid that no

    ingenuity of stopping will extract that meaning from the Greek

    words, which are, {te d' usteraia tous men eleutherous apheke tous

    de ton 'Athenaion phrourous kai ta andrapoda ta doula panta

    apedoto}. To spare the Athenian garrison would have been too

    extraordinary a proceeding even for Callicratidas. The idea

    probably never entered his head. It was sufficiently noble for him

    to refuse to sell the Methymnaeans. See the remarks of Mr. W. L.

    Newman, "The Pol. of Aristotle," vol. i. p. 142.



[7] I.e. the sea was Sparta's bride.



But Conon, aided by the sailing qualities of his fleet, the rowers of

which were the pick of several ships' companies, concentrated in a few

vessels, made good his escape, seeking shelter within the harbour of

Mitylene in Lesbos, and with him two of the ten generals, Leon and

Erasinides. Callicratidas, pursuing him with one hundred and seventy

sail, entered the harbour simultaneously; and Conon thus hindered from

further or final escape by the too rapid movements of the enemy, was

forced to engage inside the harbour, and lost thirty of his ships,

though the crews escaped to land. The remaining, forty in number, he

hauled up under the walls of the town. Callicratidas, on his side,

came to moorings in the harbour; and, having command of the exit,

blocked the Athenian within. His next step was to send for the

Methymnaeans in force by land, and to transport his army across from

Chios. Money also came to him from Cyrus.



Conon, finding himself besieged by land and sea, without means of

providing himself with corn from any quarter, the city crowded with

inhabitants, and aid from Athens, whither no news of the late events

could be conveyed, impossible, launched two of the fastest sailing

vessels of his squadron. These he manned, before daybreak, with the

best rowers whom he could pick out of the fleet, stowing away the

marines at the same time in the hold of the ships and closing the port

shutters. Every day for four days they held out in this fashion, but

at evening as soon as it was dark he disembarked his men, so that the

enemy might not suspect what they were after. On the fifth day, having

got in a small stock of provisions, when it was already mid-day and

the blockaders were paying little or no attention, and some of them

even were taking their siesta, the two ships sailed out of the

harbour: the one directing her course towards the Hellespont, whilst

her companion made for the open sea. Then, on the part of the

blockaders, there was a rush to the scene of action, as fast as the

several crews could get clear of land, in bustle and confusion,

cutting away the anchors, and rousing themselves from sleep, for, as

chance would have it, they had been breakfasting on shore. Once on

board, however, they were soon in hot pursuit of the ship which had

started for the open sea, and ere the sun dipped they overhauled her,

and after a successful engagement attached her by cables and towed her

back into harbour, crew and all. Her comrade, making for the

Hellespont, escaped, and eventually reached Athens with news of the

blockade. The first relief was brought to the blockaded fleet by

Diomedon, who anchored with twelve vessels in the Mitylenaean

Narrows.[8] But a sudden attack of Callicratidas, who bore down upon

him without warning, cost him ten of his vessels, Diomedon himself

escaping with his own ship and one other.



[8] Or, "Euripus."



Now that the position of affairs, including the blockade, was fully

known at Athens, a vote was passed to send out a reinforcement of one

hundred and ten ships. Every man of ripe age,[9] whether slave or

free, was impressed for this service, so that within thirty days the

whole one hundred and ten vessels were fully manned and weighed

anchor. Amongst those who served in this fleet were also many of the

knights.[10] The fleet at once stood out across to Samos, and picked

up the Samian vessels in that island. The muster-roll was swelled by

the addition of more than thirty others from the rest of the allies,

to whom the same principle of conscription applied, as also it did to

the ships already engaged on foreign service. The actual total,

therefore, when all the contingents were collected, was over one

hundred and fifty vessels.



[9] I.e. from eighteen to sixty years.



[10] See Boeckh. "P. E. A." Bk. II. chap. xxi. p. 263 (Eng. trans.)



Callicratidas, hearing that the relief squadron had already reached

Samos, left fifty ships, under command of Eteonicus, in the harbour of

Mitylene, and setting sail with the other one hundred and twenty, hove

to for the evening meal off Cape Malea in Lesbos, opposite Mitylene.

It so happened that the Athenians on this day were supping on the

islands of Arginusae, which lie opposite Lesbos. In the night the

Spartan not only saw their watch-fires, but received positive

information that "these were the Athenians;" and about midnight he got

under weigh, intending to fall upon them suddenly. But a violent

downpour of rain with thunder and lightning prevented him putting out

to sea. By daybreak it had cleared, and he sailed towards Arginusae.

On their side, the Athenian squadron stood out to meet him, with their

left wing facing towards the open sea, and drawn up in the following

order:--Aristocrates, in command of the left wing, with fifteen ships,

led the van; next came Diomedon with fifteen others, and immediately

in rear of Aristocrates and Diomedon respectively, as their supports,

came Pericles and Erasinides. Parallel with Diomedon were the Samians,

with their ten ships drawn up in single line, under the command of a

Samian officer named Hippeus. Next to these came the ten vessels of

the taxiarchs, also in single line, and supporting them, the three

ships of the navarchs, with any other allied vessels in the squadron.

The right wing was entrusted to Protomachus with fifteen ships, and

next to him (on the extreme right) was Thrasylus with another division

of fifteen. Protomachus was supported by Lysias with an equal number

of ships, and Thrasylus by Aristogenes. The object of this formation

was to prevent the enemy from manouvring so as to break their line by

striking them amidships,[11] since they were inferior in sailing

power.



[11] Lit. "by the diekplous." Cf. Thuc. i. 49, and Arnold's note, who

    says: "The 'diecplus' was a breaking through the enemy's line in

    order by a rapid turning of the vessel to strike the enemy's ship

    on the side or stern, where it was most defenceless, and so to

    sink it." So, it seems, "the superiority of nautical skill has

    passed," as Grote (viii. p. 234) says, "to the Peloponnesians and

    their allies." Well may the historian add, "How astonished would

    the Athenian Admiral Phormion have been, if he could have

    witnessed the fleets and the order of battle at Arginusae!" See

    Thuc. iv. 11.



The Lacedaemonians, on the contrary, trusting to their superior

seamanship, were formed opposite with their ships all in single line,

with the special object of manouvring so as either to break the

enemy's line or to wheel round them. Callicratidas commanded the right

wing in person. Before the battle the officer who acted as his pilot,

the Megarian Hermon, suggested that it might be well to withdraw the

fleet as the Athenian ships were far more numerous. But Callicratidas

replied that Sparta would be no worse off even if he personally should

perish, but to flee would be disgraceful.[12] And now the fleets

approached, and for a long space the battle endured. At first the

vessels were engaged in crowded masses, and later on in scattered

groups. At length Callicratidas, as his vessel dashed her beak into

her antagonist, was hurled off into the sea and disappeared. At the

same instant Protomachus, with his division on the right, had defeated

the enemy's left, and then the flight of the Peloponnesians began

towards Chios, though a very considerable body of them made for

Phocaea, whilst the Athenians sailed back again to Arginusae. The

losses on the side of the Athenians were twenty-five ships, crews and

all, with the exception of the few who contrived to reach dry land. On

the Peloponnesian side, nine out of the ten Lacedaemonian ships, and

more than sixty belonging to the rest of the allied squadron, were

lost.



[12] For the common reading, {oikeitai}, which is ungrammatical,

    various conjectures have been made, e.g.



      {oikieitai} = "would be none the worse off for citizens,"

      {oikesetai} = "would be just as well administered without him,"



    but as the readings and their renderings are alike doubtful, I

    have preferred to leave the matter vague. Cf. Cicero, "De Offic."

    i. 24; Plutarch, "Lac. Apophth." p. 832.



After consultation the Athenian generals agreed that two captains of

triremes, Theramenes and Thrasybulus, accompanied by some of the

taxiarchs, should take forty-seven ships and sail to the assistance of

the disabled fleet and of the men on board, whilst the rest of the

squadron proceeded to attack the enemy's blockading squadron under

Eteonicus at Mitylene. In spite of their desire to carry out this

resolution, the wind and a violent storm which arose prevented them.

So they set up a trophy, and took up their quarters for the night. As

to Etenoicus, the details of the engagement ware faithfully reported

to him by the express despatch-boat in attendance. On receipt of the

news, however, he sent the despatch-boat out again the way she came,

with an injunction to those on board of her to sail off quickly

without exchanging a word with any one. Then on a sudden they were to

return garlanded with wreaths of victory and shouting "Callicratidas

has won a great sea fight, and the whole Athenian squadron is

destroyed." This they did, and Eteonicus, on his side, as soon as the

despatch-boat came sailing in, proceeded to offer sacrifice of

thanksgiving in honour of the good news. Meanwhile he gave orders that

the troops were to take their evening meal, and that the masters of

the trading ships were silently to stow away their goods on board the

merchant ships and make sail as fast as the favourable breeze could

speed them to Chios. The ships of war were to follow suit with what

speed they might. This done, he set fire to his camp, and led off the

land forces to Methymna. Conon, finding the enemy had made off, and

the wind had grown comparatively mild,[13] got his ships afloat, and

so fell in with the Athenian squadron, which had by this time set out

from Arginusae. To these he explained the proceedings of Eteonicus.

The squadron put into Mitylene, and from Mitylene stood across to

Chios, and thence, without effecting anything further, sailed back to

Samos.



[13] Or, "had changed to a finer quarter."







VII



All the above-named generals, with the exception of Conon, were

presently deposed by the home authorities. In addition to Conon two

new generals were chosen, Adeimantus and Philocles. Of those concerned

in the late victory two never returned to Athens: these were

Protomachus and Aristogenes. The other six sailed home. Their names

were Pericles, Diomedon, Lysias, Aristocrates, Thrasylus, and

Erasinides. On their arrival Archidemus, the leader of the democracy

at that date, who had charge of the two obol fund,[1] inflicted a fine

on Erasinides, and accused him before the Dicastery[2] of having

appropriated money derived from the Hellespont, which belonged to the

people. He brought a further charge against him of misconduct while

acting as general, and the court sentenced him to imprisonment.



[1] Reading {tes diobelais}, a happy conjecture for the MSS. {tes

    diokelias}, which is inexplicable. See Grote, "Hist. of Greece,"

    vol. viii. p. 244 note (2d ed.)



[2] I.e. a legal tribunal or court of law. At Athens the free citizens

    constitutionally sworn and impannelled sat as "dicasts"

    ("jurymen," or rather as a bench of judges) to hear cases

    ({dikai}). Any particular board of dicasts formed a "dicastery."



These proceedings in the law court were followed by the statement of

the generals before the senate[3] touching the late victory and the

magnitude of the storm. Timocrates then proposed that the other five

generals should be put in custody and handed over to the public

assembly.[4] Whereupon the senate committed them all to prison. Then

came the meeting of the public assembly, in which others, and more

particularly Theramenes, formally accused the generals. He insisted

that they ought to show cause why they had not picked up the

shipwrecked crews. To prove that there had been no attempt on their

part to attach blame to others, he might point, as conclusive

testimony, to the despatch sent by the generals themselves to the

senate and the people, in which they attributed the whole disaster to

the storm, and nothing else. After this the generals each in turn made

a defence, which was necessarily limited to a few words, since no

right of addressing the assembly at length was allowed by law. Their

explanation of the occurrences was that, in order to be free to sail

against the enemy themselves, they had devolved the duty of picking up

the shipwrecked crews upon certain competent captains of men-of-war,

who had themselves been generals in their time, to wit Theramenes and

Tharysbulus, and others of like stamp. If blame could attach to any

one at all with regard to the duty in question, those to whom their

orders had been given were the sole persons they could hold

responsible. "But," they went on to say, "we will not, because these

very persons have denounced us, invent a lie, and say that Theramenes

and Thrasybulus are to blame, when the truth of the matter is that the

magnitude of the storm alone prevented the burial of the dead and the

rescue of the living." In proof of their contention, they produced the

pilots and numerous other witnesses from among those present at the

engagement. By these arguments they were in a fair way to persuade the

people of their innocence. Indeed many private citizens rose wishing

to become bail for the accused, but it was resolved to defer decision

till another meeting of the assembly. It was indeed already so late

that it would have been impossible to see to count the show of hands.

It was further resolved that the senate meanwhile should prepare a

measure, to be introduced at the next assembly, as to the mode in

which the accused should take their trial.



[3] This is the Senate or Council of Five Hundred. One of its chief

    duties was to prepare measures for discussion in the assembly. It

    had also a certain amount of judicial power, hearing complaints

    and inflicting fines up to fifty drachmas. It sat daily, a

    "prytany" of fifty members of each of the ten tribes in rotation

    holding office for a month in turn.



[4] This is the great Public Assembly (the Ecclesia), consisting of

    all genuine Athenian citizens of more than twenty years of age.



Then came the festival of the Aparturia,[5] with its family gatherings

of fathers and kinsfolk. Accordingly the party of Theramenes procured

numbers of people clad in black apparel, and close-shaven,[6] who were

to go in and present themselves before the public assembly in the

middle of the festival, as relatives, presumably, of the men who had

perished; and they persuaded Callixenus to accuse the generals in the

senate. The next step was to convoke the assembly, when the senate

laid before it the proposal just passed by their body, at the instance

of Callixenus, which ran as follows: "Seeing that both the parties to

this case, to wit, the prosecutors of the generals on the one hand,

and the accused themselves in their defence on the other, have been

heard in the late meeting of the assembly; we propose that the people

of Athens now record their votes, one and all, by their tribes; that a

couple of voting urns be placed for the convenience of each several

tribe; and the public crier in the hearing of each several tribe

proclaim the mode of voting as follows: 'Let every one who finds the

generals guilty of not rescuing the heroes of the late sea fight

deposit his vote in urn No. 1. Let him who is of the contrary opinion

deposit his vote in urn No. 2. Further, in the event of the aforesaid

generals being found guilty, let death be the penalty. Let the guilty

persons be delivered over to the eleven. Let their property be

confiscated to the State, with the exception of one tithe, which falls

to the goddess.'"



[5] An important festival held in October at Athens, and in nearly all

    Ionic cities. Its objects were (1) the recognition of a common

    descent from Ion, the son of Apollo Patrous; and (2) the

    maintenance of the ties of clanship. See Grote, "Hist. of Greece,"

    vol. viii. p. 260 foll. (2d ed.); Jebb, "Theophr." xviii. 5.



[6] I.e. in sign of mourning.



Now there came forward in the assembly a man, who said that he had

escaped drowning by clinging to a meal tub. The poor fellows perishing

around him had commissioned him, if he succeeded in saving himself, to

tell the people of Athens how bravely they had fought for their

fatherland, and how the generals had left them there to drown.



Presently Euryptolemus, the son of Peisianax, and others served a

notice of indictment on Callixenus, insisting that his proposal was

unconstitutional, and this view of the case was applauded by some

members of the assembly. But the majority kept crying out that it was

monstrous if the people were to be hindered by any stray individual

from doing what seemed to them right. And when Lysicus, embodying the

spirit of those cries, formally proposed that if these persons would

not abandon their action, they should be tried by the same vote along

with the generals: a proposition to which the mob gave vociferous

assent; and so these were compelled to abandon their summonses. Again,

when some of the Prytanes[7] objected to put a resolution to the vote

which was in itself unconstitutional, Callixenus again got up and

accused them in the same terms, and the shouting began again. "Yes,

summons all who refuse," until the Prytanes, in alarm, all agreed with

one exception to permit the voting. This obstinate dissentient was

Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus, who insisted that he would do

nothing except in accordance with the law.[8] After this Euryptolemus

rose and spoke in behalf of the generals. He said:--



[7] Prytanes--the technical term for the senators of the presiding

    tribe, who acted as presidents of the assembly. Their chairman for

    the day was called Epistates.



[8] For the part played by Socrates see further Xenophon's

    "Memorabilia," I. i. 18; IV. iv. 2.



"I stand here, men of Athens, partly to accuse Pericles, though he is

a close and intimate connection of my own, and Diomedon, who is my

friend, and partly to urge certain considerations on their behalf, but

chiefly to press upon you what seems to me the best course for the

State collectively. I hold them to blame in that they dissuaded their

colleagues from their intention to send a despatch to the senate and

this assembly, which should have informed you of the orders given to

Theramenes and Thrasybulus to take forty-seven ships of war and pick

up the shipwrecked crews, and of the neglect of the two officers to

carry out those orders. And it follows that though the offence was

committed by one or two, the responsibility must be shared by all; and

in return for kindness in the past, they are in danger at present of

sacrificing their lives to the machinations of these very men, and

others whom I could mention. In danger, do I say, of losing their

lives? No, not so, if you will suffer me to persuade you to do what is

just and right; if you will only adopt such a course as shall enable

you best to discover the truth and shall save you from too late

repentance, when you find you have transgressed irremediably against

heaven and your own selves. In what I urge there is no trap nor plot

whereby you can be deceived by me or any other man; it is a

straightforward course which will enable you to discover and punish

the offender by whatever process you like, collectively or

individually. Let them have, if not more, at any rate one whole day to

make what defence they can for themselves; and trust to your own

unbiased judgment to guide you to the right conclusion.



"You know, men of Athens, the exceeding stringency of the decree of

Cannonus,[9] which orders that man, whosoever he be, who is guilty of

treason against the people of Athens, to be put in irons, and so to

meet the charge against him before the people. If he be convicted, he

is to be thrown into the Barathron and perish, and the property of

such an one is to be confiscated, with the exception of the tithe

which falls to the goddess. I call upon you to try these generals in

accordance with this decree. Yes, and so help me God--if it please

you, begin with my own kinsman Pericles for base would it be on my

part to make him of more account than the whole of the State. Or, if

you prefer, try them by that other law, which is directed against

robbers of temples and betrayers of their country, which says: if a

man betray his city or rob a sacred temple of the gods, he shall be

tried before a law court, and if he be convicted, his body shall not

be buried in Attica, and his goods shall be confiscated to the State.

Take your choice as between these two laws, men of Athens, and let the

prisoners be tried by one or other. Let three portions of a day be

assigned to each respectively, one portion wherein they shall listen

to their accusation, a second wherein they shall make their defence,

and a third wherein you shall meet and give your votes in due order on

the question of their guilt or innocence. By this procedure the

malefactors will receive the desert of their misdeeds in full, and

those who are innocent will owe you, men of Athens, the recovery of

their liberty, in place of unmerited destruction.[10]



[9] "There was a rule in Attic judicial procedure, called the psephism

    of Kannonus (originally adopted, we do not know when, on the

    proposition of a citizen of that name, as a psephism or decree for

    some particular case, but since generalised into common practice,

    and grown into great prescriptive reverence), which peremptorily

    forbade any such collective trial or sentence, and directed that a

    separate judicial vote should in all cases be taken for or against

    each accused party." Grote, "Hist. of Greece," vol. viii. p. 266

    (2d ed.)



[10] Reading {adikos apolountai}.



"On your side, in trying the accused by recognised legal procedure,

you will show that you obey the dictates of pious feeling, and can

regard the sanctity of an oath, instead of joining hands with our

enemies the Lacedaemonians and fighting their battles. For is it not

to fight their battles, if you take their conquerors, the men who

deprived them of seventy vessels, and at the moment of victory sent

them to perdition untried and in the teeth of the law? What are you

afraid of, that you press forward with such hot haste? Do you imagine

that you may be robbed of the power of life and death over whom you

please, should you condescend to a legal trial? but that you are safe

if you take shelter behind an illegality, like the illegality of

Callixenus, when he worked upon the senate to propose to this assembly

to deal with the accused by a single vote? But consider, you may

actually put to death an innocent man, and then repentance will one

day visit you too late. Bethink you how painful and unavailing remorse

will then be, and more particularly if your error has cost a fellow-

creature his life. What a travesty of justice it would be if in the

case of a man like Aristarchus,[11] who first tried to destroy the

democracy and then betrayed Oenoe to our enemy the Thebans, you

granted him a day for his defence, consulting his wishes, and conceded

to him all the other benefits of the law; whereas now you are

proposing to deprive of these same privileges your own generals, who

in every way conformed to your views and defeated your enemies. Do not

you, of all men, I implore you, men of Athens, act thus. Why, these

laws are your own, to them, beyond all else you owe your greatness.

Guard them jealously; in nothing, I implore you, act without their

sanction.



[11] See below, II. iii; also cf. Thuc. viii. 90, 98.



"But now, turn for a moment and consider with me the actual

occurrences which have created the suspicion of misconduct on the part

of our late generals. The sea-fight had been fought and won, and the

ships had returned to land, when Diomedon urged that the whole

squadron should sail out in line and pick up the wrecks and floating

crews. Erasinides was in favour of all the vessels sailing as fast as

possible to deal with the enemy's forces at Mitylene. And Thrasylus

represented that both objects could be effected, by leaving one

division of the fleet there, and with the rest sailing against the

enemy; and if this resolution were agreed to, he advised that each of

the eight generals should leave three ships of his own division with

the ten vessels of the taxiarchs, the ten Samian vessels, and the

three belonging to the navarchs. These added together make forty-

seven, four for each of the lost vessels, twelve in number. Among the

taxiarchs left behind, two were Thrasybulus and Theramenes, the men

who in the late meeting of this assembly undertook to accuse the

generals. With the remainder of the fleet they were to sail to attack

the enemy's fleet. Everything, you must admit, was duly and admirably

planned. It was only common justice, therefore, that those whose duty

it was to attack the enemy should render an account for all

miscarriages of operations against the enemy; while those who were

commissioned to pick up the dead and dying should, if they failed to

carry out the instructions of the generals, be put on trial to explain

the reasons of the failure. This indeed I may say in behalf of both

parites. It was really the storm which, in spite of what the generals

had planned, prevented anything being done. There are witnesses ready

to attest the truth of this: the men who escaped as by a miracle, and

among these one of these very generals, who was on a sinking ship and

was saved. And this man, who needed picking up as much as anybody at

that moment, is, they insist, to be tried by one and the same vote as

those who neglected to perform their orders! Once more, I beg you, men

of Athens, to accept your victory and your good fortune, instead of

behaving like the desperate victims of misfortune and defeat.

Recognise the finger of divine necessity; do not incur the reproach of

stony-heartedness by discovering treason where there was merely

powerlessness, and condemning as guilty those who were prevented by

the storm from carrying out their instructions. Nay! you will better

satisfy the demands of justice by crowning these conquerors with

wreaths of victory than by punishing them with death at the

instigation of wicked men."



At the conclusion of his speech Euryptolemus proposed, as an

amendment, that the prisoners should, in accordance with the decree of

Cannonus, be tried each separately, as against the proposal of the

senate to try them all by a single vote.



At the show of hands the tellers gave the majority in favour of

Euryptolemus's amendment, but upon the application of Menecles, who

took formal exception[12] to this decision, the show of hands was gone

through again, and now the verdict was in favour of the resolution of

the senate. At a later date the balloting was made, and by the votes

recorded the eight generals were condemned, and the six who were in

Athens were put to death.



[12] For this matter cf. Schomann, "De Comitiis Athen." p. 161 foll.;

    also Grote, "Hist. of Grece," vol. viii. p. 276 note (2d ed.)



Not long after, repentance seized the Athenians, and they passed a

decree authorising the public prosecution of those who had deceived

the people, and the appointment of proper securities for their persons

until the trial was over. Callixenus was one of those committed for

trail. There were, besides Callixenus, four others against whom true

bills were declared, and they were all five imprisoned by their

sureties. But all subsequently effected their escape before the trial,

at the time of the sedition in which Cleophon[13] was killed.

Callixenus eventually came back when the party in Piraeus returned to

the city, at the date of the amnesty,[14] but only to die of hunger,

an object of universal detestation.



[13] Cleophon, the well-known demagogue. For the occasion of his death

    see Grote, "Hist. of Greece," vol. viii. pp. 166, 310 (2d ed.);

    Prof. Jebb, "Attic Orators," i. 266, ii. 288. For his character,

    as popularly conceived, cf. Aristoph. "Frogs," 677.



[14] B.C. 403.


