





BOOK VI







I



B.C. 374. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians were thus engaged. But to

return to the Thebans. After the subjugation of the cities in Boeotia,

they extended the area of aggression and marched into Phocis. The

Phocians, on their side, sent an embassy to Lacedaemon, and pleaded

that without assistance from that power they must inevitably yield to

Thebes. The Lacedaemonians in response conveyed by sea into the

territory of Phocis their king Cleombrotus, at the head of four

regiments and the contingents of the allies.



About the same time Polydamus of Pharsalus arrived from Thessaly to

address the general assembly[1] of Lacedaemon. He was a man of high

repute throughout the whole of Thessaly, while in his native city he

was regarded as so true a gentleman that the faction-ridden

Pharsalians were content to entrust the citadel to his keeping, and to

allow their revenues to pass through his hands. It was his privilege

to disburse the money needed for sacred rites or other expenditure,

within the limits of their written law and constitution. Out of these

moneys this faithful steward of the state was able to garrison and

guard in safety for the citizens their capital. Every year he rendered

an account of his administration in general. If there was a deficit he

made it up out of his own pocket, and when the revenues expanded he

paid himself back. For the rest, his hospitality to foreigners and his

magnificence were on a true Thessalian scale. Such was the style and

character of the man who now arrived in Lacedaemon and spoke as

follows:



[1] {pros to koinon}, "h.e. vel ad ad senatum vel ad ephoros vel ad

    concionem."--Sturz, "Lex. Xen." s.v.



"Men of Lacedaemon, it is in my capacity as 'proxenos' and

'benefactor' (titles borne by my ancestry from time immemorial) that I

claim, or rather am bound, in case of any difficulty to come to you,

and, in case of any complication dangerous to your interests in

Thessaly, to give you warning. The name of Jason, I feel sure, is not

unknown to Lacedaemonian ears. His power as a prince is sufficiently

large, and his fame widespread. It is of Jason I have to speak. Under

cover of a treaty of peace he has lately conferred with me, and this

is the substance of what he urged: 'Polydamas,' he said, 'if I chose I

could lay your city at my feet, even against its will, as the

following considerations will prove to you. See,' he went on, 'the

majority and the most important of the states of Thessaly are my

allies. I subdued them in campaigns in which you took their side in

opposition to myself. Again, you do not need to be told that I have

six thousand mercenaries who are a match in themselves, I take it, for

any single state. It is not the mere numbers on which I insist. No

doubt as large an army could be raised in other quarters; but these

citizen armies have this defect--they include men who are already

advanced in years, with others whose beards are scarcely grown. Again,

it is only a fraction of the citizens who attend to bodily training in

a state, whereas with me no one takes mercenary service who is not as

capable of endurance as myself.'



"And here, Lacedaemonians, I must tell you what is the bare truth.

This Jason is a man stout of limb and robust of body, with an

insatiable appetite for toil. Equally true is it that he tests the

mettle of those with him day by day. He is always at their head,

whether on a field-day under arms, or in the gymnasium, or on some

military expedition. The weak members of the corps he weeds out, but

those whom he sees bear themselves stout-heartedly in the face of war,

like true lovers of danger and of toil, he honours with double,

treble, and quadruple pay, or with other gifts. On the bed of sickness

they will not lack attendance, nor honour in their graves. Thus every

foreigner in his service knows that his valour in war may obtain for

him a livelihood--a life replete at once with honour and abundance.[2]



[2] Or, "a life satisfying at once to soul and body."



"Then with some parade he pointed out to me what I knew before, that

the Maracians, and the Dolopians, and Alcetas the hyparch[3] in

Epirus, were already subject to his sway; 'so that I may fairly ask

you, Polydamas,' he proceeded, 'what I have to apprehend that I should

not look on your future subjugation as mere child's play. Perhaps some

one who did not know me, and what manner of man I am, might put it to

me: "Well! Jason, if all you say be true, why do you hesitate? why do

you not march at once against Pharsalia?" For the good reason, I

reply, that it suits me better to win you voluntarily than to annex

you against your wills. Since, if you are forced, you will always be

planning all the mischief you can against me, and I on my side shall

be striving to diminish your power; whereas if you throw in your lot

with mine trustfully and willingly, it is certain we shall do what we

can to help each other. I see and know, Polydamas, that your country

fixes her eyes on one man only, and that is yourself: what I guarantee

you, therefore, is that, if you will dispose her lovingly to myself, I

on my side will raise you up to be the greatest man in Hellas next to

me. Listen, while I tell you what it is in which I offer you the

second prize. Listen, and accept nothing which does not approve itself

as true to your own reasoning. First, is it not plain to us both, that

with the adhesion of Pharsalus and the swarm of pettier states

dependent on yourselves, I shall with infinite ease become Tagos[4] of

all the Thessalians; and then the corollary--Thessaly so united--

sixteen thousand cavalry and more than ten thousand heavy infantry

leap into life. Indeed, when I contemplate the physique and proud

carriage of these men, I cannot but persuade myself that, with proper

handling, there is not a nation or tribe of men to which Thessalians

would deign to yield submission. Look at the broad expanse of Thessaly

and consider: when once a Tagos is established here, all the tribes in

a circle round will lie stilled in subjection; and almost every member

of each of these tribes is an archer born, so that in the light

infantry division of the service our power must needs excel.

Furthermore, the Boeotians and all the rest of the world in arms

against Lacedaemon are my allies; they clamour to follow my banner, if

only I will free them from Sparta's yoke. So again the Athenians, I

make sure, will do all they can to gain our alliance; but with them I

do not think we will make friends, for my persuasion is that empire by

sea will be even easier to acquire than empire by land; and to show

you the justice of this reasoning I would have you weigh the following

considerations. With Macedonia, which is the timber-yard[5] of the

Athenian navy, in our hands we shall be able to construct a far larger

fleet than theirs. That stands to reason. And as to men, which will be

the better able to man vessels, think you--Athens, or ourselves with

our stalwart and numerous Penestae?[6] Which will better support

mariners--a nation which, like our own, out of her abundance exports

her corn to foriegn parts, or Athens, which, but for foreign

purchases, has not enough to support herself? And so as to wealth in

general it is only natural, is it not, that we, who do not look to a

string of little islands for supplies, but gather the fruits of

continental peoples, should find our resources more copious? As soon

as the scattered powers of Thessaly are gathered into a principality,

all the tribes around, I repeat, will become our tributaries. I need

not tell you that the king of Persia reaps the fruits, not of islands,

but of a continent, and he is the wealthiest of men! But the reduction

of Persia will be still more practicable, I imagine, than that of

Hellas, for there the men, save one, are better versed in slavery than

in prowess. Nor have I forgotten, during the advance of Cyrus, and

afterwards under Agesilaus, how scant the force was before which the

Persian quailed.'



[3] Or, "his underlord in Epirus." By hyparch, I suppose, is implied

    that Alcetas regarded Jason as his suzerain. Diodorus (xv. 13, 36)

    speaks of him as "king" of the Molossians.



[4] Or, "Prince," and below, "Thessaly so converted into a

    Principality." "The Tagos of Thessaly was not a King, because his

    office was not hereditary or even permanent; neither was he

    exactly a Tyrant, because his office had some sort of legal

    sanction. But he came much nearer to the character either of a

    King or of a Tyrant than to that of a Federal President like the

    General of the Achaians. . . . Jason of Pherai acts throughout

    like a King, and his will seems at least as uncontrolled as that

    of his brother sovereign beyond the Kambunian hills. Even Jason

    seems to have been looked upon as a Tyrant (see below, 'Hell.' VI.

    iv. 32); possibly, like the Athenian Demos, he himself did not

    refuse the name" (cf. Arist. "Pol." iii. 4, 9).--Freeman, "Hist.

    Fed. Gov." "No True Federation in Thessaly," iv. pp. 152 foll.



[5] See above, and Hicks, 74.



[6] Or, "peasantry."



"Such, Lacedaemonians, were the glowing arguments of Jason. In answer

I told him that what he urged was well worth weighing, but that we,

the friends of Lacedaemon, should so, without a quarrel, desert her

and rush into the arms of her opponents, seemed to me sheer madness.

Whereat he praised me, and said that now must he needs cling all the

closer to me if that were my disposition, and so charged me to come to

you and tell you the plain truth, which is, that he is minded to march

against Pharsalus if we will not hearken to him. Accordingly he bade

me demand assistance from you; 'and if they suffer you,'[7] he added,

'so to work upon them that they will send you a force sufficient to do

battle with me, it is well: we will abide by war's arbitrament, nor

quarrel with the consequence; but if in your eyes that aid is

insufficient, look to yourself. How shall you longer be held blameless

before that fatherland which honours you and in which you fare so

well?'[8]



[7] Or, reading {theoi}, after Cobet; translate "if providentially

    they should send you."



[8] Reading {kai e su pratteis}, after Cobet. The chief MSS. give {ouk

    ede anegkletos an dikaios eies en te patridi e se tima kai su

    prattois ta kratista}, which might be rendered either, "and how be

    doing best for yourself?" [lit. "and you would not be doing best

    for yourself," {ouk an} carried on from previous clause], or

    (taking {prattois} as pure optative), "may you be guided to adopt

    the course best for yourself!" "may the best fortune attend you!

    Farewell." See Otto Keller, op. cit. ad loc. for various

    emendations.



"These are the matters," Polydamas continued, "which have brought me

to Lacedaemon. I have told you the whole story; it is based partly on

what I see to be the case, and partly on what I have heard from yonder

man. My firm belief is, men of Lacedaemon, that if you are likely to

despatch a force sufficient, not in my eyes only, but in the eyes of

all the rest of Thessaly, to cope with Jason in war, the states will

revolt from him, for they are all in alarm as to the future

development of the man's power; but if you think a company of newly-

enfranchised slaves and any amateur general will suffice, I advise you

to rest in peace. You may take my word for it, you will have a great

power to contend against, and a man who is so prudent a general that,

in all he essays to do, be it an affair of secrecy, or speed, or

force, he is wont to hit the mark of his endeavours: one who is

skilled, should occasion serve, to make the night of equal service to

him with the day;[9] or, if speed be needful, will labour on while

breakfasting or taking an evening meal. And as for repose, he thinks

that the time for it has come when the goal is reached or the business

on hand accomplished. And to this same practice he has habituated

those about him. Right well he knows how to reward the expectations of

his soldiers, when by the extra toil which makes the difference they

have achieved success; so that in his school all have laid to heart

that maxim, 'Pain first and pleasure after.'[10] And in regard to

pleasure of the senses, of all men I know, he is the most continent;

so that these also are powerless to make him idle at the expense of

duty. You must consider the matter then and tell me, as befits you,

what you can and will do."



[9] See "Cyrop." III. i. 19.



[10] For this sentiment, see "Mem." II. i. 20 et passim.



Such were the representations of Polydamas. The Lacedaemonians, for

the time being, deferred their answer; but after calculating the next

day and the day following how many divisions[11] they had on foreign

service, and how many ships on the coast of Laconia to deal with the

foreign squadron of the Athenians, and taking also into account the

war with their neighbours, they gave their answer to Polydamas: "For

the present they would not be able to send him sufficient aid: under

the circumstances they advised him to go back and make the best

settlement he could of his own affairs and those of his city." He,

thanking the Lacedaemonians for their straightforwardness, withdrew.



[11] Lit. "morai."



The citadel of Pharsalus he begged Jason not to force him to give up:

his desire was to preserve it for those who had entrusted it to his

safe keeping; his own sons Jason was free to take as hostages, and he

would do his best to procure for him the voluntary adhesion of his

city by persuasion, and in every way to further his appointment as

Tagos of Thessaly. Accordingly, after interchange of solemn assurances

between the pair, the Pharsalians were let alone and in peace, and ere

long Jason was, by general consent, appointed Tagos of all the

Thessalians. Once fairly vested with that authority, he drew up a list

of the cavalry and heavy infantry which the several states were

capable of furnishing as their quota, with the result that his

cavalry, inclusive of allies, numbered more than eight thousand, while

his infantry force was computed at not less than twenty thousand; and

his light troops would have been a match for those of the whole world

--the mere enumeration of their cities would be a labour in

itself.[12] His next act was a summons to all the dwellers round[13]

to pay tribute exactly the amount imposed in the days of Scopas.[14]

And here in this state of accomplishment we may leave these matters. I

return to the point reached when this digression into the affairs of

Jason began.



[12] See "Cyrop." I. i. 5.



[13] Lit. perioeci.



[14] It is conjectured that the Scopadae ruled at Pherae and Cranusa

    in the earlier half of the fifth century B.C.; see, for the change

    of dynasty, what is said of Lycophron of Pherae in "Hell." II.

    iii. 4. There was a famous Scopas, son of Creon, to whom Simonides

    addressed his poem--



{Andr' agathon men alatheos genesthai

khalepon khersin te kai posi kai noo tetragonon, aneu psogou tetugmenon.}



a sentiment criticised by Plato, "Protag." 359 A. "Now Simonides

says to Scopas, the son of Creon, the Thessalian:



'Hardly on the one hand can a man become truly good; built

four-square in hands and feet and mind, a work without a flaw.'



Do you know the poem?"--Jowett, "Plat." i. 153. But whether this

Scopas is the Scopas of our text and a hero of Jason's is not clear.







II



B.C. 374. The Lacedaemonians and their allies were collecting in

Phocia, and the Thebans, after retreating into their own territory,

were guarding the approaches. At this juncture the Athenians, seeing

the Thebans growing strong at their expense without contributing a

single penny to the maintenance of the fleet, while they themselves,

what with money contributions, and piratical attacks from Aegina, and

the garrisoning of their territory, were being pared to the bone,

conceived a desire to cease from war. In this mood they sent an

embassy to Lacedaemon and concluded peace.[1]



[1] See Curtius, "H. G." vol. iv. p. 376 (Eng. trans.)



B.C. 374-373. This done, two of the ambassadors, in obedience to a

decree of the state, set sail at once from Laconian territory, bearing

orders to Timotheus to sail home, since peace was established. That

officer, while obeying his orders, availed himself of the homeward

voyage to land certain Zacynthian exiles[2] on their native soil,

whereupon the Zacynthian city party sent to Lacedaemon and complained

of the treatment they had received from Timotheus; and the

Lacedaemonians, without further consideration, decided that the

Athenians were in the wrong, and proceeded to equip another navy, and

at length collected from Laconia itself, from Corinth, Leucas,[3]

Ambracia, Elis, Zacynthus, Achaia, Epidaurus, Troezen, Hermione, and

Halieis, a force amounting to sixty sail. In command of this squadron

they appointed Mnasippus admiral, with orders to attack Corcyra, and

in general to look after their interests in those seas. They,

moreover, sent an embassy to Dionysius, instructing him that his

interests would be advanced by the withdrawal of Corcyra from Athenian

hands.



[2] See Hicks, 81, p. 142.



[3] Ibid. 81, 86.



B.C. 373. Accordingly Mnasippus set sail, as soon as his squadron was

ready, direct to Corcyra; he took with him, besides his troops from

Lacedaemon, a body of mercenaries, making a total in all of no less

than fifteen hundred men. His disembarked, and soon became master of

the island, the country district falling a prey to the spoiler. It was

in a high state of cultivation, and rich with fruit-trees, not to

speak of magnificent dwelling-houses and wine-cellars fitted up on the

farms: so that, it was said, the soldiers reached such a pitch of

luxury that they refused to drink wine which had not a fine bouquet. A

crowd of slaves, too, and fat beasts were captured on the estates.



The general's next move was to encamp with his land forces about

three-quarters of a mile[4] from the city district, so that any

Corcyraean who attempted to leave the city to go into the country

would certainly be cut off on that side. The fleet he stationed on the

other side of the city, at a point where he calculated on detecting

and preventing the approach of convoys. Besides which he established a

blockade in front of the harbour when the weather permitted. In this

way the city was completely invested.



[4] Lit. "five stades."



The Corcyraeans, on their side, were in the sorest straits. They could

get nothing from their soil owing to the vice in which they were

gripped by land, whilst owing to the predominance of the enemy at sea

nothing could be imported. Accordingly they sent to the Athenians and

begged for their assistance. They urged upon them that it would be a

great mistake if they suffered themselves to be robbed of Corcyra. If

they did so, they would not only throw away a great advantage to

themselves, but add a considerable strength to their enemy; since,

with the exception of Athens, no state was capable of furnishing a

larger fleet or revenue. Moreover, Corcyra lay favourably[5] for

commanding the Corinthian gulf and the cities which line its shores;

it was splendidly situated for injuring the rural districts of

Laconia, and still more splendidly in relation to the opposite shores

of the continent of Epirus, and the passage between Peloponnesus and

Sicily.



[5] See Thuc. i. 36.



This appeal did not fall on deaf ears. The Athenians were persuaded

that the matter demanded their most serious attention, and they at

once despatched Stesicles as general,[6] with about six hundred

peltasts. They also requested Alcetas to help them in getting their

troops across. Thus under cover of night the whole body were conveyed

across to a point in the open country, and found their way into the

city. Nor was that all. The Athenians passed a decree to man sixty

ships of war, and elected[7] Timotheus admiral. The latter, being

unable to man the fleet on the spot, set sail on a cruise to the

islands and tried to make up the complements of his crews from those

quarters. He evidently looked upon it as no light matter to sail round

Peloponnesus as if on a voyage of pleasure, and to attack a fleet in

the perfection of training.[8] To the Athenians, however, it seemed

that he was wasting the precious time seasonable for the coastal

voyage, and they were not disposed to condone such an error, but

deposed him, appointing Iphicrates in his stead. The new general was

no sooner appointed than he set about getting his vessels manned with

the utmost activity, putting pressure on the trierarchs. He further

procured from the Athenians for his use not only any vessels cruising

on the coast of Attica, but the Paralus and Salaminia[9] also,

remarking that, if things turned out well yonder, he would soon send

them back plenty of ships. Thus his numbers grew to something like

seventy sail.



[6] The name of the general was Ctesicles, according to Diod. xv. 47.

    Read {strategon} for {tagon}, with Breitenbach, Cobet, etc. For

    Alcetas, see above, "Hell." VI. i. 7.



[7] I.e. by show of hands, {ekheirotonoun}.



[8] See Jowett, note to Thuc. VIII. xcv. 2, ii. p. 525.



[9] The two sacred galleys. See Thuc. iii. 33; Aristoph. "Birds," 147

    foll.



Meanwhile the Corcyraeans were sore beset with famine: desertion

became every day more frequent, so much so that Mnasippus caused

proclamation to be made by herald that all deserters would be sold

there and then;[10] and when that had no effect in lessening the

stream of runaways, he ended by driving them back with the lash. Those

within the walls, however, were not disposed to receive these

miserable slaves within the lines, and numbers died outside.

Mnasippus, not blind to what was happening, soon persuaded himself

that he had as good as got the city into his possession: and he began

to try experiments on his mercenaries. Some of them he had already

paid off;[11] others still in his service had as much as two months'

pay owing to them by the general, who, if report spoke true, had no

lack of money, since the majority of the states, not caring for a

campaign across the seas, sent him hard cash instead of men. But now

the beleaguered citizens, who could espy from their towers that the

outposts were less carefully guarded than formerly, and the men

scattered about the rural districts, made a sortie, capturing some and

cutting down others. Mnasippus, perceiving the attack, donned his

armour, and, with all the heavy troops he had, rushed to the rescue,

giving orders to the captains and brigadiers[12] to lead out the

mercenaries. Some of the captains answered that it was not so easy to

command obedience when the necessaries of life were lacking; whereat

the Spartan struck one man with his staff, and another with the butt

of his spear. Without spirit and full of resentment against their

general, the men mustered--a condition very unfavourable to success in

battle. Having drawn up the troops, the general in person repulsed the

division of the enemy which was opposite the gates, and pursued them

closely; but these, rallying close under their walls, turned right

about, and from under cover of the tombs kept up a continuous

discharge of darts and other missiles; other detachments, dashing out

at other gates, meanwhile fell heavily on the flanks of the enemy. The

Lacedaemonians, being drawn up eight deep, and thinking that the wing

of their phalanx was of inadeqate strength, essayed to wheel around;

but as soon as they began the movement the Corcyraeans attacked them

as if they were fleeing, and they were then unable to recover

themselves,[13] while the troops next in position abandoned themselves

to flight. Mnasippus, unable to succour those who were being pressed

owing to the attack of the enemy immediately in front, found himself

left from moment to moment with decreasing numbers. At last the

Corcyraeans collected, and with one united effort made a final rush

upon Mnasippus and his men, whose numbers were now considerably

reduced. At the same instant the townsmen,[14] eagerly noticing the

posture of affairs, rushed out to play their part. First Mnasippus was

slain, and then the pursuit became general; nor could the pursuers

well have failed to capture the camp, barricade and all, had they not

caught sight of the mob of traffickers with a long array of attendants

and slaves, and thinking that here was a prize indeed, desisted from

further chase.



[10] Or, "he would knock them all down to the hammer."



[11] Or, "cut off from their pay."



[12] Lit. "lochagoi and taxiarchs."



[13] Or, "to retaliate"; or, "to complete the movement."



[14] Reading, after Dindorf, {oi politai}, or, if with the MSS., {oi

    oplitai}; translate "the heavy-armed among the assailants saw

    their advantage and pressed on."



The Corcyraeans were well content for the moment to set up a trophy

and to give back the enemy's dead under a flag of truce; but the

after-consequences were even more important to them in the revival of

strength and spirits which were sunk in despondency. The rumour spread

that Iphicrates would soon be there--he was even at the doors; and in

fact the Corcyraeans themselves were manning a fleet. So Hypermenes,

who was second in command to Mnasippus and the bearer of his

despatches, manned every vessel of the fleet as full as it would hold,

and then sailing round to the entrenched camp, filled all the

transports with prisoners and valuables and other stock, and sent them

off. He himself, with his marines and the survivors of his troops,

kept watch over the entrenchments; but at last even this remnant in

the excess of panic and confusion got on board the men-of-war and

sailed off, leaving behind them vast quantities of corn and wine, with

numerous prisoners and invalided soldiers. The fact was, they were

sorely afraid of being caught by the Athenians in the island, and so

they made safely off to Leucas.



Meanwhile Iphicrates had commenced his voyage of circumnavigation,

partly voyaging and partly making every preparation for an engagement.

He at once left his large sails behind him, as the voyage was only to

be the prelude of a battle; his flying jibs, even if there was a good

breeze, were but little used, since by making his progres depend on

sheer rowing, he hoped at once to improve the physique of his men and

the speed of his attack. Often when the squadron was about to put into

shore for the purpose of breakfast or supper, he would seize the

moment, and draw back the leading wing of the column from the land off

the point in question; and then facing round again with the triremes

posted well in line, prow for prow, at a given signal let loose the

whole fleet in a stoutly contested race for the shore. Great was the

triumph in being the first to take in water or whatever else they

might need, or the first to breakfast; just as it was a heavy penalty

on the late-comers, not only to come short in all these objects of

desire, but to have to put out to sea with the rest as soon as the

signal was given; since the first-comers had altogether a quiet time

of it, whilst the hindmost must get through the whole business in hot

haste. So again, in the matter of outposts, if he chanced to be

getting the morning meal on hostile territory, pickets would be

posted, as was right and proper, on the land; but, apart from these,

he would raise his masts and keep look-out men on the maintops. These

commanded of course a far wider prospect from their lofty perches than

the outposts on the level ground. So too, when he dined or slept he

had no fires burning in the camp at night, but only a beacon kindled

in front of the encampment to prevent any unseen approach; and

frequently in fine weather he put out to sea immediately after the

evening meal, when, if the breeze favoured, they ran along and took

their rest simultaneously, or if they depended on oars he gave his

mariners repose by turns. During the voyage in daytime he would at one

time signal to "sail in column," and at another signal "abreast in

line." So that whilst they prosecuted the voyage they at the same time

became (both as to theory and practice) well versed in all the details

of an engagement before they reached the open sea--a sea, as they

imagined, occupied by their foes. For the most part they breakfasted

and dined on hostile territory; but as he confined himelf to bare

necessaries he was always too quick for the enemy. Before the hostile

reinforcement would come up he had finished his business and was out

to sea again.



At the date of Mnasippus's death he chanced to be off Sphagiae in

Laconian territory. Reaching Elis, and coasting past the mouth of the

Alpheus, he came to moorings under Cape Ichthus,[15] as it is called.

The next day he put out from that port for Cephallenia, so drawing up

his line and conducting the voyage that he might be prepared in every

detail to engage if necessary. The tale about Mnasippus and his demise

had reached him, but he had not heard it from an eye-witness, and

suspected that it might have been invented to deceive him and throw

him off his guard. He was therefore on the look-out. It was, in fact,

only on arrival in Cephallenia that he learned the news in an explicit

form, and gave his troops rest.



[15] Cape Fish, mod. Cape Katakolon, protecting harbour of Pyrgos in

    Elis.



I am well aware that all these details of practice and manouvring are

customary in anticipation of a sea-fight, but what I single out for

praise in the case before us is the skill with which the Athenian

admiral attained a twofold object. Bearing in mind that it was his

duty to reach a certain point at which he expected to fight a naval

battle without delay, it was a happy discovery on his part not to

allow tactical skill, on the one hand, to be sacrificed to the pace of

sailing,[16] nor, on the other, the need of training to interfere with

the date of arrival.



[16] Lit. "the voyage."



After reducing the towns of Cephallenia, Iphicrates sailed to Corcyra.

There the first news he heard was that the triremes sent by Dionysius

were expected to relieve the Lacedaemonians. On receipt of this

information he set off in person and surveyed the country, in order to

find a spot from which it would be possible to see the vessels

approaching and to signal to the city. Here he stationed his look-out

men. A code of signals was agreed upon to signify "vessels in sight,"

"mooring," etc.; which done he gave his orders to twenty of his

captains of men-of-war who were to follow him at a given word of

command. Any one who failed to follow him must not grumble at the

penalty; that he warned them. Presently the vessels were signalled

approaching; the word of command was given, and then the enthusiasm

was a sight to see--every man of the crews told off for the expedition

racing to join his ship and embark. Sailing to the point where the

enemy's vessels lay, he had no difficulty in capturing the crews, who

had disembarked from all the ships with one exception. The exception

was that of Melanippus the Rhodian, who had advised the other captains

not to stop at this point, and had then manned his own vessel and

sailed off. Thus he encountered the ships of Iphicrates, but contrived

to slip through his fingers, while the whole of the Syracusan vessels

were captured, crews and all.



Having cut the beaks off the prows, Iphicrates bore down into the

harbour of Corcyra with the captured triremes in tow. With the captive

crews themselves he came to an agreement that each should pay a fixed

sum as ransom, with one exception, that of Crinippus, their commander.

Him he kept under guard, with the intention apparently of exacting a

handsome sum in his case or else of selling him. The prisoner,

however, from vexation of spirit, put an end to his own life. The rest

were sent about their business by Iphicrates, who accepted the

Corcyraeans as sureties for the money. His own sailors he supported

for the most part as labourers on the lands of the Corcyraeans, while

at the head of his light infantry and the hoplites of the contingent

he crossed over into Acarnania, and there lent his aid to any friendly

state that needed his services; besides which he went to war with the

Thyrians,[17] a sturdy race of warriors in possession of a strong

fortress.



[17] Thyreum (or Thyrium), in Acarnania, a chief city at the time of

    the Roman wars in Greece; and according to Polybius (xxxviii. 5),

    a meeting-place of the League on one occasion. See "Dict. Anct.

    Geog." s.v.; Freeman, op. cit. iv. 148; cf. Paus. IV. xxvi. 3, in

    reference to the Messenians and Naupactus; Grote, "H. G." x. 212.



B.C. 372. Having attached to his squadron the navy also of Corcyra,

with a fleet numbering now about ninety ships he set sail, in the

first instance to Cephallenia, where he exacted money--which was in

some cases voluntarily paid, in others forcibly extorted. In the next

place he began making preparations partly to harass the territory of

the Lacedaemonians, and partly to win over voluntarily the other

states in that quarter which were hostile to Athens; or in case of

refusal to go to war with them.



The whole conduct of the campaign reflects, I think, the highest

credit on Iphicrates. If his strategy was admirable, so too was the

instinct which led him to advise the association with himself of two

such colleagues as Callistratus and Chabrias--the former a popular

orator but no great friend of himself politically,[18] the other a man

of high military reputation. Either he looked upon them as men of

unusual sagacity, and wished to profit by their advice, in which case

I commend the good sense of the arrangement, or they were, in his

belief, antagonists, in which case the determination to approve

himself a consummate general, neither indolent nor incautious, was

bold, I admit, but indicative of a laudable self-confidence. Here,

however, we must part with Iphicrates and his achievements to return

to Athens.



[18] Reading with the MSS. {ou mala epitedeion onta}. See Grote, "H.

    G." x. 206. Boeckh ("P. E. A.," trans. Cornewall Lewis, p. 419)

    wished to read {eu mala} for {ou mala k.t.l.}, in which case

    translate "the former a popular orator, and a man of singular

    capacity"; and for {epitedeion} in that sense, see "Hipparch." i.

    8; for {eu mala}, see "Hipparch." i. 25. For details concerning

    Callistratus, see Dindorf, op. cit. note ad. loc.; Curtius, "H.

    G." iv. 367, 381 foll., v. 90. For Chabrias, Rehdantz, op. cit. In

    the next sentence I have again adhered to the reading of the MSS.,

    but the pasage is commonly regarded as corrupt; see Otto Keller,

    op. cit. p. 215 for various emendations.







III



The Athenians, forced to witness the expatriation from Boeotia of

their friends the Plataeans (who had sought an asylum with

themselves), forced also to listen to the supplications of the

Thespiaeans (who begged them not to suffer them to be robbed of their

city), could no longer regard the Thebans with favour;[1] though, when

it came to a direct declaration of war, they were checked in part by a

feeling of shame, and partly by considerations of expediency. Still,

to go hand in hand with them, to be a party to their proceedings, this

they absolutely refused, now that they saw them marching against time-

honoured friends of the city like the Phocians, and blotting out

states whose loyalty in the great Persian war was conspicuous no less

than their friendship to Athens. Accordingly the People passed a

decree to make peace; but in the first instance they sent an embassy

to Thebes, inviting that state to join them if it pleased them on an

embassy which they proposed to send to Lacedaemon to treat of peace.

In the next place they despatched such an embassy on their own

account. Among the commissioners appointed were Callias the son of

Hipponicus, Autocles the son of Strombichides, Demostratus the son of

Aristophon, Aristocles, Cephisodotus,[2] Melanopus, and Lycaethus.



[1] Plataea destroyed in B.C. 373. See Jowett, "Thuc." ii. 397.



[2] See below, "Hell." VII. i. 12; Hicks, 87.



B.C. 371. [These were formally introduced to the Deputies of the

Lacedaemonians and the allies.[3]] Nor ought the name of Callistratus

to be omitted. That statesman and orator was present. He had obtained

furlough from Iphicrates on an undertaking either to send money for

the fleet or to arrange a peace. Hence his arrival in Athens and

transactions in behalf of peace. After being introduced to the

assembly[4] of the Lacedaemonians and to the allies, Callias,[5] who

was the dadouchos (or torch-holder) in the mysteries, made the first

speech. He was a man just as well pleased to praise himself as to hear

himself praised by others. He opened the proceedings as follows:



[3] The bracketed words read like an annotator's comment, or possibly

    they are a note by the author.



[4] See above, "Hell." II. iv. 38.



[5] See above, "Hell." IV. v. 13; Cobet, "Prosop. Xen." p. 67 foll.;

    Xen. "Symp."; Plat. "Protag."; Andoc. "de Myst." If this is one

    and the same person he must have been an elderly man at this date,

    371 B.C.



"Lacedaemonians, the duty of representing you as proxenos at Athens is

a privilege which I am not the first member of my family to enjoy; my

father's father held it as an heirloom of our family and handed it

down as a heritage to his descendants. If you will permit me, I should

like to show you the disposition of my fatherland towards yourselves.

If in times of war she chooses us as her generals, so when her heart

is set upon quiet she sends us out as her messengers of peace. I

myself have twice already[6] stood here to treat for conclusion of

war, and on both embassies succeeded in arranging a mutually agreeable

peace. Now for the third time I am come, and I flatter myself that to-

day again I shall obtain a reconciliation, and on grounds

exceptionally just. My eyes bear witness that our hearts are in

accord; you and we alike are pained at the effacement of Plataeae and

Thespiae. Is it not then reasonable that out of agreement should

spring concord rather than discord? It is never the part, I take it,

of wise men to raise the standard of war for the sake of petty

differences; but where there is nothing but unanimity they must be

marvellous folk who refuse the bond of peace. But I go further. It

were just and right on our parts even to refuse to bear arms against

each other; since, as the story runs, the first strangers to whom our

forefather Triptolemus showed the unspeakable mystic rites of Demeter

and Core, the mother and the maiden, were your ancestors;--I speak of

Heracles, the first founder of your state, and of your two citizens,

the great twin sons of Zeus--and to Peloponnesus first he gave as a

gift the seed of Demeter's corn-fruits. How, then, can it be just or

right either that you should come and ravage the corn crops of those

from whom you got the sacred seed of corn, or that we should not

desire that they to whom the gift was given should share abundantly of

this boon? But if, as it would seem, it is a fixed decree of heaven

that war shall never cease among men, yet ought we--your people and

our people--to be as slow as possible to begin it, and being in it, as

swift as possible to bring it to an end."



[6] B.C. 387 and 374; see Curtius, "H. G." vol. iv. p. 376 (Eng. ed.)



After him Autocles[7] spoke: he was of repute as a versatile lawyer

and orator, and addressed the meeting as follows: "Lacedaemonians, I

do not conceal from myself that what I am about to say is not

calculated to please you, but it seems to me that, if you wish the

friendship which we are cementing to last as long as possible, we are

wise to show each other the underlying causes of our wars. Now, you

are perpetually saying that the states ought to be independent; but it

is you yourselves who most of all stand in the way of independence--

your first and last stipulation with the allied states being that they

should follow you whithersoever you choose to lead; and yet what has

this principle of follow-my-leader got to do with independent

action?[8] Again, you pick quarrels without consulting your allies,

and lead them against those whom you account enemies; so that in many

cases, with all their vaunted independence, they are forced to march

against their greatest friends; and, what is still more opposed to

independence than all else, you are for ever setting up here your

decarchies and there your thirty commissioners, and your chief aim in

appointing these officers and governors seems to be, not that they

should fulfil their office and govern legally, but that they should be

able to keep the cities under their heels by sheer force. So that it

looks as if you delighted in despotisms rather than free

constitutions. Let us go back to the date[9] at which the Persian king

enjoined the independence of the states. At that time you made no

secret of your conviction that the Thebans, if they did not suffer

each state to govern itself and to use the laws of its own choice,

would be failing to act in the spirit of the king's rescript. But no

sooner had you got hold of Cadmeia than you would not suffer the

Thebans themselves to be independent. Now, if the maintenance of

friendship be an object, it is no use for people to claim justice from

others while they themselves are doing all they can to prove the

selfishness of their aims."



[7] For the political views of Autocles, see Curtius, "H. G." iv. 387,

    v. 94 (Eng. tr.); see also Grote, "H. G." x. 225.



[8] Or, "what consistency is there between these precepts of yours and

    political independence?"



[9] Sixteen years before--B.C. 387. See "Pol. Lac." xiv. 5.



These remarks were received in absolute silence, yet in the hearts of

those who were annoyed with Lacedaemon they stirred pleasure. After

Autocles spoke Callistratus: "Trespasses, men of Lacedaemon, have been

committed on both sides, yours and ours, I am free to confess; but

still it is not my view that because a man has done wrong we can never

again have dealings with him. Experience tells me that no man can go

very far without a slip, and it seems to me that sometimes the

transgressor by reason of his transgression becomes more tractable,

especially if he be chastened through the error he has committed, as

has been the case with us. And so on your own case I see that

ungenerous acts have sometimes reaped their own proper reward: blow

has been met by counter-blow; and as a specimen I take the seizure of

the Cadmeia in Thebes. To-day, at any rate, the very cities whose

independence you strove for have, since your unrighteous treatment of

Thebes, fallen one and all of them again into her power.[10] We are

schooled now, both of us, to know that grasping brings not gain. We

are prepared, I hope, to be once more moderate under the influence of

a mutual friendship. Some, I know, in their desire to render our

peace[11] abortive accuse us falsely, as though we were come hither,

not seeking friendship, but because we dread the arrival of some[12]

Antalcidas with moneys from the king. But consider, what arrant

nonsense they talk! Was it not, pray, the great king who demanded that

all the states in Hellas should be independent? and what have we

Athenians, who are in full agreement with the king, both in word and

deed, to fear from him? Or is it conceivable that he prefers spending

money in making others great to finding his favourite projects

realised without expense?



[10] Reading, with Breitenbach and Hartman, {as} instead of {os

    espoudasate k.t.l.}



[11] Or, more lit. "to avert the peace" as an ill-omened thing.



[12] Without inserting {tis}, as Hartman proposes ("An. Xen." p. 387),

    that, I think, is the sense. Antalcidas is the arch-diplomat--a

    name to conjure with, like that of Bismarck in modern European

    politics. But see Grote, "H. G." x. 213, note 2.



"Well! what is it really that has brought us here? No especial need or

difficulty in our affairs. That you may discover by a glance at our

maritime condition, or, if you prefer, at the present posture of our

affairs on land. Well, then, how does the matter stand? It is obvious

that some of our allies please us no better than they please you;[13]

and, possibly, in return for your former preservation of us, we may be

credited with a desire to point out to you the soundness of our

policy.



[13] See, for this corrupt passage, Otto Keller, op. cit. p. 219;

    Hartman, op. cit. p. 387; and Breitenbach, n. ad loc. In the next

    sentence I should like to adopt Hartman's emendation (ib.) {on

    orthos egnote} for the MSS. {a orthos egnomen}, and translate "we

    may like to prove to you the soundness of your policy at the

    time." For the "preservation" referred to, see below, VI. v. 35,

    and above, II. ii. 20.



"But, to revert once more to the topic of expediency and common

interests. It is admitted, I presume, that, looking at the states

collectively, half support your views, half ours; and in every single

state one party is for Sparta and another for Athens. Suppose, then,

we were to shake hands, from what quarter can we reasonably anticipate

danger and trouble? To put the case in so many words, so long as you

are our friends no one can vex us by land; no one, whilst we are your

supports, can injure you by sea. Wars like tempests gather and grow to

a head from time to time, and again they are dispelled. That we all

know. Some future day, if not to-day, we shall crave, both of us, for

peace. Why, then, need we wait for that moment, holding on until we

expire under the multitude of our ills, rather than take time by the

forelock and, before some irremediable mischief betide, make peace? I

cannot admire the man who, because he has entered the lists and has

scored many a victory and obtained to himself renown, is so eaten up

with the spirit of rivalry that he must needs go on until he is beaten

and all his training is made futile. Nor again do I praise the gambler

who, if he makes one good stroke of luck, insists on doubling the

stakes. Such conduct in the majority of cases must end in absolute

collapse. Let us lay the lesson of these to heart, and forbear to

enter into any such lists as theirs for life or death; but, while we

are yet in the heyday of our strength and fortune, shake hands in

mutual amity. So assuredly shall we through you and you through us

attain to an unprecedented pinnacle of glory throughout Hellas."



The arguments of the speakers were approved, and the Lacedaemonians

passed a resolution to accept peace on a threefold basis: the

withdrawal of the governors from the cities,[14] the disbanding of

armaments naval and military, and the guarantee of independence to the

states. "If any state transgressed these stipulations, it lay at the

option of any power whatsoever to aid the states so injured, while,

conversely, to bring such aid was not compulsory on any power against

its will." On these terms the oaths were administered and accepted by

the Lacedaemonians on behalf of themselves and their allies, and by

the Athenians and their allies separately state by state. The Thebans

had entered their individual name among the states which accepted the

oaths, but their ambassadors came the next day with instructions to

alter the name of the signatories, substituting for Thebans

Boeotians.[15] But Agesilaus answered to this demand that he would

alter nothing of what they had in the first instance sworn to and

subscribed. If they did not wish to be included in the treaty, he was

willing to erase their name at their bidding. So it came to pass that

the rest of the world made peace, the sole point of dispute being

confined to the Thebans; and the Athenians came to the conclusion that

there was a fair prospect of the Thebans being now literally

decimated.[16] As to the Thebans themselves, they retired from Sparta

in utter despondency.



[14] Grote ("H. G." x. 236) thinks that Diod. xv. 38 ({exagogeis})

    belongs to this time, not to the peace between Athens and Sparta

    in 374 B.C.



[15] See, for a clear explanation of the matter, Freeman, "Hist. Red.

    Gov." iv. p. 175, note 3, in reference to Grote, ib. x. 231 note,

    and Paus. IX. xiii. 2; Plut. "Ages." 28; Thirlwall, "H. G." v. p

    69 note.



[16] Or, "as the saying is, taken and tithed." See below, VI. v. 35,

    and for the origin of the saying, Herod. vii. 132.







IV



In consequence of the peace the Athenians proceeded to withdraw their

garrisons from the different sates, and sent to recall Iphicrates with

his fleet; besides which they forced him to restore eveything captured

subsequently to the late solemn undertaking at Lacedaemon. The

Lacedaemonians acted differently. Although they withdrew their

governors and garrisons from the other states, in Phocis they did not

do so. Here Cleombrotus was quartered with his army, and had sent to

ask directions from the home authorities. A speaker, Prothous,

maintained that their business was to disband the army in accordance

with their oaths, and then to send round invitations to the states to

contribute what each felt individually disposed, and lay such sum in

the temple of Apollo; after which, if any attempt to hinder the

independence of the states on any side were manifested, it would be

time enough then again to invite all who cared to protect the

principle of autonomy to march against its opponents. "In this way,"

he added, "I think the goodwill of heaven will be secured, and the

states will suffer least annoyance." But the Assembly, on hearing

these views, agreed that this man was talking nonsense. Puppets in the

hands of fate![1] An unseen power, it would seem, was already driving

them onwards; so they sent instructions to Cleombrotus not to disband

the army, but to march straight against the Thebans if they refused to

recognise the autonomy of the states. [Cleombrotus, it is understood,

had, on hearing the news of the establishment of peace, sent to the

ephorate to ask for guidance; and then they sent him the above

instructions, bidding him under the circumstances named to march upon

Thebes.[2]]



[1] See Grote, "H. G." x. 237: "The miso-Theban impulse now drove them

    on with a fury which overcame all other thoughts . . . a

    misguiding inspiration sent by the gods--like that of the Homeric

    Ate."



[2] This passage reads like an earlier version for which the above was

    substituted by the author.



The Spartan king soon perceived that, so far from leaving the Boeotian

states their autonomy, the Thebans were not even preparing to disband

their army, clearly in view of a general engagement; he therefore felt

justified in marching his troops into Boeotia. The point of ingress

which he adopted was not that which the Thebans anticipated from

Phocis, and where they were keeping guard at a defile; but, marching

through Thisbae by a mountainous and unsuspected route, he arrived

before Creusis, taking that fortress and capturing twelve Theban war-

vessels besides. After this achievement he advanced from the seaboard

and encamped in Leuctra on Thespian territory. The Thebans encamped in

a rising ground immediately opposite at no great distance, and were

supported by no allies except the Boeotians.



At this juncture the friends of Cleombrotus came to him and urged upon

him strong reasons for delivering battle. "If you let the Thebans

escape without a battle," they said, "you will run great risks of

suffering the extreme penalty at the hands of the state. People will

call to mind against you the time when you reached Cynoscephelae and

did not ravage a square foot of Theban territory; and again, a

subsequent expedition when you were driven back foiled in your attempt

to make an entry into the enemy's country--while Agesilaus on each

occasion found his entry by Mount Cithaeron. If then you have any care

for yourself, or any attachment to your fatherland, march you against

the enemy." That was what his friends urged. As to his opponents, what

they said was, "Now our fine friend will show whether he really is so

concerned on behalf of the Thebans as he is said to be."




Cleombrotus, with these words ringing in his ears, felt driven[3] to

join battle. On their side the leaders of Thebes calculated that, if

they did not fight, their provincial cities[4] would hold aloof from

them and Thebes itself would be besieged; while, if the commonalty of

Thebes failed to get supplies, there was every prospect that the city

itself would turn against them; and, seeing that many of them had

already tasted the bitterness of exile, they came to the conclusion

that it was better for them to die on the field of battle than to

renew that experience. Besides this they were somewhat encouraged by

the recital of an oracle which predicted that the Lacedaemonians would

be defeated on the spot where the monument of the maidens stood, who,

as the story goes, being violated by certain Lacedaemonians, had slain

themselves.[5] This sepulchral monument the Thebans decked with

ornaments before the battle. Furthermore, tidings were brought them

from the city that all the temples had opened of their own accord; and

the priestesses asserted that the gods revealed victory. Again, from

the Heracleion men said that the arms had disappeared, as though

Heracles himself had sallied forth to battle. It is true that another

interpretation[6] of these marvels made them out to be one and all the

artifices of the leaders of Thebes. However this may be, everything in

the battle turned out adverse to the Lacedaemonians; while fortune

herself lent aid to the Thebans and crowned their efforts with

success. Cleombrotus held his last council "whether to fight or not,"

after the morning meal. In the heat of noon a little goes a long way;

and the people said that it took a somewhat provocative effect on

their spirits.[7]



[3] Or, "was provoked."



[4] Lit. "perioecid." See Thuc. iv. 76, Arnold's note, and "Hell." V.

    iv. 46, 63.



[5] See Diod. xv. 54; Paus. IX. xiii. 3; Plut. "Pelop." xx.



[6] Or, "it is true that some people made out these marvels."



[7] Or, "they were somewhat excited by it."



Both sides were now arming, and there was the unmistakeable signs of

approaching battle, when, as the first incident, there issued from the

Boeotian lines a long train bent on departure--these were the

furnishers of the market, a detachment of baggage bearers, and in

general such people as had no inclination to join in the fight. These

were met on their retreat and attacked by the mercenary troops under

Hiero, who got round them by a circular movement.[8] The mercenaries

were supported by the Phocian light infantry and some squadrons of

Heracleot and Phliasian cavalry, who fell upon the retiring train and

turned them back, pursuing them and driving them into the camp of the

Boeotians. The immediate effect was to make the Boeotian portion of

the army more numerous and closer packed than before. The next feature

of the combat was that in consequence of the flat space of plain[9]

between the opposing armies, the Lacedaemonians posted their cavalry

in front of their squares of infantry, and the Thebans followed suit.

Only there was this difference--the Theban cavalry was in a high state

of training and efficiency, owing to their war with the Orchomenians

and again their war with Thespiae, whilst the cavalry of the

Lacedaemonians was at its worst at this period.[10] The horses were

reared and kept by the wealthiest members of the state; but whenever

the ban was called out, an appointed trooper appeared who took the

horse with any sort of arms which might be presented to him, and set

off on the expedition at a moment's notice. Moreover, these troopers

were the least able-bodied of the men: raw recruits set simply astride

their horses, and devoid of soldierly ambition. Such was the cavalry

of either antagonist.



[8] Or, "surrounded them."



[9] See Rustow and Kochly, op. cit. p. 173.



[10] See "Hipparch." ix. 4; also "Cyrop." VIII. viii.



The heavy infantry of the Lacedaemonians, it is said, advanced by

sections three files abreast,[11] allowing a total depth to the whole

line of not more than twelve. The Thebans were formed in close order

of not less than fifty shields deep, calculating that victory gained

over the king's division of the army implied the easy conquest of the

rest.



[11] It would appear that the "enomoty" (section) numbered thirty-six

    files. See "Pol. Lac." xi. 4; xiii. 4. For further details as to

    the tactical order of the Thebans, see Diod. xv. 55; Plut.

    "Pelop." xxiii.



Cleombrotus had hardly begun to lead his division against the foe

when, before in fact the troops with him were aware of his advance,

the cavalry had already come into collision, and that of the

Lacedaemonians was speedily worsted. In their flight they became

involved with their own heavy infantry; and to make matters worse, the

Theban regiments were already attacking vigorously. Still strong

evidence exists for supposing that Cleombrotus and his division were,

in the first instance, victorious in the battle, if we consider the

fact that they could never have picked him up and brought him back

alive unless his vanguard had been masters of the situation for the

moment.



When, however, Deinon the polemarch and Sphodrias, a member of the

king's council, with his son Cleonymus,[12] had fallen, then it was

that the cavalry and the polemarch's adjutants,[13] as they are

called, with the rest, under pressure of the mass against them, began

retreating; and the left wing of the Lacedaemonians, seeing the right

borne down in this way, also swerved. Still, in spite of the numbers

slain, and broken as they were, as soon as they had crossed the trench

which protected their camp in front, they grounded arms on the

spot[14] whence they had rushed to battle. This camp, it must be borne

in mind, did not lie at all on the level, but was pitched on a

somewhat steep incline. At this juncture there were some of the

Lacedaemonians who, looking upon such a disaster as intolerable,

maintained that they ought to prevent the enemy from erecting a

trophy, and try to recover the dead not under a flag of truce but by

another battle. The polemarchs, however, seeing that nearly a thousand

men of the total Lacedaemonian troops were slain; seeing also that of

the seven hundred Spartans themselves who were on the field something

like four hundred lay dead;[15] aware, further, of the despondency

which reigned among the allies, and the general disinclination on

their parts to fight longer (a frame of mind not far removed in some

instances from positive satisfaction at what had taken place)--under

the circumstances, I say, the polemarchs called a council of the

ablest representatives of the shattered army[16] and deliberated as to

what should be done. Finally the unanimous opinion was to pick up the

dead under a flag of truce, and they sent a herald to treat for terms.

The Thebans after that set up a trophy and gave back the bodies under

a truce.



[12] See above, V. iv. 33.



[13] {sumphoreis}. For the readings of this corrupt passage see Otto

    Keller.



[14] Or, "in orderly way." See Curt. "H. G." iv. 400.



[15] See "Ages." ii. 24.



[16] {tous epikairiotatous}. See above, III. iii. 10; "Cyrop." VII.

    iv. 4; VIII. iv. 32, vi. 2.



After these events, a messenger was despatched to Lacedaemon with news

of the calamity. He reached his destination on the last day of the

gymnopaediae,[17] just when the chorus of grown men had entered the

theatre. The ephors heard the mournful tidings not without grief and

pain, as needs they must, I take it; but for all that they did not

dismiss the chorus, but allowed the contest to run out its natural

course. What they did was to deliver the names of those who had fallen

to their friends and families, with a word of warning to the women not

to make any loud lamentations but to bear their sorrow in silence; and

the next day it was a striking spectacle to see those who had

relations among the slain moving to and fro in public with bright and

radiant looks, whilst of those whose friends were reported to be

living barely a man was to be seen, and these flitted by with lowered

heads and scowling brows, as if in humiliation.



[17] The festival was celebrated annually about midsummer. See Herod.

    vi. 67; Thuc. v. 82, and Arnold's note; Pollux. iv. 105; Athen.

    xiv. 30, xv. 22; Muller, "Dorians," ii. 389.



After this the ephors proceeded to call out the ban, including the

forty-years-service men of the two remaining regiments;[18] and they

proceeded further to despatch the reservces of the same age belonging

to the six regiments already on foreign service. Hitherto the Phocian

campaign had only drawn upon the thirty-five-years-service list.

Besides these they now ordered out on active service the troops

retained at the beginning of the campaign in attendance on the

magistrates at the government offices. Agesilaus being still disabled

by his infirmity, the city imposed the duty of command upon his son

Archidamus. The new general found eager co-operators in the men of

Tegea. The friends of Stasippus at this date were still living,[19]

and they were stanch in their Lacedaemonian proclivities, and wielded

considerable power in their state. Not less stoutly did the Mantineans

from their villages under their aristocratic form of government flock

to the Spartan standard. Besides Tegea and Mantinea, the Corinthians

and Sicyonians, the Phliasians and Achaeans were equally enthusiastic

to joining the campaign, whilst other states sent out soldiers. Then

came the fitting out and manning of ships of war on the part of the

Lacedaemonians themselves and of the Corinthians, whilst the

Sicyonians were requested to furnish a supply of vessels on board of

which it was proposed to transport the army across the gulf. And so,

finally, Archidamus was able to offer the sacrifices usual at the

moment of crossing the frontier. But to return to Thebes.



[18] I.e. every one up to fifty-eight years of age.



[19] See below, VI. v. 9.



Imediately after the battle the Thebans sent a messenger to Athens

wearing a chaplet. Whilst insisting on the magnitude of the victory

they at the same time called upon the Athenians to send them aid, for

now the opportunity had come to wreak vengeance on the Lacedaemonians

for all the evil they had done to Athens. As it chanced, the senate of

the Athenians was holding a session on the Acropolis. As soon as the

news was reported, the annoyance caused by its announcement was

unmistakeable. They neither invited the herald to accept of

hospitality nor sent back one word in reply to the request for

assistance. And so the herald turned his back on Athens and departed.



But there was Jason still to look to, and he was their ally. To him

then the Thebans sent, and earnestly besought his aid, their thoughts

running on the possible turn which events might take. Jason on his

side at once proceeded to man a fleet, with the apparent intention of

sending assistance by sea, besides which he got together his foreign

brigade and his own cavalry; and although the Phocians and he were

implacable enemies,[20] he marched through their territory to Boeotia.

Appearing like a vision to many of the states before his approach was

even announced--at any rate before levies could be mustered from a

dozen different points--he had stolen a march upon them and was a long

way ahead, giving proof that expedition is sometimes a better tool to

work with than sheer force.



[20] Or, "though the Phocians maintained a war 'a outrance' with him."



When he arrived in Boeotia the Thebans urged upon him that now was the

right moment to attack the Lacedaemonians: he with his foreign brigade

from the upper ground, they face to face in front; but Jason dissuaded

them from their intention. He reminded them that after a noble

achievement won it was not worth their while to play for so high a

stake, involving a still greater achievement or else the loss of

victory already gained. "Do you not see," he urged, "that your success

followed close on the heels of necessity? You ought then to reflect

that the Lacedaemonians in their distress, with a choice between life

and death, will fight it out with reckless desperation. Providence, as

it seems, ofttimes delights to make the little ones great and the

great ones small."[21]



[21] Cf. "Anab." III. ii. 10.



By such arguments he diverted the Thebans from the desperate

adventure. But for the Lacedaemonians also he had words of advice,

insisting on the difference between an army defeated and an army

flushed with victory. "If you are minded," he said, "to forget this

disaster, my advice to you is to take time to recover breath and

recruit your energies. When you have grown stronger then give battle

to these unconquered veterans.[22] At present," he continued, "you

know without my telling you that among your own allies there are some

who are already discussing terms of friendship with your foes. My

advice is this: by all means endeavour to obtain a truce. This," he

added, "is my own ambition: I want to save you, on the ground of my

father's friendship with yourselves, and as being myself your

representative."[23] Such was the tenor of his speech, but the secret

of action was perhaps to be found in a desire to make these mutual

antagonists put their dependence on himself alone. Whatever his

motive, the Lacedaemonians took his advice, and commissioned him to

procure a truce.



[22] Or, "the invincibles."



[23] Lit. "your proxenos."



As soon as the news arrived that the terms were arranged, the

polemarchs passed an order round: the troops were to take their

evening meal, get their kit together, and be ready to set off that

night, so as to scale the passes of Cithaeron by next morning. After

supper, before the hour of sleep, the order to march was given, and

with the generals at their head the troops advanced as the shades of

evening fell, along the road to Creusis, trusting rather to the chance

of their escaping notice, than to the truce itself. It was weary

marching in the dead of night, making their retreat in fear, and along

a difficult road, until they fell in with Archidamus's army of relief.

At this point, then, Archidamus waited till all the allies had

arrived, and so led the whole of the united armies back to Corinth,

from which point he dismissed the allies and led his fellow-citizens

home.



Jason took his departure from Boeotia through Phocis, where he

captured the suburbs of Hyampolis[24] and ravaged the country

districts, putting many to the sword. Content with this, he traversed

the rest of Phocis without meddling or making. Arrived at

Heraclea,[25] he knocked down the fortress of the Heracleots, showing

that he was not troubled by any apprehension lest when the pass was

thrown open somebody or other might march against his own power at

some future date. Rather was he haunted by the notion that some one or

other might one day seize Heraclea, which commanded the pass, and bar

his passage into Hellas--should Hellas ever be his goal.[26] At the

moment of his return to Thessaly he had reached the zenith of his

greatness. He was the lawfully constituted Prince[27] of Thessaly, and

he had under him a large mercenary force of infantry and cavalry, and

all in the highest perfection of training. For this twofold reason he

might claim the title great. But he was still greater as the head of a

vast alliance. Those who were prepared to fight his battles were

numerous, and he might still count upon the help of many more eager to

do so; but I call Jason greatest among his contemporaries, because not

one among them could afford to look down upon him.[28]



[24] An ancient town in Phocis (see Hom. "Il." ii. 521) on the road

    leading from Orchomenus to Opus, and commanding a pass from Locris

    into Phocis and Boeotia. See Herod. viii. 28; Paus. ix. 35, S. 5;

    Strab. ix. 424; "Dict. of Geog." s.v.



[25] Or, "Heracleia Trachinia," a fortress city founded (as a colony)

    by the Lacedaemonians in B.C. 426, to command the approach to

    Thermopylae from Thessaly, and to protect the Trachinians and the

    neighbouring Dorians from the Oetean mountaineers. See "Dict. of

    Geog." "Trachis"; Thuc. iii. 92, 93, v. 51, 52; Diod. xii. 59.



[26] B.C. 370. The following sections 28-37 form an episode concerning

    Thessalian affairs between B.C. 370 and B.C. 359.



[27] Lit. "Tagos."



[28] For a similar verbal climax see below, VI. v. 47.



B.C. 370. The Pythian games were now approaching, and an order went

round the cities from Jason to make preparation for the solemn

sacrifice of oxen, sheep and goats, and swine. It was reported that

although the requisitions upon the several cities were moderate, the

number of beeves did not fall short of a thousand, while the rest of

the sacrificial beasts exceeded ten times that number. He issued a

proclamation also to this effect: a golden wreath of victory should be

given to whichever city could produce the best-bred bull to head the

procession in honour of the god. And lastly there was an order issued

to all the Thessalians to be ready for a campaign at the date of the

Pythian games. His intention, as people said, was to act as manager of

the solemn assembly and games in person. What the thought was that

passed through his mind with reference to the sacred money, remains to

this day uncertain; only, a tale is rife to the effect that in answer

to the inquiry of the Delphians, "What ought we to do, if he takes any

of the treasures of the god?" the god made answer, "He would see to

that himself." This great man, his brain teeming with vast designs of

this high sort, came now to his end. He had ordered a military

inspection. The cavalry of the Pheraeans were to pass muster before

him. He was already seated, delivering answers to all petitioners,

when seven striplings approached, quarrelling, as it seemed, about

some matter. Suddenly by these seven the Prince was despatched; his

throat gashed, his body gored with wounds. Stoutly his guard rushed to

the rescue with their long spears, and one of the seven, while still

in the act of aiming a blow at Jason, was thrust through with a lance

and died; a second, in the act of mounting his horse, was caught, and

dropped dead, the recipient of many wounds. The rest leaped on the

horses which they had ready waiting and escaped. To whatever city of

Hellas they came honours were almost universally accorded them. The

whole incident proves clearly that the Hellenes stood in much alarm of

Jason. They looked upon him as a tyrant in embryo.



So Jason was dead; and his brothers Polydorus and Polyphron were

appointed princes[29] in his place. But of these twain, as they

journeyed together to Larissa, Polydorus was slain in the night, as he

slept, by his brother Polyphron, it was thought; since a death so

sudden, without obvious cause, could hardly be otherwise accounted

for.



[29] Lit. "Tagoi."



Polyphron governed for a year, and by the year's end he had

refashioned his princedom into the likeness of a tyranny. In Pharsalus

he put to death Polydamas[30] and eight other of the best citizens;

and from Larissa he drove many into exile. But while he was thus

employed, he, in his turn, was done to death by Alexander, who slew

him to avenge Polydorus and to destroy the tyranny. This man now

assumed the reins of office, and had no sooner done so than he showed

himself a harsh prince to the Thessalians: harsh too and hostile to

the Thebans and Athenians,[31] and an unprincipled freebooter

everywhere by land and by sea. But if that was his character, he too

was doomed to perish shortly. The perpetrators of the deed were his

wife's brothers.[32] The counsellor of it and the inspiring soul was

the wife herself. She it was who reported to them that Alexander had

designs against them; who hid them within the house a whole day; who

welcomed home her husband deep in his cups and laid him to rest, and

then while the lamp still burned brought out the prince's sword. It

was she also who, perceiving her brothers shrank bank, fearing to go

in and attack Alexander, said to them, "If you do not be quick and do

the deed, I will wake him up!" After they had gone in, she, too, it

was who caught and pulled to the door, clinging fast to the knocker

till the breath was out of her husband's body.[33] Her fierce hatred

against the man is variously explained. By some it was said to date

from the day when Alexander, having imprisoned his own favourite--who

was a fair young stripling--when his wife supplicated him to release

the boy, brought him forth and stabbed him in the throat. Others say

it originated through his sending to Thebes and seeking the hand of

the wife of Jason in marriage, because his own wife bore him no

children. These are the various causes assigned to explain the treason

of his wife against him. Of the brothers who executed it, the eldest,

Tisiphonus, in virtue of his seniority accepted, and up to the date of

this history[34] succeeded in holding, the government.



[30] See above, VI. i. 2 foll.



[31] See Dem. "c. Aristocr." 120; Diod. xv. 60 foll.



[32] B.C. 359 or 358.



[33] The woman's name was Thebe. See Diod. xvi. 14; Cicero, "de

    Inven." II. xlix. 144; "de Div." I. xxv. 52; "de Off." II. vii.

    25; Ovid, "Ibis," iii. 21 foll.



[34] Or, "portion of my work;" lit. "argument," {logos}. See

    {Kuprianos, Peri ton 'Ell}: p. 111.







V



The above is a sketch of Thessalian affairs, including the incidents

connected with Jason, and those subsequent to his death, down to the

government of Tisiphonus. I now return to the point at which we

digressed.



B.C. 371. Archidamus, after the relief of the army defeated at

Leuctra, had led back the united forces. When he was gone, the

Athenians, impressed by the fact that the Peloponessians still felt

under an obligation to follow the Lacedaemonians to the field, whilst

Sparta herself was by no means as yet reduced to a condition

resembling that to which she had reduced Athens, sent invitations to

those states which cared to participate in the peace authorised by the

great king.[1] A congress met, and they passed a resolution in

conjunction with those who wished to make common cause with them to

bind themselves by oath as follows: "I will abide by the treaty terms

as conveyed in the king's rescript, as also by the decrees of the

Athenians and the allies. If any one marches against any city among

those which have accepted this oath, I will render assistance to that

city with all my strength." The oath gave general satisfaction, the

Eleians alone gainsaying its terms and protesting that it was not

right to make either the Marganians or the Scilluntians or the

Triphylians independent, since these cities belonged to them, and were

a part of Elis.[2] The Athenians, however, and the others passed the

decree in the precise language of the king's rescript: that all

states--great and small alike--were to be independent; and they sent

out administrators of the oath, and enjoined upon them to administer

it to the highest authorities in each state. This oath they all, with

the exception of the Eleians, swore to.



[1] I.e. in B.C. 387, the peace "of" Antalcidas. See Grote, "H. G." x.

    274.



[2] See Busolt, op. cit. p. 186.



B.C. 371-370. As an immediate consequence of this agreement, the

Mantineans, on the assumption that they were now absolutely

independent, met in a body and passed a decree to make Mantinea into a

single state and to fortify the town.[3] The proceeding was not

overlooked by the Lacedaemonians, who thought it would be hard if this

were done without their consent. Accordingly they despatched Agesilaus

as ambassador to the Mantineans, choosing him as the recognised

ancestral friend of that people. When the ambassador arrived, however,

the chief magistrates had no inclination to summon a meeting of the

commons to listen to him, but urged him to make a statement of his

wishes to themselves. He, on his side, was ready to undertake for

himself and in their interests that, if they would at present desist

from their fortification work, he would bring it about that the

defensive walls should be built with the sanction of Lacedaemon and

without cost. Their answer was, that it was impossible to hold back,

since a decree had been passed by the whole state of Mantinea to build

at once. Whereupon Agesilaus went off in high dudgeon; though as to

sending troops to stop them,[4] the idea seemed impracticable, as the

peace was based upon the principle of autonomy. Meanwhile the

Mantineans received help from several of the Arcadian states in the

building of their walls; and the Eleians contributed actually three

talents[5] of silver to cover the expense of their construction. And

here leaving the Mantineans thus engaged, we will turn to the men of

Tegea.



[3] For the restoration of Mantinea, see Freeman, "Fed. Gov." iv. p.

    198; Grote, "H. G." x. 283 foll.



[4] See above, V. ii. 1, sub anno B.C. 386.



[5] = 731 pounds: 5 shillings. See Busolt, op. cit. p. 199.



There were in Tegea two political parties. The one was the party of

Callibius and Proxenus, who were for drawing together the whole

Arcadian population in a confederacy,[6] in which all measures carried

in the common assembly should be held valid for the individual

component states. The programme of the other (Stasippus's) party was

to leave Tegea undisturbed and in the enjoyment of the old national

laws. Perpetually defeated in the Sacred College,[7] the party of

Callibius and Proxenus were persuaded that if only the commons met

they would gain an easy victory by an appeal to the multitude; and in

this faith they proceeded to march out the citizen soldiers.[8] At

sight of this Stasippus and his friends on their side armed in

opposition, and proved not inferior in numbers. The result was a

collision and battle, in which Proxenus and some few others with him

were slain and the rest put to flight; though the conquerors did not

pursue, for Stasippus was a man who did not care to stain his hands

with the blood of his fellow-citizens.[9]



[6] Although the historian does not recount the foundation of

    Megalopolis (see Pausanias and Diodorus), the mention of the

    common assembly of the League {en to koino} in this passage and,

    still more, of the Ten Thousand (below, "Hell." VII. i. 38),

    implies it. See Freeman, op. cit. iv. 197 foll.; Grote, "H. G." x.

    306 foll., ii. 599; "Dict. of Geog." "Megalopolis." As to the date

    of its foundation Pausanias (VIII. xxvii. 8) says "a few months

    after the battle of Leuctra," before midsummer B.C. 370; Diodorus

    (xv. 72) says B.C. 368. The great city was not built in a day.

    Messene, according to Paus. IV. xxvii. 5, was founded between the

    midsummers of B.C. 370 and B.C. 369.



[7] Lit. "in the Thearoi." For the Theari, see Thuc. v. 47, Arnold's

    note; and "C. I. G." 1756 foll.; and for the revolution at Tegea

    here recounted, see Grote, "H. G." x. 285 foll.



[8] Or, "they mustered under arms."



[9] Or, "opposed to a wholesale slaughter of the citizens."



Callibius and his friends had retired under the fortification walls

and gates facing Mantinea; but, as their opponents made no further

attempts against them, they here collected together and remained

quiet. Some while ago they had sent messages to the Mantineans

demanding assistance, but now they were ready to discuss terms of

reconciliation with the party of Stasippus. Presently they saw the

Mantineans advancing; whereupon some of them sprang to the walls, and

began calling to them to bring succour with all speed. With shouts

they urged upon them to make haste, whilst others threw open wide the

gates to them. Stasippus and his party, perceiving what was happening,

poured out by the gates leading to Pallantium,[10] and, outspeeding

their pursuers, succeeded in reaching the temple of Artemis, where

they found shelter, and, shutting to the doors, kept quiet. Following

close upon their heels, however, their foes scaled the temple, tore

off the roof, and began striking them down with the tiles. They,

recognising that there was no choice, called upon their assailants to

desist, and undertook to come forth. Then their opponents, capturing

them like birds in a fowler's hand, bound them with chains, threw them

on to the prisoner's van,[11] and led them off to Tegea. Here with the

Mantineans they sentenced and put them to death.



[10] Pallantium, one of the most ancient towns of Arcadia, in the

    Maenalia (Paus. VIII. xliv. 5; Livy, i. 5), situated somewhat

    south of the modern Tripolitza (see "Dict. of Anc. Geog."); like

    Asea and Eutaea it helped to found Megalopolis (Paus. VIII. xxvii.

    3, where for {'Iasaia} read {'Asea}); below, VII. v. 5; Busolt,

    op. cit. p. 125.



[11] For the sequel of the matter, see above, "Hell." VI. iv. 18;

    Busolt, op. cit. p. 134.



The outcome of these proceedings was the banishment to Lacedaemon of

the Tegeans who formed the party of Stasippus, numbering eight

hundred; but as a sequel to what had taken place, the Lacedaemonians

determined that they were bound by their oaths to aid the banished

Tegeans and to avenge the slain. With this purpose they marched

against the Mantineans, on the ground that they had violated their

oaths in marching against Tegea with an armed force. The ephors called

out the ban and the state commanded Agesilaus to head the expedition.



Meanwhile most of the Arcadian contingents were mustering at Asea.[12]

The Orchomenians not only refused to take part in the Arcadian league,

on account of their personal hatred to Mantinea, but had actually

welcomed within their city a mercenary force under Polytropus, which

had been collected at Corinth. The Mantineans themselves were forced

to stay at home to keep an eye on these. The men of Heraea and Lepreum

made common cause with the Lacedaemonians in a campaign against

Mantinea.



[12] Asea is placed by Leake ("Travels in Morea," i. 84; iii. 34) near

    Frangovrysi, a little south of Pallantium.



    Heraea, the most important town of Arcadia in the Cynuria, near

    Elis, on the high road to Olympia, and commanding other main

    roads. See Leake, "Peloponnesiaca," p. 1 foll.; "Morea," ii. 91.



    Lepreum, chief town of the Triphylia (Herod. iv. 148, ix. 28;

    Thuc. v. 31; above, III. ii. 25; Paus. V. v. 3; Polyb. iv. 77

    foll.; Strab. viii. 345), near modern Strovitzi; Leake, "Morea,"

    i. 56; Dodwell, "Tour," ii. 347.



    Eutaea is placed by Leake between Asea and Pallantium at Barbitza

    ("Morea," iii. 31); but see Grote, "H. G." x. 288.



Finding the frontier sacrifices favourable, Agesilaus began his march

at once upon Arcadia. He began by occupying the border city of Eutaea,

where he found the old men, women, and children dwelling in their

houses, while the rest of the population of a military age were off to

join the Arcadian league. In spite of this he did not stir a finger

unjustly against the city, but suffered the inhabitants to continue in

their homes undisturbed. The troops took all they needed, and paid for

it in return; if any pillage had occurred on his first entrance into

the town, the property was hunted up and restored by the Spartan king.

Whilst awaiting the arrival of Polytropus's mercenaries, he amused

himself by repairing such portions of their walls as necessity

demanded.



Meanwhile the Mantineans had taken the field against Orchomenus; but

from the walls of that city the invaders had some difficulty in

retiring, and lost some of their men. On their retreat they found

themselves in Elymia;[13] here the heavy infantry of the Orchomenians

ceased to follow them; but Polytropus and his troops continued to

assail their rear with much audacity. At this conjuncture, seeing at a

glance that either they must beat back the foe or suffer their own men

to be shot down, the Mantineans turned right about and met the

assailant in a hand-to-hand encounter. Polytropus fell fighting on

that battlefield; and of the rest who took to flight, many would have

shared his fate, but for the opportune arrival of the Phliasian

cavalry, who swooped round to the conqueror's rear and checked him in

his pursuit.[14]



[13] Elymia, mentioned only by Xenophon, must have been on the

    confines of the Mantinice and Orchomenus, probably at Levidhi.--

    Leake, "Morea," iii. 75; "Peloponn." p. 229.



[14] See "Cyrop." VII. i. 36.



Content with this achievement, the Mantineans retired homewards; while

Agesilaus, to whom the news was brought, no longer expecting that the

Orchomenian mercenaries could effect a junction with himself,

determined to advance without further delay.[15] On the first day he

encamped for the evening meal in the open country of Tegea, and the

day following crossed into Mantinean territory. Here he encamped under

the westward-facing[16] mountains of Mantinea, and employed himself in

ravaging the country district and sacking the farmsteads; while the

troops of the Arcadians who were mustered in Asea stole by night into

Tegea. The next day Agesilaus shifted his position, encamping about

two miles'[17] distance from Mantinea; and the Arcadians, issuing from

Tegea and clinging to the mountains between Mantinea and that city,

appeared with large bodies of heavy infantry, wishing to effect a

junction with the Mantineans. The Argives, it is true, supported them,

but they were not in full force. And here counsellors were to be found

who urged on Agesilaus to attack these troops separately; but fearing

lest, in proportion as he pressed on to engage them, the Mantineans

might issue from the city behind and attack him on flank and rear, he

decided it was best to let the two bodies coalesce, and then, if they

would accept battle, to engage them on an open and fair field.



[15] See "Ages." ii. 23.



[16] See Leake, "Morea," iii. 73.



[17] Lit. "twenty stades."



And so ere long the Arcadians had effected their object and were

united with the Mantineans. The next incident was the sudden

apparition at break of day, as Agesilaus was sacrificing in front of

the camp, of a body of troops. These proved to be the light infantry

from Orchomenus, who in company with the Phliasian cavalry had during

the night made their way across past the town of Mantinea; and so

caused the mass of the army to rush to their ranks, and Agesilaus

himself to retire within the lines. Presently, however, the newcomers

were recognised as friends; and as the sacrifices were favourable,

Agesilaus led his army forward a stage farther after breakfast. As the

shades of evening descended he encamped unobserved within the fold of

the hills behind the Mantinean territory, with mountains in close

proximity all round.[18]



[18] Lit. "within the hindmost bosom of the Mantinice." In reference

    to the position, Leake ("Morea," iii. 75) says: "The northern bay

    [of the Mantinic plain between Mantinea and the Argon] corresponds

    better by its proximity to Mantinea; by Mount Alesium it was

    equally hidden from the city, while its small dimensions, and the

    nearness of the encumbent mountains, rendered it a more hazardous

    position to an army under the circumstances of that of Agesilaus"

    [than had he encamped in the Argon itself]. For the Argon (or

    Inert Plain), see Leake, ib. 54 foll.



On the next morning, as day broke, he sacrificed in front of the army;

and observing a mustering of men from the city of Mantinea on the

hills which overhung the rear of his army, he decided that he must

lead his troops out of the hollow by the quickest route. But he feared

lest, if he himself led off, the enemy might fall upon his rear. In

this dilemma he kept quiet; presenting a hostile front to the enemy,

he sent orders to his rear to face about to the right,[19] and so

getting into line behind his main body, to move forward upon him; and

in this way he at once extricated his troops from their cramped

position and kept continually adding to the weight and solidity of his

line. As soon as the phalanx was doubled in depth he emerged upon the

level ground, with his heavy infantry battalions in this order, and

then again extended his line until his troops were once more nine or

ten shields deep. But the Mantineans were no longer so ready to come

out. The arguments of the Eleians who had lent them their co-operation

had prevailed: that it was better not to engage until the arrival of

the Thebans. The Thebans, it was certain, would soon be with them; for

had they not borrowed ten talents[20] from Elis in order to be able to

send aid? The Arcadians with this information before them kept quiet

inside Mantinea. On his side Agesilaus was anxious to lead off his

troops, seeing it was midwinter; but, to avoid seeming to hurry his

departure out of fear, he preferred to remain three days longer and no

great distance from Mantinea. On the fourth day, after an early

morning meal, the retreat commenced. His intention was to encamp on

the same ground which he had made his starting-point on leaving

Eutaea. But as none of the Arcadians appeared, he marched with all

speed and reached Eutaea itself, although very late, that day; being

anxious to lead off his troops without catching a glimpse of the

enemy's watch-fires, so as to silence the tongues of any one

pretending that he withdrew in flight. His main object was in fact

achieved. To some extent he had recovered the state from its late

despondency, since he had invaded Arcadia and ravaged the country

without any one caring to offer him battle. But, once arrived on

Laconian soil, he dismissed the Spartan troops to their homes and

disbanded the provincials[21] to their several cities.



[19] See "Anab." IV. iii. 29; "Pol. Lac." xi. 10.



[20] 2,437 pounds: 10 shillings. See Busult, op. cit. p. 199.



[21] Lit. "perioeci"; and below, SS. 25, 32.



B.C. 370-369. The Arcadians, now that Agesilaus had retired, realising

that he had disbanded his troops, while they themselves were fully

mustered, marched upon Heraea, the citizens of which town had not only

refused to join the Arcadian league, but had joined the Lacedaemonians

in their invasion of Arcadia. For this reason they entered the

country, burning the homesteads and cutting down the fruit-trees.



Meanwhile news came of the arrival of the Theban reinforcements at

Mantinea, on the strength of which they left Heraea and hastened to

fraternise[22] with their Theban friends. When they were met together,

the Thebans, on their side, were well content with the posture of

affairs: they had duly brought their succour, and no enemy was any

longer to be discovered in the country; so they made preparations to

return home. But the Arcadians, Argives and Eleians were eager in

urging them to lead the united forces forthwith into Laconia: they

dwelt proudly on their own numbers, extolling above measure the

armament of Thebes. And, indeed, the Boeotians one and all were

resolute in their military manouvres and devotion to arms,[23]

exulting in the victory of Leuctra. In the wake of Thebes followed the

Phocians, who were now their subjects, Euboeans from all the townships

of the island, both sections of the Locrians, the Acarnanians,[24] and

the men of Heraclea and of Melis; while their force was further

swelled by Thessalian cavalry and light infantry. With the full

consciousness of facts like these, and further justifying their appeal

by dwelling on the desolate condition of Lacedaemon, deserted by her

troops, they entreated them not to turn back without invading the

territory of Laconia. But the Thebans, albeit they listened to their

prayers, urged arguments on the other side. In the first place,

Laconia was by all accounts most difficult to invade; and their belief

was that garrisons were posted at all the points most easily

approached. (As a matter of fact, Ischolaus was posted at Oeum in the

Sciritid, with a garrison of neodamodes and about four hundred of the

youngest of the Tegean exiles; and there was a second outpost on

Leuctrum above the Maleatid.[25]) Again it occurred to the Thebans

that the Lacedaemonian forces, though disbanded, would not take long

to muster, and once collected they would fight nowhere better than on

their own native soil. Putting all these considerations together, they

were not by any means impatient to march upon Lacedaemon. A strong

counter-impulse, however, was presently given by the arrival of

messengers from Caryae, giving positive information as to the

defenceless condition of the country, and offering to act as guides

themselves; they were ready to lose their lives if they were convicted

of perfidy. A further impulse in the same direction was given by the

presence of some of the provincials,[26] with invitations and promises

of revolt, if only they would appear in the country. These people

further stated that even at the present moment, on a summons of the

Spartans proper, the provincials did not care to render them

assistance. With all these arguments and persuasions echoing from all

sides, the Thebans at last yielded, and invaded. They chose the Caryan

route themselves, while the Arcadians entered by Oeum in the

Sciritid.[27]



[22] Or, "effect a junction with."



[23] Or, "in practising gymnastics about the place of arms." See "Pol.

    Lac." xii. 5.



[24] See "Hell." IV. vii. 1; "Ages." ii. 20. For a sketch of the

    relations of Acarnania to Athens and Sparta, see Hicks, No. 83, p.

    150; and above, "Hell." V. iv. 64.



[25] Leuctrum, a fortress of the district Aegytis on the confines of

    Arcadia and Laconia ("in the direction of Mount Lycaeum," Thuc. v.

    54). See Leake, "Morea," ii. 322; also "Peloponn." p. 248, in

    which place he corrects his former view as to the situation of

    Leuctrum and the Maleatid.



    Oeum or Ium, the chief town of the Sciritis, probably stood in the

    Klisura or series of narrow passes through the watershed of the

    mountains forming the natural boundary between Laconia and Arcadia

    (in the direct line north from Sparta to Tegea), "Dict. of Anc.

    Geog." s.v. Leake says ("Morea," iii. 19, 30 foll.) near the

    modern village of Kolina; Baedeker ("Greece," p. 269) says perhaps

    at Palaeogoulas.



    Caryae. This frontier town was apparently (near Arachova) on the

    road from Thyrea (in the direction of the Argolid) to Sparta

    (Thuc. v. 55; Paus. III. x. 7; Livy, xxxiv. 26, but see Leake,

    "Morea," iii. 30; "Peloponn." p. 342).



    Sellasia, probably rightly placed "half an hour above Vourlia"

    (Baedeker, "Greece," p. 269). The famous battle of Sellasia, in

    the spring of B.C. 221, in which the united Macedonians under

    Antigonus and the Achaeans finally broke the power of Sparta, was

    fought in the little valley where the stream Gorgylus joins the

    river Oenus and the Khan of Krevatas now stands. For a plan, see

    "Dict. of Anc. Geog." s.v.



[26] "Perioeci."



[27] Diodorus (xv. 64) gives more details; he makes the invaders

    converge upon Sellasia by four separate routes. See Leake,

    "Morea," iii. 29 foll.



By all accounts Ischolaus made a mistake in not advancing to meet them

on the difficult ground above Oeum. Had he done so, not a man, it is

believed, would have scaled the passes there. But for the present,

wishing to turn the help of the men of Oeum to good account, he waited

down in the village; and so the invading Arcadians scaled the heights

in a body. At this crisis Ischolaus and his men, as long as they

fought face to face with their foes, held the superiority; but,

presently, when the enemy, from rear and flank, and even from the

dwelling-houses up which they scaled, rained blows and missiles upon

them, then and there Ischolaus met his end, and every man besides,

save only one or two who, failing to be recognised, effected their

escape.



After these achievements the Arcadians marched to join the Thebans at

Caryae, and the Thebans, hearing what wonders the Arcadians had

performed, commenced their descent with far greater confidence. Their

first exploit was to burn and ravage the district of Sellasia, but

finding themselves ere long in the flat land within the sacred

enclosure of Apollo, they encamped for the night, and the next day

continued their march along the Eurotas. When they came to the bridge

they made no attempt to cross it to attack the city, for they caught

sight of the heavy infantry in the temple of Alea[28] ready to meet

them. So, keeping the Eurotas on their right, they tramped along,

burning and pillaging homesteads stocked with numerous stores. The

feelings of the citizens may well be imagined. The women who had never

set eyes upon a foe[29] could scarcely contain themselves as they

beheld the cloud of smoke. The Spartan warriors, inhabiting a city

without fortifications, posted at intervals, here one and there

another, were in truth what they appeared to be--the veriest handful.

And these kept watch and ward. The authorities passed a resolution to

announce to the helots that whosoever among them chose to take arms

and join a regiment should have his freedom guaranteed to him by

solemn pledges in return for assistance in the common war.[30] More

than six thousand helots, it is said, enrolled themselves, so that a

new terror was excited by the very incorporation of these men, whose

numbers seemed to be excessive. But when it was found that the

mercenaries from Orchomenus remained faithful, and reinforcements came

to Lacedaemon from Phlius, Corinth, Epidaurus, and Pellene, and some

other states, the dread of these new levies was speedily diminished.



[28] See Pausanias, III. xix. 7.



[29] See Plutarch, "Ages." xxxi. 3 (Clough, vol. iv. p. 38); Aristot.

    "Pol." ii. 9-10.



[30] See below, VII. ii. 2.



The enemy in his advance came to Amyclae.[31] Here he crossed the

Eurotas. The Thebans wherever they encamped at once formed a stockade

of the fruit-trees they had felled, as thickly piled as possible, and

so kept ever on their guard. The Arcadians did nothing of the sort.

They left their camping-ground and took themselves off to attack the

homesteads and loot. On the third or fourth day after their arrival

the cavalry advanced, squadron by squadron, as far as the

racecourse,[32] within the sacred enclosure of Gaiaochos. These

consisted of the entire Theban cavalry and the Eleians, with as many

of the Phocian or Thessalian or Locrian cavalry as were present. The

cavalry of the Lacedaemonians, looking a mere handful, were drawn up

to meet them. They had posted an ambuscade chosen from their heavy

infantry, the younger men, about three hundred in number, in the house

of the Tyndarids[33]; and while the cavalry charged, out rushed the

three hundred at the same instant at full pace. The enemy did not wait

to receive the double charge, but swerved, and at sight of that many

also of the infantry took to headlong flight. But the pursuers

presently paused; the Theban army remained motionless; and both

parties returned to their camps. And now the hope, the confidence

strengthened that an attack upon the city itself would never come; nor

did it. The invading army broke up from their ground, and marched off

on the road to Helos and Gytheum.[34] The unwalled cities were

consigned to the flames, but Gytheum, where the Lacedaemonians had

their naval arsenal, was subjected to assault for three days. Certain

of the provincials[35] also joined in this attack, and shared the

campaign with the Thebans and their friends.



[31] For this ancient (Achaean) town, see Paus. III. ii. 6; Polyb. v.

    19. It lay only twenty stades (a little more than two miles) from

    the city of Sparta.



[32] Or, "hippodrome." See Paus. III. ii. 6.



[33] Paus. III. xvi. 2.



[34] See Baedeker's "Greece," p. 279. Was Gytheum taken? See Grote,

    "H. G." x. 305; Curt. "H. G." Eng. trans. iv. 431.



[35] "Perioeci." See above, III. iii. 6; VI. v. 25; below, VII. ii. 2;

    Grote, "H. G." x. 301. It is a pity that the historian should

    hurry us off to Athens just at this point. The style here is

    suggestive of notes ({upomnemata}) unexpanded.



The news of these proceedings set the Athenians deeply pondering what

they ought to do concerning the Lacedaemonians, and they held an

assembly in accordance with a resolution of the senate. It chanced

that the ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians and the allies still

faithful to Lacedaemon were present. The Lacedaemonian ambassadors

were Aracus, Ocyllus, Pharax, Etymocles, and Olontheus, and from the

nature of the case they all used, roughly speaking, similar arguments.

They reminded the Athenians how they had often in old days stood

happily together, shoulder to shoulder, in more than one great crisis.

They (the Lacedaemonians), on their side, had helped to expel the

tyrant from Athens, and the Athenians, when Lacedaemon was besieged by

the Messenians, had heartly leant her a helping hand.[36] Then they

fell to enumerating all the blessings that marked the season when the

two states shared a common policy, hinting how in common they had

warred against the barbarians, and more boldly recalling how the

Athenians with the full consent and advice of the Lacedaemonians were

chosen by united Hellas leaders of the common navy[37] and guardians

of all the common treasure, while they themselves were selected by all

the Hellenes as confessedly the rightful leaders on land; and this

also not without the full consent and concurrence of the Athenians.



[36] In reference (1) to the expulsion of the Peisistratidae (Herod.

    v. 64); (2) the "third" Messenian war (Thuc. i. 102).



[37] See "Revenues," v. 6.



One of the speakers ventured on a remark somewhat to this strain: "If

you and we, sirs, can only agree, there is hope to-day that the old

saying may be fulfilled, and Thebes be 'taken and tithed.'"[38] The

Athenians, however, were not in the humour to listen to that style of

argument. A sort of suppressed murmur ran through the assembly which

seemed to say, "That language may be well enough now; but when they

were well off they pressed hard enough on us." But of all the pleas

put forward by the Lacedaemonians, the weightiest appeared to be this:

that when they had reduced the Athenians by war, and the Thebans

wished to wipe Athens off the face of the earth, they (the

Lacedaemonians) themselves had opposed the measure.[39] If that was

the argument of most weight, the reasoning which was the most commonly

urged was to the effect that "the solemn oaths necessitated the aid

demanded. Sparta had done no wrong to justify this invasion on the

part of the Arcadians and their allies. All she had done was to assist

the men of Tegea when[40] the Mantineans had marched against that

township contrary to their solemn oaths." Again, for the second time,

at these expressions a confused din ran through the assembly, half the

audience maintaining that the Mantineans were justified in supporting

Proxenus and his friends, who were put to death by the party with

Stasippus; the other half that they were wrong in bringing an armed

force against the men of Tegea.



[38] Or, "the Thebans be decimated"; for the phrase see above, "Hell."

    VI. iii. 20.



[39] See "Hell." II. ii. 19; and "Hell." III. v. 8.



[40] Lit. "because," {oti}.



Whilst these distinctions were being drawn by the assembly itself,

Cleiteles the Corinthian got up and spoke as follows: "I daresay, men

of Athens, there is a double answer to the question, Who began the

wrongdoing? But take the case of ourselves. Since peace began, no one

can accuse us either of wantonly attacking any city, or of seizing the

wealth of any, or of ravaging a foreign territory. In spite of which

the Thebans have come into our country and cut down our fruit-treees,

burnt to the ground our houses, filched and torn to pieces our cattle

and our goods. How then, I put it to you, will you not be acting

contrary to your solemn oaths if you refuse your aid to us, who are so

manifestly the victims of wrongdoings? Yes; and when I say solemn

oaths, I speak of oaths and undertakings which you yourselves took

great pains to exact from all of us." At that point a murmur of

applause greeted Cleiteles, the Athenians feeling the truth and

justice of the speaker's language.



He sat down, and then Procles of Phlius got up and spoke as follows:

"What would happen, men of Athens, if the Lacedaemonians were well out

of the way? The answer to that question is obvious. You would be the

first object of Theban invasion. Clearly; for they must feel that you

and you alone stand in the path between them and empire over Hellas.

If this be so, I do not consider that you are more supporting

Lacedaemon by a campaign in her behalf than you are helping

yourselves. For imagine the Thebans, your own sworn foes and next-door

neighbours, masters of Hellas! You will find it a painful and onerous

exchange indeed for the distant antagonism of Sparta. As a mere matter

of self-interest, now is the time to help yourselves, while you may

still reckon upon allies, instead of waiting until they are lost, and

you are forced to fight a life-and-death battle with the Thebans

single-handed. But the fear suggests itself, that should the

Lacedaemonians escape now, they will live to cause you trouble at some

future date. Lay this maxim to heart, then, that it is not the

potential greatness of those we benefit, but of those we injure, which

causes apprehension. And this other also, that it behoves individuals

and states alike so to better their position[41] while yet in the

zenith of their strength that, in the day of weakness, when it comes,

they may find some succour and support in what their former labours

have achieved.[42] To you now, at this time, a heaven-sent opportunity

is presented. In return for assistance to the Lacedaemonians in their

need, you may win their sincere, unhesitating friendship for all time.

Yes, I say it deliberately, for the acceptance of these benefits at

your hands will not be in the presence of one or two chance witnesses.

The all-seeing gods, in whose sight to-morrow is even as to-day, will

be cognisant of these things. The knowledge of them will be jointly

attested by allies and enemies; nay, by Hellenes and barbarians alike,

since to not one of them is what we are doing a matter of unconcern.

If, then, in the presence of these witnesses, the Lacedaemonians

should prove base towards you, no one will ever again be eager in

their cause. But our hope, our expectation should rather be that they

will prove themselves good men and not base; since they beyond all

others would seem persistently to have cherished a high endeavour,

reaching forth after true praise, and holding aloof from ugly deeds.



[41] Lit. "to acquire some good."



[42] Or, "for what," etc.



"But there are further considerations which it were well you should

lay to heart. If danger were ever again to visit Hellas from the

barbarian world outside, in whom would you place your confidence if

not in the Lacedaemonians? Whom would you choose to stand at your

right hand in battle if not these, whose soldiers at Thermopylae to a

man preferred to fall at their posts rather than save their lives by

giving the barbarian free passage into Hellas? Is it not right, then,

considering for what thing's sake they dislayed that bravery in your

companionship, considering also the good hope there is that they will

prove the like again--is it not just that you and we should lend them

all countenance and goodwill? Nay, even for us their allies' sake, who

are present, it would be worth your while to manifest this goodwill.

Need you be assured that precisely those who continue faithful to them

in their misfortunes would in like manner be ashamed not to requite

you with gratitude? And if we seem to be but small states, who are

willing to share their dangers with them, lay to heart that there is a

speedy cure for this defect: with the accession of your city the

reproach that, in spite of all our assistance, we are but small

cities, will cease to be.



"For my part, men of Athens, I have hitherto on hearsay admired and

envied this great state, whither, I was told, every one who was

wronged or stood in terror of aught needed only to betake himself and

he would obtain assistance. To-day I no longer hear, I am present

myself and see these famous citizens of Lacedaemon here, and by their

side their trustiest friends, who have come to you, and ask you in

their day of need to give them help. I see Thebans also, the same who

in days bygone failed to persuade the Lacedaemonians to reduce you to

absolute slavery,[43] to-day asking you to suffer those who saved you

to be destroyed.



[43] See "Hell." II. ii. 19; III. v. 8, in reference to B.C. 405.



"That was a great deed and of fair renown, attributed in old story to

your ancestors, that they did not suffer those Argives who died on the

Cadmeia[44] to lie unburied; but a fairer wreath of glory would you

weave for your own brows if you suffer not these still living

Lacedaemonians to be trampled under the heel of insolence and

destroyed. Fair, also, was that achievement when you stayed the

insolence of Eurystheus and saved the sons of Heracles;[45] but fairer

still than that will your deed be if you rescue from destruction, not

the primal authors[46] merely, but the whole city which they founded;

fairest of all, if because yesterday the Lacedaemonians won you your

preservation by a vote which cost them nothing, you to-day shall bring

them help with arms, and at the price of peril. It is a proud day for

some of us to stand here and give what aid we can in pleading for

asistance to brave men. What, then, must you feel, who in very deed

are able to render that assistance! How generous on your parts, who

have been so often the friends and foes of Lacedaemon, to forget the

injury and remember only the good they have done! How noble of you to

repay, not for yourelves only, but for the sake of Hellas, the debt

due to those who proved themselves good men and true in her behalf!"



[44] In reference to the Seven against Thebes, see Herod. IX. xxvii.

    4; Isoc. "Paneg." 55.



[45] Herod. IX. xxvii. 3; see Isoc. "Paneg." 56. "The greatness of

    Sparta was founded by the succour which Athens lent to the

    Heraklid invaders of the Peloponnese--a recollection which ought

    to restrain Sparta from injuring or claiming to rule Athens.

    Argos, Thebes, Sparta were in early times, as they are now, the

    foremost cities of Hellas; but Athens was the greatest of them all

    --the avenger of Argos, the chastiser of Thebes, the patron of

    those who founded Sparta."--Jebb, "Att. Or." ii. 154.



[46] Plut. "Lyc." vi.



After these speeches the Athenians deliberated, and though there was

opposition, the arguments of gainsayers[47] fell upon deaf ears. The

assembly finally passed a decree to send assistance to Lacedaemon in

force, and they chose Iphicrates general. Then followed the

preliminary sacrifices, and then the general's order to his troops to

take the evening meal in the grove of the Academy.[48] But the general

himself, it is said, was in no hurry to leave the city; many were

found at their posts before him. Presently, however, he put himself at

the head of his troops, and the men followed cheerily, in firm

persuasion that he was about to lead them to some noble exploit. On

arrival at Corinth he frittered away some days, and there was a

momentary outburst of discontent at so much waste of precious time;

but as soon as he led the troops out of Corinth there was an obvious

rebound. The men responded to all orders with enthusiasm, heartily

following their general's lead, and attacking whatever fortified place

he might confront them with.



[47] As to the anti-Laconian or Boeotian party at Athens, see Curtius,

    "H. G." vol. v. ch. ii. (Eng. tr.)



[48] See Baedeker, "Greece," p. 103.



And now reverting to the hostile forces on Laconian territory, we find

that the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleians had retired in large numbers.

They had every inducement so to do since their homes bordered on

Laconia; and off they went, driving or carrying whatever they had

looted. The Thebans and the rest were no less anxious to get out of

the country, though for other reasons, partly because the army was

melting away under their eyes day by day, partly because the

necessities of life were growing daily scantier, so much had been

either fairly eaten up and pillaged or else recklessly squandered and

reduced to ashes. Besides this, it was winter; so that on every ground

there was a general desire by this time to get away home.



As son as the enemy began his retreat from Laconian soil, Iphicrates

imitated his movement, and began leading back his troops out of

Arcadia into Corinthia. Iphicrates exhibited much good generalship, no

doubt, with which I have no sort of fault to find. But it is not so

with that final feature of the campaign to which we are now come. Here

I find his strategy either meaningless in intent or inadequate in

execution. He made an attempt to keep guard at Oneion, in order to

prevent the Boeotians making their way out homewards; but left

meanwhile far the best passage through Cenchreae unguarded. Again,

when he wished to discover whether or not the Thebans had passed

Oneion, he sent out on a reconnaissance the whole of the Athenian and

Corinthian cavalry; whereas, for the object in view, the eyes of a

small detachment would have been as useful as a whole regiment;[49]

and when it came to falling back, clearly the smaller number had a

better chance of hitting on a traversable road, and so effecting the

desired movement quietly. But the height of folly seems to have been

reached when he threw into the path of the enemy a large body of

troops which were still too weak to cope with him. As a matter of

fact, this body of cavalry, owing to their very numbers, could not

help covering a large space of ground; and when it became necessary to

retire, had to cling to a series of difficult positions in succession,

so that they lost not fewer than twenty horsemen.[50] It was thus the

Thebans effected their object and retired from Peloponnese.



[49] See "Hipparch." viii. 10 foll.



[50] See Diod. xv. 63; Plut. "Pelop." 24.


