




Part VI





Of the Character of Virtue


Consisting of Three Sections





Introduction





    When we consider the character of any individual, we


naturally view it under two different aspects; first, as it may


affect his own happiness; and secondly, as it may affect that of


other people.





Section I





Of the Character of the Individual, so far as it affects his own


Happiness; or of Prudence





    The preservation and healthful state of the body seem to be


the objects which Nature first recommends to the care of every


individual. The appetites of hunger and thirst, the agreeable or


disagreeable sensations of pleasure and pain, of heat and cold,


etc. may be considered as lessons delivered by the voice of


Nature herself, directing him what he ought to chuse, and what he


ought to avoid, for this purpose. The first lessons which he is


taught by those to whom his childhood is entrusted, tend, the


greater part of them, to the same purpose. Their principal object


is to teach him how to keep out of harm's way.


    As he grows up, he soon learns that some care and foresight


are necessary for providing the means of gratifying those natural


appetites, of procuring pleasure and avoiding pain, of procuring


the agreeable and avoiding the disagreeable temperature of heat


and cold. In the proper direction of this care and foresight


consists the art of preserving and increasing what is called his


external fortune.


    Though it is in order to supply the necessities and


conveniencies of the body, that the advantages of external


fortune are originally recommended to us, yet we cannot live long


in the world without perceiving that the respect of our equals,


our credit and rank in the society we live in, depend very much


upon the degree in which we possess, or are supposed to possess,


those advantages. The desire of becoming the proper objects of


this respect, of deserving and obtaining this credit and rank


among our equals, is, perhaps, the strongest of all our desires,


and our anxiety to obtain the advantages of fortune is


accordingly much more excited and irritated by this desire, than


by that of supplying all the necessities and conveniencies of the


body, which are always very easily supplied.


    Our rank and credit among our equals, too, depend very much


upon, what, perhaps, a virtuous man would wish them to depend


entirely, our character and conduct, or upon the confidence,


esteem, and good-will, which these naturally excite in the people


we live with.


    The care of the health, of the fortune, of the rank and


reputation of the individual, the objects upon which his comfort


and happiness in this life are supposed principally to depend, is


considered as the proper business of that virtue which is


commonly called Prudence.


    We suffer more, it has already been observed, when we fall


from a better to a worse situation, than we ever enjoy when we


rise from a worse to a better. Security, therefore, is the first


and the principal object of prudence. It is averse to expose our


health, our fortune, our rank, or reputation, to any sort of


hazard. It is rather cautious than enterprising, and more anxious


to preserve the advantages which we already possess, than forward


to prompt us to the acquisition of still greater advantages. The


methods of improving our fortune, which it principally recommends


to us, are those which expose to no loss or hazard; real


knowledge and skill in our trade or profession, assiduity and


industry in the exercise of it, frugality, and even some degree


of parsimony, in all our expences.


    The prudent man always studies seriously and earnestly to


understand whatever he professes to understand, and not merely to


persuade other people that he understands it; and though his


talents may not always be very brilliant, they are always


perfectly genuine. He neither endeavours to impose upon you by


the cunning devices of an artful impostor, nor by the arrogant


airs of an assuming pedant, nor by the confident assertions of a


superficial and imprudent pretender. He is not ostentatious even


of the abilities which he really possesses. His conversation is


simple and modest, and he is averse to all the quackish arts by


which other people so frequently thrust themselves into public


notice and reputation. For reputation in his profession he is


naturally disposed to rely a good deal upon the solidity of his


knowledge and abilities; and he does not always think of


cultivating the favour of those little clubs and cabals, who, in


the superior arts and sciences, so often erect themselves into


the supreme judges of merit; and who make it their business to


celebrate the talents and virtues of one another, and to decry


whatever can come into competition with them. If he ever connects


himself with any society of this kind, it is merely in


self-defence, not with a view to impose upon the public, but to


hinder the public from being imposed upon, to his disadvantage,


by the clamours, the whispers, or the intrigues, either of that


particular society, or of some other of the same kind.


    The prudent man is always sincere, and feels horror at the


very thought of exposing himself to the disgrace which attends


upon the detection of falsehood. But though always sincere, he is


not always frank and open; and though he never tells any thing


but the truth, he does not always think himself bound, when not


properly called upon, to tell the whole truth. As he is cautious


in his actions, so he is reserved in his speech; and never rashly


or unnecessarily obtrudes his opinion concerning either things or


persons.


    The prudent man, though not always distinguished by the most


exquisite sensibility, is always very capable of friendship. But


his friendship is not that ardent and passionate, but too often


transitory affection, which appears so delicious to the


generosity of youth and inexperience. It is a sedate, but steady


and faithful attachment to a few well-tried and well-chosen


companions; in the choice of whom he is not guided by the giddy


admiration of shining accomplishments, but by the sober esteem of


modesty, discretion, and good conduct. But though capable of


friendship, he is not always much disposed to general sociality.


He rarely frequents, and more rarely figures in those convivial


societies which are distinguished for the jollity and gaiety of


their conversation. Their way of life might too often interfere


with the regularity of his temperance, might interrupt the


steadiness of his industry, or break in upon the strictness of


his frugality.


    But though his conversation may not always be very sprightly


or diverting, it is always perfectly inoffensive. He hates the


thought of being guilty of any petulance or rudeness. He never


assumes impertinently over any body, and, upon all common


occasions, is willing to place himself rather below than above


his equals. Both in his conduct and conversation, he is an exact


observer of decency, and respects with an almost religious


scrupulosity, all the established decorums and ceremonials of


society. And, in this respect, he sets a much better example than


has frequently been done by men of much more splendid talents and


virtues; who, in all ages, from that of Socrates and Aristippus,


down to that of Dr Swift and Voltaire, and from that of Philip


and Alexander the Great, down to that of the great Czar Peter of


Moscovy, have too often distinguished themselves by the most


improper and even insolent contempt of all the ordinary decorums


of life and conversation, and who have thereby set the most


pernicious example to those who wish to resemble them, and who


too often content themselves with imitating their follies,


without even attempting to attain their perfections.


    In the steadiness of his industry and frugality, in his


steadily sacrificing the ease and enjoyment of the present moment


for the probable expectation of the still greater ease and


enjoyment of a more distant but more lasting period of time, the


prudent man is always both supported and rewarded by the entire


approbation of the impartial spectator, and of the representative


of the impartial spectator, the man within the breast. The


impartial spectator does not feel himself worn out by the present


labour of those whose conduct he surveys; nor does he feel


himself solicited by the importunate calls of their present


appetites. To him their present, and what is likely to be their


future situation, are very nearly the same: he sees them nearly


at the same distance, and is affected by them very nearly in the


same manner. He knows, however, that to the persons principally


concerned, they are very far from being the same, and that they


naturally affect them in a very different manner. He cannot


therefore but approve, and even applaud, that proper exertion of


self-command, which enables them to act as if their present and


their future situation affected them nearly in the same manner in


which they affect him.


    The man who lives within his income, is naturally contented


with his situation, which, by continual, though small


accumulations, is growing better and better every day. He is


enabled gradually to relax, both in the rigour of his parsimony


and in the severity of his application; and he feels with double


satisfaction this gradual increase of ease and enjoyment, from


having felt before the hardship which attended the want of them.


He has no anxiety to change so comfortable a situation, and does


not go in quest of new enterprises and adventures, which might


endanger, but could not well increase, the secure tranquillity


which he actually enjoys. If he enters into any new projects or


enterprises, they are likely to be well concerted and well


prepared. He can never be hurried or drove into them by any


necessity, but has always time and leisure to deliberate soberly


and coolly concerning what are likely to be their consequences.


    The prudent man is not willing to subject himself to any


responsibility which his duty does not impose upon him. He is not


a bustler in business where he has no concern; is not a meddler


in other people's affairs; is not a professed counsellor or


adviser, who obtrudes his advice where nobody is asking it. He


confines himself, as much as his duty will permit, to his own


affairs, and has no taste for that foolish importance which many


people wish to derive from appearing to have some influence in


the management of those of other people. He is averse to enter


into any party disputes, hates faction, and is not always very


forward to listen to the voice even of noble and great ambition.


When distinctly called upon, he will not decline the service of


his country, but he will not cabal in order to force himself into


it; and would be much better pleased that the public business


were well managed by some other person, than that he himself


should have the trouble, and incur the responsibility, of


managing it. In the bottom of his heart he would prefer the


undisturbed enjoyment of secure tranquillity, not only to all the


vain splendour of successful ambition, but to the real and solid


glory of performing the greatest and most magnanimous actions.


    Prudence, in short, when directed merely to the care of the


health, of the fortune, and of the rank and reputation of the


individual, though it is regarded as a most respectable and even,


in some degree, as an amiable and agreeable quality, yet it never


is considered as one, either of the most endearing, or of the


most ennobling of the virtues. It commands a certain cold esteem,


but seems not entitled to any very ardent love or admiration.


    Wise and judicious conduct, when directed to greater and


nobler purposes than the care of the health, the fortune, the


rank and reputation of the individual, is frequently and very


properly called prudence. We talk of the prudence of the great


general, of the great statesman, of the great legislator.


Prudence is, in all these cases, combined with many greater and


more splendid virtues, with valour, with extensive and strong


benevolence, with a sacred regard to the rules of justice, and


all these supported by a proper degree of self-command. This


superior prudence, when carried to the highest degree of


perfection, necessarily supposes the art, the talent, and the


habit or disposition of acting with the most perfect propriety in


every possible circumstance and situation. It necessarily


supposes the utmost perfection of all the intellectual and of all


the moral virtues. It is the best head joined to the best heart.


It is the most perfect wisdom combined with the most perfect


virtue. It constitutes very nearly the character of the


Academical or Peripatetic sage, as the inferior prudence does


that of the Epicurean.


    Mere imprudence, or the mere want of the capacity to take


care of one's-self, is, with the generous and humane, the object


of compassion; with those of less delicate sentiments, of


neglect, or, at worst, of contempt, but never of hatred or


indignation. When combined with other vices, however, it


aggravates in the highest degree the infamy and disgrace which


would otherwise attend them. The artful knave, whose dexterity


and address exempt him, though not from strong suspicions, yet


from punishment or distinct detection, is too often received in


the world with an indulgence which he by no means deserves. The


awkward and foolish one, who, for want of this dexterity and


address, is convicted and brought to punishment, is the object of


universal hatred, contempt, and derision. In countries where


great crimes frequently pass unpunished, the most atrocious


actions become almost familiar, and cease to impress the people


with that horror which is universally felt in countries where an


exact administration of justice takes place. The injustice is the


same in both countries; but the imprudence is often very


different. In the latter, great crimes are evidently great


follies. In the former, they are not always considered as such.


In Italy, during the greater part of the sixteenth century,


assassinations, murders, and even murders under trust, seem to


have been almost familiar among the superior ranks of people.


Caesar Borgia invited four of the little princes in his


neighbourhood, who all possessed little sovereignties, and


commanded little armies of their own, to a friendly conference at


Senigaglia, where, as soon as they arrived, he put them all to


death. This infamous action, though certainly not approved of


even in that age of crimes, seems to have contributed very little


to the discredit, and not in the least to the ruin of the


perpetrator. That ruin happened a few years after from causes


altogether disconnected with this crime. Machiavel, not indeed a


man of the nicest morality even for his own times, was resident,


as minister from the republic of Florence, at the court of Caesar


Borgia when this crime was committed. He gives a very particular


account of it, and in that pure, elegant, and simple language


which distinguishes all his writings. He talks of it very coolly;


is pleased with the address with which Caesar Borgia conducted


it; has much contempt for the dupery and weakness of the


sufferers; but no compassion for their miserable and untimely


death, and no sort of indignation at the cruelty and falsehood of


their murderer. The violence and injustice of great conquerors


are often regarded with foolish wonder and admiration; those of


petty thieves, robbers, and murderers, with contempt, hatred, and


even horror upon all occasions. The former, though they are a


hundred times more mischievous and destructive, yet when


successful, they often pass for deeds of the most heroic


magnanimity. The latter are always viewed with hatred and


aversion, as the follies, as well as the crimes, of the lowest


and most worthless of mankind. The injustice of the former is


certainly, at least, as great as that of the latter; but the


folly and imprudence are not near so great. A wicked and


worthless man of parts often goes through the world with much


more credit than he deserves. A wicked and worthless fool appears


always, of all mortals, the most hateful, as well as the most


contemptible. As prudence combined with other virtues,


constitutes the noblest; so imprudence combined with other vices,


constitutes the vilest of all characters.








Section II





Of the Character of the Individual, so far as it can affect the


Happiness of other People





    The character of every individual, so far as it can affect


the happiness of other people, must do so by its disposition


either to hurt or to benefit them.


    Proper resentment for injustice attempted, or actually


committed, is the only motive which, in the eyes of the impartial


spectator, can justify our hurting or disturbing in any respect


the happiness of our neighbour. To do so from any other motive is


itself a violation of the laws of justice, which force ought to


be employed either to restrain or to punish. The wisdom of every


state or commonwealth endeavours, as well as it can, to employ


the force of the society to restrain those who are subject to its


authority, from hurting or disturbing the happiness of one


another. The rules which it establishes for this purpose,


constitute the civil and criminal law of each particular state or


country. The principles upon which those rules either are, or


ought to be founded, are the subject of a particular science, of


all sciences by far the most important, but hitherto, perhaps,


the least cultivated, that of natural jurisprudence,. concerning


which it belongs not to our present subject to enter into any


detail. A sacred and religious regard not to hurt or disturb in


any respect the happiness of our neighbour, even in those cases


where no law can properly protect him, constitutes the character


of the perfectly innocent and just man; a character which, when


carried to a certain delicacy of attention, is always highly


respectable and even venerable for its own sake, and can scarce


ever fail to be accompanied with many other virtues, with great


feeling for other people, with great humanity and great


benevolence. It is a character sufficiently understood, and


requires no further explanation. In the present section I shall


only endeavour to explain the foundation of that order which


nature seems to have traced out for the distribution of our good


offices, or for the direction and employment of our very limited


powers of beneficence: first, towards individuals; and secondly,


towards societies.


    The same unerring wisdom, it will be found, which regulates


every other part of her conduct, directs, in this respect too,


the order of her recommendations; which are always stronger or


weaker in proportion as our beneficence is more or less


necessary, or can be more or less useful.





Chap. I





Of the Order in which Individuals are recommended by Nature to


our care and attention





    Every man, as the Stoics used to say, is first and


principally recommended to his own care; and every man is


certainly, in every respect, fitter and abler to take care of


himself than of any other person. Every man feels his own


pleasures and his own pains more sensibly than those of other


people. The former are the original sensations; the latter the


reflected or sympathetic images of those sensations. The former


may be said to be the substance; the latter the shadow.


    After himself, the members of his own family, those who


usually live in the same house with him, his parents, his


children, his brothers and sisters, are naturally the objects of


his warmest affections. They are naturally and usually the


persons upon whose happiness or misery his conduct must have the


greatest influence. He is more habituated to sympathize with


them. He knows better how every thing is likely to affect them,


and his sympathy with them is more precise and determinate, than


it can be with the greater part of other people. It approaches


nearer, in short, to what he feels for himself.


    This sympathy too, and the affections which are founded on


it, are by nature more strongly directed towards his children


than towards his parents, and his tenderness for the former seems


generally a more active principle, than his reverence and


gratitude towards the latter. In the natural state of things, it


has already been observed, the existence of the child, for some


time after it comes into the world, depends altogether upon the


care of the parent; that of the parent does not naturally depend


upon the care of the child. In the eye of nature, it would seem,


a child is a more important object than an old man; and excites a


much more lively, as well as a much more universal sympathy. It


ought to do so. Every thing may be expected, or at least hoped,


from the child. In ordinary cases, very little can be either


expected or hoped from the old man. The weakness of childhood


interests the affections of the most brutal and hard-hearted. It


is only to the virtuous and humane, that the infirmities of old


age are not the objects of contempt and aversion. In ordinary


cases, an old man dies without being much regretted by any body.


Scarce a child can die without rending asunder the heart of


somebody.


    The earliest friendships, the friendships which are naturally


contracted when the heart is most susceptible of that feeling,


are those among brothers and sisters. Their good agreement, while


they remain in the same family, is necessary for its tranquillity


and happiness. They are capable of giving more pleasure or pain


to one another than to the greater part of other people. Their


situation renders their mutual sympathy of the utmost importance


to their common happiness; and, by the wisdom of nature, the same


situation, by obliging them to accommodate to one another,


renders that sympathy more habitual, and thereby more lively,


more distinct, and more determinate.


    The children of brothers and sisters are naturally connected


by the friendship which, after separating into different


families, continues to take place between their parents. Their


good agreement improves the enjoyment of that friendship; their


discord would disturb it. As they seldom live in the same family,


however, though of more importance to one another, than to the


greater part of other people, they are of much less than brothers


and sisters. As their mutual sympathy is less necessary, so it is


less habitual, and therefore proportionably weaker.


    The children of cousins, being still less connected, are of


still less importance to one another; and the affection gradually


diminishes as the relation grows more and more remote.


    What is called affection, is in reality nothing but habitual


sympathy. Our concern in the happiness or misery of those who are


the objects of what we call our affections; our desire to promote


the one, and to prevent the other; are either the actual feeling


of that habitual sympathy, or the necessary consequences of that


feeling. Relations being usually placed in situations which


naturally create this habitual sympathy, it is expected that a


suitable degree of affection should take place among them. We


generally find that it actually does take place; we therefore


naturally expect that it should; and we are, upon that account,


more shocked when, upon any occasion, we find that it does not.


The general rule is established, that persons related to one


another in a certain degree, ought always to be affected towards


one another in a certain manner, and that there is always the


highest impropriety, and sometimes even a sort of impiety, in


their being affected in a different manner. A parent without


parental tenderness, a child devoid of all filial reverence,


appear monsters, the objects, not of hatred only, but of horror.


    Though in a particular instance, the circumstances which


usually produce those natural affections, as they are called,


may, by some accident, not have taken place, yet respect for the


general rule will frequently, in some measure, supply their


place, and produce something which, though not altogether the


same, may bear, however, a very considerable resemblance to those


affections. A father is apt to be less attached to a child, who,


by some accident, has been separated from him in its infancy, and


who does not return to him till it is grown up to manhood. The


father is apt to feel less paternal tenderness for the child; the


child, less filial reverence for the father. Brothers and


sisters, when they have been educated in distant countries, are


apt to feel a similar diminution of affection. With the dutiful


and the virtuous, however, respect for the general rule will


frequently produce something which, though by no means the same,


yet may very much resemble those natural affections. Even during


the separation, the father and the child, the brothers or the


sisters, are by no means indifferent to one another. They all


consider one another as persons to and from whom certain


affections are due, and they live in the hopes of being some time


or another in a situation to enjoy that friendship which ought


naturally to have taken place among persons so nearly connected.


Till they meet, the absent son, the absent brother, are


frequently the favourite son, the favourite brother. They have


never offended, or, if they have, it is so long ago, that the


offence is forgotten, as some childish trick not worth the


remembering. Every account they have heard of one another, if


conveyed by people of any tolerable good nature, has been, in the


highest degree, flattering and favourable. The absent son, the


absent brother, is not like other ordinary sons and brothers; but


an all-perfect son, an all-perfect brother; and the most romantic


hopes are entertained of the happiness to be enjoyed in the


friendship and conversation of such persons. When they meet, it


is often with so strong a disposition to conceive that habitual


sympathy which constitutes the family affection, that they are


very apt to fancy they have actually conceived it, and to behave


to one another as if they had. Time and experience, however, I am


afraid, too frequently undeceive them. Upon a more familiar


acquaintance, they frequently discover in one another habits,


humours, and inclinations, different from what they expected, to


which, from want of habitual sympathy, from want of the real


principle and foundation of what is properly called


family-affection, they cannot now easily accommodate themselves.


They have never lived in the situation which almost necessarily


forces that easy accommodation, and though they may now be


sincerely desirous to assume it, they have really become


incapable of doing so. Their familiar conversation and


intercourse soon become less pleasing to them, and, upon that


account, less frequent. They may continue to live with one


another in the mutual exchange of all essential good offices, and


with every other external appearance of decent regard. But that


cordial satisfaction, that delicious sympathy, that confidential


openness and ease, which naturally take place in the conversation


of those who have lived long and familiarly with one another, it


seldom happens that they can completely enjoy.


    It is only, however, with the dutiful and the virtuous, that


the general rule has even this slender authority. With the


dissipated, the profligate, and the vain, it is entirely


disregarded. They are so far from respecting it, that they seldom


talk of it but with the most indecent derision. and an early and


long separation of this kind never fails to estrange them most


completely from one another. With such persons, respect for the


general rule can at best produce only a cold and affected


civility (a very slender semblance of real regard); and even


this, the slightest offence, the smallest opposition of interest,


commonly puts an end to altogether.


    The education of boys at distant great schools, of young men


at distant colleges, of young ladies in distant nunneries and


boarding-schools, seems, in the higher ranks of life, to have


hurt most essentially the domestic morals, and consequently the


domestic happiness, both of France and England. Do you wish to


educate your children to be dutiful to their parents, to be kind


and affectionate to their brothers and sisters? put them under


the necessity of being dutiful children, of being kind and


affectionate brothers and sisters: educate them in your own


house. From their parent's house they may, with propriety and


advantage, go out every day to attend public schools: but let


their dwelling be always at home. Respect for you must always


impose a very useful restraint upon their conduct; and respect


for them may frequently impose no useless restraint upon your


own. Surely no acquirement, which can possibly be derived from


what is called a public education, can make any sort of


compensation for what is almost certainly and necessarily lost by


it. Domestic education is the institution of nature; public


education, the contrivance of man. It is surely unnecessary to


say, which is likely to be the wisest.


    In some tragedies and romances, we meet with many beautiful


and interesting scenes, founded upon, what is called, the force


of blood, or upon the wonderful affection which near relations


are supposed to conceive for one another, even before they know


that they have any such connection. This force of blood, however,


I am afraid, exists no-where but in tragedies and romances. Even


in tragedies and romances, it is never supposed to take place


between any relations, but those who are naturally bred up in the


same house; between parents and children, between brothers and


sisters. To imagine any such mysterious affection between


cousins, or even between aunts or uncles, and nephews or nieces,


would be too ridiculous.


    In pastoral countries, and in all countries where the


authority of law is not alone sufficient to give perfect security


to every member of the state, all the different branches of the


same family commonly chuse to live in the neighbourhood of one


another. Their association is frequently necessary for their


common defence. They are all, from the highest to the lowest, of


more or less importance to one another. Their concord strengthens


their necessary association; their discord always weakens, and


might destroy it. They have more intercourse with one another,


than with the members of any other tribe. The remotest members of


the same tribe claim some connection with one another; and, where


all other circumstances are equal, expect to be treated with more


distinguished attention than is due to those who have no such


pretensions. It is not many years ago that, in the Highlands of


Scotland, the Chieftain used to consider the poorest man of his


clan, as his cousin and relation. The same extensive regard to


kindred is said to take place among the Tartars, the Arabs, the


Turkomans, and, I believe, among all other nations who are nearly


in the same state of society in which the Scots Highlanders were


about the beginning of the present century.


    In commercial countries, where the authority of law is always


perfectly sufficient to protect the meanest man in the state, the


descendants of the same family, having no such motive for keeping


together, naturally separate and disperse, as interest or


inclination may direct. They soon cease to be of importance to


one another; and, in a few generations, not only lose all care


about one another, but all remembrance of their common origin,


and of the connection which took place among their ancestors.


Regard for remote relations becomes, in every country, less and


less, according as this state of civilization has been longer and


more completely established. It has been longer and more


completely established in England than in Scotland; and remote


relations are, accordingly, more considered in the latter country


than in the former, though, in this respect, the difference


between the two countries is growing less and less every day.


Great lords, indeed, are, in every country, proud of remembering


and acknowledging their connection with one another, however


remote. The remembrance of such illustrious relations flatters


not a little the family pride of them all; and it is neither from


affection, nor from any thing which resembles affection, but from


the most frivolous and childish of all vanities, that this


remembrance is so carefully kept up. Should some more humble,


though, perhaps, much nearer kinsman, presume to put such great


men in mind of his relation to their family, they seldom fail to


tell him that they are bad genealogists, and miserably


ill-informed concerning their own family history. It is not in


that order, I am afraid, that we are to expect any extraordinary


extension of, what is called, natural affection.


    I consider what is called natural affection as more the


effect of the moral than of the supposed physical connection


between the parent and the child. A jealous husband, indeed,


notwithstanding the moral connection, notwithstanding the child's


having been educated in his own house, often regards, with hatred


and aversion, that unhappy child which he supposes to be the


offspring of his wife's infidelity. It is the lasting monument of


a most disagreeable adventure; of his own dishonour, and of the


disgrace of his family.


    Among well-disposed people, the necessity or conveniency of


mutual accommodation, very frequently produces a friendship not


unlike that which takes place among those who are born to live in


the same family. Colleagues in office, partners in trade, call


one another brothers; and frequently feel towards one another as


if they really were so. Their good agreement is an advantage to


all; and, if they are tolerably reasonable people, they are


naturally disposed to agree. We expect that they should do so;


and their disagreement is a sort of a small scandal. The Romans


expressed this sort of attachment by the word necessitudo, which,


from the etymology, seems to denote that it was imposed by the


necessity of the situation.


    Even the trifling circumstance of living in the same


neighbourhood, has some effect of the same kind. We respect the


face of a man whom we see every day, provided he has never


offended us. Neighbours can be very convenient, and they can be


very troublesome, to one another. If they are good sort of


people, they are naturally disposed to agree. We expect their


good agreement; and to be a bad neighbour is a very bad


character. There are certain small good offices, accordingly,


which are universally allowed to be due to a neighbour in


preference to any other person who has no such connection.


    This natural disposition to accommodate and to assimilate, as


much as we can, our own sentiments, principles, and feelings, to


those which we see fixed and rooted in the persons whom we are


obliged to live and converse a great deal with, is the cause of


the contagious effects of both good and bad company. The man who


associates chiefly with the wise and the virtuous, though he may


not himself become either wise or virtuous, cannot help


conceiving a certain respect at least for wisdom and virtue; and


the man who associates chiefly with the profligate and the


dissolute, though he may not himself become profligate and


dissolute, must soon lose, at least, all his original abhorrence


of profligacy and dissolution of manners. The similarity of


family characters, which we so frequently see transmitted through


several successive generations, may, perhaps, be partly owing to


this disposition, to assimilate ourselves to those whom we are


obliged to live and converse a great deal with. The family


character, however, like the family countenance, seems to be


owing, not altogether to the moral, but partly too to the


physical connection. The family countenance is certainly


altogether owing to the latter.


    But of all attachments to an individual, that which is


founded altogether upon the esteem and approbation of his good


conduct and behaviour, confirmed by much experience and long


acquaintance, is, by far, the most respectable. Such friendships,


arising not from a constrained sympathy, not from a sympathy


which has been assumed and rendered habitual for the sake of


conveniency and accommodation; but from a natural sympathy, from


an involuntary feeling that the persons to whom we attach


ourselves are the natural and proper objects of esteem and


approbation; can exist only among men of virtue. Men of virtue


only can feel that entire confidence in the conduct and behaviour


of one another, which can, at all times, assure them that they


can never either offend or be offended by one another. Vice is


always capricious: virtue only is regular and orderly. The


attachment which is founded upon the love of virtue, as it is


certainly, of all attachments, the most virtuous; so it is


likewise the happiest, as well as the most permanent and secure.


Such friendships need not be confined to a single person, but may


safely embrace all the wise and virtuous, with whom we have been


long and intimately acquainted, and upon whose wisdom and virtue


we can, upon that account, entirely depend. They who would


confine friendship to two persons, seem to confound the wise


security of friendship with the jealousy and folly of love. The


hasty, fond, and foolish intimacies of young people, founded,


commonly, upon some slight similarity of character, altogether


unconnected with good conduct, upon a taste, perhaps, for the


same studies, the same amusements, the same diversions, or upon


their agreement in some singular principle or opinion, not


commonly adopted; those intimacies which a freak begins, and


which a freak puts an end to, how agreeable soever they may


appear while they last, can by no means deserve the sacred and


venerable name of friendship.


    Of all the persons, however, whom nature points out for our


peculiar beneficence, there are none to whom it seems more


properly directed than to those whose beneficence we have


ourselves already experienced. Nature, which formed men for that


mutual kindness, so necessary for their happiness, renders every


man the peculiar object of kindness, to the persons to whom he


himself has been kind. Though their gratitude should not always


correspond to his beneficence, yet the sense of his merit, the


sympathetic gratitude of the impartial spectator, will always


correspond to it. The general indignation of other people,


against the baseness of their ingratitude, will even, sometimes,


increase the general sense of his merit. No benevolent man ever


lost altogether the fruits of his benevolence. If he does not


always gather them from the persons from whom he ought to have


gathered them, he seldom fails to gather them, and with a tenfold


increase, from other people. Kindness is the parent of kindness;


and if to be beloved by our brethren be the great object of our


ambition, the surest way of obtaining it is, by our conduct to


show that we really love them.


    After the persons who are recommended to our beneficence,


either by their connection with ourselves, by their personal


qualities, or by their past services, come those who are pointed


out, not indeed to, what is called, our friendship, but to our


benevolent attention and good offices; those who are


distinguished by their extraordinary situation; the greatly


fortunate and the greatly unfortunate, the rich and the powerful,


the poor and the wretched. The distinction of ranks, the peace


and order of society, are, in a great measure, founded upon the


respect which we naturally conceive for the former. The relief


and consolation of human misery depend altogether upon our


compassion for the latter. The peace and order of society, is of


more importance than even the relief of the miserable. Our


respect for the great, accordingly, is most apt to offend by its


excess; our fellow_feeling for the miserable, by its defect.


Moralists exhort us to charity and compassion. They warn us


against the fascination of greatness. This fascination, indeed,


is so powerful, that the rich and the great are too often


preferred to the wise and the virtuous. Nature has wisely judged


that the distinction of ranks, the peace and order of society,


would rest more securely upon the plain and palpable difference


of birth and fortune, than upon the invisible and often uncertain


difference of wisdom and virtue. The undistinguishing eyes of the


great mob of mankind can well enough perceive the former: it is


with difficulty that the nice discernment of the wise and the


virtuous can sometimes distinguish the latter. In the order of


all those recommendations, the benevolent wisdom of nature is


equally evident.


    It may, perhaps, be unnecessary to observe, that the


combination of two, or more, of those exciting causes of


kindness, increases the kindness. The favour and partiality


which, when there is no envy in the case, we naturally bear to


greatness, are much increased when it is joined with wisdom and


virtue. If, notwithstanding that wisdom and virtue, the great man


should fall into those misfortunes, those dangers and distresses,


to which the most exalted stations are often the most exposed, we


are much more deeply interested in his fortune than we should be


in that of a person equally virtuous, but in a more humble


situation. The most interesting subjects of tragedies and


romances are the misfortunes of virtuous and magnanimous kings


and princes. If, by the wisdom and manhood of their exertions,


they should extricate themselves from those misfortunes, and


recover completely their former superiority and security, we


cannot help viewing them with the most enthusiastic and even


extravagant admiration. The grief which we felt for their


distress, the joy which we feel for their prosperity, seem to


combine together in enhancing that partial admiration which we


naturally conceive both for the station and the character.


    When those different beneficent affections happen to draw


different ways, to determine by any precise rules in what cases


we ought to comply with the one, and in what with the other, is,


perhaps, altogether impossible. In what cases friendship ought to


yield to gratitude, or gratitude to friend, ship. in what cases


the strongest of all natural affections ought to yield to a


regard for the safety of those superiors upon whose safety often


depends that of the whole society; and in what cases natural


affection may, without impropriety, prevail over that regard;


must be left altogether to the decision of the man within the


breast, the supposed impartial spectator, the great judge and


arbiter of our conduct. If we place ourselves completely in his


situation, if we really view ourselves with his eyes, and as he


views us, and listen with diligent and reverential attention to


what he suggests to us, his voice will never deceive us. We shall


stand in need of no casuistic rules to direct our conduct. These


it is often impossible to accommodate to all the different shades


and gradations of circumstance, character, and situation, to


differences and distinctions which, though not imperceptible,


are, by their nicety and delicacy, often altogether undefinable.


In that beautiful tragedy of Voltaire, the Orphan of China, while


we admire the magnanimity of Zamti, who is willing to sacrifice


the life of his own child, in order to preserve that of the only


feeble remnant of his ancient sovereigns and masters; we not only


pardon, but love the maternal tenderness of Idame, who, at the


risque of discovering the important secret of her husband,


reclaims her infant from the cruel hands of the Tartars, into


which it had been delivered.





Chap. II





Of the order in which Societies are by nature recommended to our


Beneficence





    The same principles that direct the order in which


individuals are recommended to our beneficence, direct that


likewise in which societies are recommended to it. Those to which


it is, or may be of most importance, are first and principally


recommended to it.


    The state or sovereignty in which we have been born and


educated, and under the protection of which we continue to live,


is, in ordinary cases, the greatest society upon whose happiness


or misery, our good or bad conduct can have much influence. It is


accordingly, by nature, most strongly recommended to us. Not only


we ourselves, but all the objects of our kindest affections, our


children, our parents, our relations, our friends, our


benefactors, all those whom we naturally love and revere the


most, are commonly comprehended within it; and their prosperity


and safety depend in some measure upon its prosperity and safety.


It is by nature, therefore, endeared to us, not only by all our


selfish, but by all our private benevolent affections. Upon


account of our own connexion with it, its prosperity and glory


seem to reflect some sort of honour upon ourselves. When we


compare it with other societies of the same kind, we are proud of


its superiority, and mortified in some degree, if it appears in


any respect below them. All the illustrious characters which it


has produced in former times (for against those of our own times


envy may sometimes prejudice us a little), its warriors, its


statesmen, its poets, its philosophers, and men of letters of all


kinds; we are disposed to view with the most partial admiration,


and to rank them (sometimes most unjustly) above those of all


other nations. The patriot who lays down his life for the safety,


or even for the vain-glory of this society, appears to act with


the most exact propriety. He appears to view himself in the light


in which the impartial spectator naturally and necessarily views


him, as but one of the multitude, in the eye of that equitable


judge, of no more consequence than any other in it, but bound at


all times to sacrifice and devote himself to the safety, to the


service, and even to the glory of the greater number. But though


this sacrifice appears to be perfectly just and proper, we know


how difficult it is to make it, and how few people are capable of


making it. His conduct, therefore, excites not only our entire


approbation, but our highest wonder and admiration, and seems to


merit all the applause which can be due to the most heroic


virtue. The traitor, on the contrary, who, in some peculiar


situation, fancies he can promote his own little interest by


betraying to the public enemy that of his native country. who,


regardless of the judgment of the man within the breast, prefers


himself, in this respect so shamefully and so basely, to all


those with whom he has any connexion; appears to be of all


villains the most detestable.


    The love of our own nation often disposes us to view, with


the most malignant jealousy and envy, the prosperity and


aggrandisement of any other neighbouring nation. Independent and


neighbouring nations, having no common superior to decide their


disputes, all live in continual dread and suspicion of one


another. Each sovereign, expecting little justice from his


neighbours, is disposed to treat them with as little as he


expects from them. The regard for the laws of nations, or for


those rules which independent states profess or pretend to think


themselves bound to observe in their dealings with one another,


is often very little more than mere pretence and profession. From


the smallest interest, upon the slightest provocation, we see


those rules every day, either evaded or directly violated without


shame or remorse. Each nation foresees, or imagines it foresees,


its own subjugation in the increasing power and aggrandisement of


any of its neighbours; and the mean principle of national


prejudice is often founded upon the noble one of the love of our


own country. The sentence with which the elder Cato is said to


have concluded every speech which he made in the senate, whatever


might be the subject, 'It is my opinion likewise that Carthage


ought to be destroyed,' was the natural expression of the savage


patriotism of a strong but coarse mind, enraged almost to madness


against a foreign nation from which his own had suffered so much.


The more humane sentence with which Scipio Nasica is said to have


concluded all his speeches, 'It is my opinion likewise that


Carthage ought not to be destroyed,' was the liberal expression


of a more enlarged and enlightened mind, who felt no aversion to


the prosperity even of an old enemy, when reduced to a state


which could no longer be formidable to Rome. France and England


may each of them have some reason to dread the increase of the


naval and military power of the other; but for either of them to


envy the internal happiness and prosperity of the other, the


cultivation of its lands, the advancement of its manufactures,


the increase of its commerce, the security and number of its


ports and harbours, its proficiency in all the liberal arts and


sciences, is surely beneath the dignity of two such great


nations. These are all real improvements of the world we live in.


Mankind are benefited, human nature is ennobled by them. In such


improvements each nation ought, not only to endeavour itself to


excel, but from the love of mankind, to promote, instead of


obstructing the excellence of its neighbours. These are all


proper objects of national emulation, not of national prejudice


or envy.


    The love of our own country seems not to be derived from the


love of mankind. The former sentiment is altogether independent


of the latter, and seems sometimes even to dispose us to act


inconsistently with it. France may contain, perhaps, near three


times the number of inhabitants which Great Britain contains. In


the great society of mankind, therefore, the prosperity of France


should appear to be an object of much greater importance than


that of Great Britain. The British subject, however, who, upon


that account, should prefer upon all occasions the prosperity of


the former to that of the latter country, would not be thought a


good citizen of Great Britain. We do not love our country merely


as a part of the great society of mankind: we love it for its own


sake, and independently of any such consideration. That wisdom


which contrived the system of human affections, as well as that


of every other part of nature, seems to have judged that the


interest of the great society of mankind would be best promoted


by directing the principal attention of each individual to that


particular portion of it, which was most within the sphere both


of his abilities and of his understanding.


    National prejudices and hatreds seldom extend beyond


neighbouring nations. We very weakly and foolishly, perhaps, call


the French our natural enemies; and they perhaps, as weakly and


foolishly, consider us in the same manner. Neither they nor we


bear any sort of envy to the prosperity of China or Japan. It


very rarely happens, however, that our good-will towards such


distant countries can be exerted with much effect.


    The most extensive public benevolence which can commonly be


exerted with any considerable effect, is that of the statesmen,


who project and form alliances among neighbouring or not very


distant nations, for the preservation either of, what is called,


the balance of power, or of the general peace and tranquillity of


the states within the circle of their negotiations. The


statesmen, however, who plan and execute such treaties, have


seldom any thing in view, but the interest of their respective


countries. Sometimes, indeed, their views are more extensive. The


Count d'Avaux, the plenipotentiary of France, at the treaty of


Munster, would have been willing to sacrifice his life (according


to the Cardinal de Retz, a man not over-credulous in the virtue


of other people) in order to have restored, by that treaty, the


general tranquillity of Europe. King William seems to have had a


real zeal for the liberty and independency of the greater part of


the sovereign states of Europe; which, perhaps, might be a good


deal stimulated by his particular aversion to France, the state


from which, during his time, that liberty and independency were


principally in danger. Some share of the same spirit seems to


have descended to the first ministry of Queen Anne.


    Every independent state is divided into many different orders


and societies, each of which has its own particular powers,


privileges, and immunities. Every individual is naturally more


attached to his own particular order or society, than to any


other. His own interest, his own vanity the interest and vanity


of many of his friends and companions, are commonly a good deal


connected with it. He is ambitious to extend its privileges and


immunities. He is zealous to defend them against the


encroachments of every other order or society.


    Upon the manner in which any state is divided into the


different orders and societies which compose it, and upon the


particular distribution which has been made of their respective


powers, privileges, and immunities, depends, what is called, the


constitution of that particular state.


    Upon the ability of each particular order or society to


maintain its own powers, privileges, and immunities, against the


encroachments of every other, depends the stability of that


particular constitution. That particular constitution is


necessarily more or less altered, whenever any of its subordinate


parts is either raised above or depressed below whatever had been


its former rank and condition.


    All those different orders and societies are dependent upon


the state to which they owe their security and protection. That


they are all subordinate to that state, and established only in


subserviency to its prosperity and preservation, is a truth


acknowledged by the most partial member of every one of them. It


may often, however, be hard to convince him that the prosperity


and preservation of the state require any diminution of the


powers, privileges, and immunities of his own particular order or


society. This partiality, though it may sometimes be unjust, may


not, upon that account, be useless. It checks the spirit of


innovation. It tends to preserve whatever is the established


balance among the different orders and societies into which the


state is divided; and while it sometimes appears to obstruct some


alterations of government which may be fashionable and popular at


the time, it contributes in reality to the stability and


permanency of the whole system.


    The love of our country seems, in ordinary cases, to involve


in it two different principles; first, a certain respect and


reverence for that constitution or form of government which is


actually established; and secondly, an earnest desire to render


the condition of our fellow-citizens as safe, respectable, and


happy as we can. He is not a citizen who is not disposed to


respect the laws and to obey the civil magistrate; and he is


certainly not a good citizen who does not wish to promote, by


every means in his power, the welfare of the whole society of his


fellow-citizens.


    In peaceable and quiet times, those two principles generally


coincide and lead to the same conduct. The support of the


established government seems evidently the best expedient for


maintaining the safe, respectable, and happy situation of our


fellow-citizens; when we see that this government actually


maintains them in that situation. But in times of public


discontent, faction, and disorder, those two different principles


may draw different ways, and even a wise man may be disposed to


think some alteration necessary in that constitution or form of


government, which, in its actual condition, appears plainly


unable to maintain the public tranquillity. In such cases,


however, it often requires, perhaps, the highest effort of


political wisdom to determine when a real patriot ought to


support and endeavour to re-establish the authority of the old


system, and when he ought to give way to the more daring, but


often dangerous spirit of innovation.


    Foreign war and civil faction are the two situations which


afford the most splendid opportunities for the display of public


spirit. The hero who serves his country successfully in foreign


war gratifies the wishes of the whole nation, and is, upon that


account, the object of universal gratitude and admiration. In


times of civil discord, the leaders of the contending parties,


though they may be admired by one half of their fellow-citizens,


are commonly execrated by the other. Their characters and the


merit of their respective services appear commonly more doubtful.


The glory which is acquired by foreign war is, upon this account,


almost always more pure and more splendid than that which can be


acquired in civil faction.


    The leader of the successful party, however, if he has


authority enough to prevail upon his own friends to act with


proper temper and moderation (which he frequently has not), may


sometimes render to his country a service much more essential and


important than the greatest victories and the most extensive


conquests. He may re-establish and improve the constitution, and


from the very doubtful and ambiguous character of the leader of a


party, he may assume the greatest and noblest of all characters,


that of the reformer and legislator of a great state; and, by the


wisdom of his institutions, secure the internal tranquillity and


happiness of his fellow-citizens for many succeeding generations.


    Amidst the turbulence and disorder of faction, a certain


spirit of system is apt to mix itself with that public spirit


which is founded upon the love of humanity, upon a real


fellow-feeling with the inconveniencies and distresses to which


some of our fellow-citizens may be exposed. This spirit of system


commonly takes the direction of that more gentle public spirit;


always animates it, and often inflames it even to the madness of


fanaticism. The leaders of the discontented party seldom fail to


hold out some plausible plan of reformation which, they pretend,


will not only remove the inconveniencies and relieve the


distresses immediately complained of, but will prevent, in all


time coming, any return of the like inconveniencies and


distresses. They often propose, upon this account, to new-model


the constitution, and to alter, in some of its most essential


parts, that system of government under which the subjects of a


great empire have enjoyed, perhaps, peace, security, and even


glory, during the course of several centuries together. The great


body of the party are commonly intoxicated with the imaginary


beauty of this ideal system, of which they have no experience,


but which has been represented to them in all the most dazzling


colours in which the eloquence of their leaders could paint it.


Those leaders themselves, though they originally may have meant


nothing but their own aggrandisement, become many of them in time


the dupes of their own sophistry, and are as eager for this great


reformation as the weakest and foolishest of their followers.


Even though the leaders should have preserved their own heads, as


indeed they commonly do, free from this fanaticism, yet they dare


not always disappoint the expectation of their followers; but are


often obliged, though contrary to their principle and their


conscience, to act as if they were under the common delusion. The


violence of the party, refusing all palliatives, all


temperaments, all reasonable accommodations, by requiring too


much frequently obtains nothing; and those inconveniencies and


distresses which, with a little moderation, might in a great


measure have been removed and relieved, are left altogether


without the hope of a remedy.


    The man whose public spirit is prompted altogether by


humanity and benevolence, will respect the established powers and


privileges eVen of individuals, and still more those of the great


orders and societies, into which the state is divided. Though he


should consider some of them as in some measure abusive, he will


content himself with moderating, what he often cannot annihilate


without great violence. When he cannot conquer the rooted


prejudices of the people by reason and persuasion, he will not


attempt to subdue them by force; but will religiously observe


what, by Cicero, is justly called the divine maxim of Plato,


never to use violence to his country no more than to his parents.


He will accommodate, as well as he can, his public arrangements


to the confirmed habits and prejudices of the people; and will


remedy as well as he can, the inconveniencies which may flow from


the want of those regulations which the people are averse to


submit to. When he cannot establish the right, he will not


disdain to ameliorate the wrong; but like Solon, when he cannot


establish the best system of laws, he will endeavour to establish


the best that the people can bear.


    The man of system, on the contrary, is apt to be very wise in


his own conceit; and is often so enamoured with the supposed


beauty of his own ideal plan of government, that he cannot suffer


the smallest deviation from any part of it. He goes on to


establish it completely and in all its parts, without any regard


either to the great interests, or to the strong prejudices which


may oppose it. He seems to imagine that he can arrange the


different members of a great society with as much ease as the


hand arranges the different pieces upon a chess-board. He does


not consider that the pieces upon the chess-board have no other


principle of motion besides that which the hand impresses upon


them; but that, in the great chess-board of human society, every


single piece has a principle of motion of its own, altogether


different from that which the legislature might chuse to impress


upon it. If those two principles coincide and act in the same


direction, the game of human society will go on easily and


harmoniously, and is very likely to be happy and successful. If


they are opposite or different, the game will go on miserably,


and the society must be at all times in the highest degree of


disorder.


    Some general, and even systematical, idea of the perfection


of policy and law, may no doubt be necessary for directing the


views of the statesman. But to insist upon establishing, and upon


establishing all at once, and in spite of all opposition, every


thing which that idea may seem to require, must often be the


highest degree of arrogance. It is to erect his own judgment into


the supreme standard of right and wrong. It is to fancy himself


the only wise and worthy man in the commonwealth, and that his


fellow-citizens should accommodate themselves to him and not he


to them. It is upon this account, that of all political


speculators, sovereign princes are by far the most dangerous.


This arrogance is perfectly familiar to them. They entertain no


doubt of the immense superiority of their own judgment. When such


imperial and royal reformers, therefore, condescend to


contemplate the constitution of the country which is committed to


their government, they seldom see any thing so wrong in it as the


obstructions which it may sometimes oppose to the execution of


their own will. They hold in contempt the divine maxim of Plato,


and consider the state as made for themselves, not themselves for


the state. The great object of their reformation, therefore, is


to remove those obstructions; to reduce the authority of the


nobility; to take away the privileges of cities and provinces,


and to render both the greatest individuals and the greatest


orders of the state, as incapable of opposing their commands, as


the weakest and most insignificant.





Chap. III





Of universal Benevolence





    Though our effectual good offices can very seldom be extended


to any wider society than that of our own country; our good-will


is circumscribed by no boundary, but may embrace the immensity of


the universe. We cannot form the idea of any innocent and


sensible being, whose happiness we should not desire, or to whose


misery, when distinctly brought home to the imagination, we


should not have some degree of aversion. The idea of a


mischievous, though sensible, being, indeed, naturally provokes


our hatred: but the ill-will which, in this case, we bear to it,


is really the effect of our universal benevolence. It is the


effect of the sympathy which we feel with the misery and


resentment of those other innocent and sensible beings, whose


happiness is disturbed by its malice.


    This universal benevolence, how noble and generous soever,


can be the source of no solid happiness to any man who is not


thoroughly convinced that all the inhabitants of the universe,


the meanest as well as the greatest, are under the immediate care


and protection of that great, benevolent, and all-wise Being, who


directs all the movements of nature; and who is determined, by


his own unalterable perfections, to maintain in it, at all times,


the greatest possible quantity of happiness. To this universal


benevolence, on the contrary, the very suspicion of a fatherless


world, must be the most melancholy of all reflections; from the


thought that all the unknown regions of infinite and


incomprehensible space may be filled with nothing but endless


misery and wretchedness. All the splendour of the highest


prosperity can never enlighten the gloom with which so dreadful


an idea must necessarily over-shadow the imagination; nor, in a


wise and virtuous man, can all the sorrow of the most afflicting


adversity ever dry up the joy which necessarily springs from the


habitual and thorough conviction of the truth of the contrary


system.


    The wise and virtuous man is at all times willing that his


own private interest should be sacrificed to the public interest


of his own particular order or society. He is at all times


willing, too, that the interest of this order or society should


be sacrificed to the greater interest of the state or


sovereignty, of which it is only a subordinate part. He should,


therefore, be equally willing that all those inferior interests


should be sacrificed to the greater interest of the universe, to


the interest of that great society of all sensible and


intelligent beings, of which God himself is the immediate


administrator and director. If he is deeply impressed with the


habitual and thorough conviction that this benevolent and


all-wise Being can admit into the system of his government, no


partial evil which is not necessary for the universal good, he


must consider all the misfortunes which may befal himself, his


friends, his society, or his country, as necessary for the


prosperity of the universe, and therefore as what he ought, not


only to submit to with resignation, but as what he himself, if he


had known all the connexions and dependencies of things, ought


sincerely and devoutly to have wished for.


    Nor does this magnanimous resignation to the will of the


great Director of the universe, seem in any respect beyond the


reach of human nature. Good soldiers, who both love and trust


their general, frequently march with more gaiety and alacrity to


the forlorn station, from which they never expect to return, than


they would to one where there was neither difficulty nor danger.


In marching to the latter, they could feel no other sentiment


than that of the dulness of ordinary duty: in marching to the


former, they feel that they are making the noblest exertion which


it is possible for man to make. They know that their general


would not have ordered them upon this station, had it not been


necessary for the safety of the army, for the success of the war.


They cheerfully sacrifice their own little systems to the


prosperity of a greater system. They take an affectionate leave


of their comrades, to whom they wish all happiness and success;


and march out, not only with submissive obedience, but often with


shouts of the most joyful exultation, to that fatal, but splendid


and honourable station to which they are appointed. No conductor


of an army can deserve more unlimited trust, more ardent and


zealous affection, than the great Conductor of the universe. In


the greatest public as well as private disasters, a wise man


ought to consider that he himself, his friends and countrymen,


have only been ordered upon the forlorn station of the universe;


that had it not been necessary for the good of the whole, they


would not have been so ordered; and that it is their duty, not


only with humble resignation to submit to this allotment, but to


endeavour to embrace it with alacrity and joy. A wise man should


surely be capable of doing what a good soldier holds himself at


all times in readiness to do.


    The idea of that divine Being, whose benevolence and wisdom


have, from all eternity, contrived and conducted the immense


machine of the universe, so as at all times to produce the


greatest possible quantity of happiness, is certainly of all the


objects of human contemplation by far the most sublime. Every


other thought necessarily appears mean in the comparison. The man


whom we believe to be principally occupied in this sublime


contemplation, seldom fails to be the object of our highest


veneration; and though his life should be altogether


contemplative, we often regard him with a sort of religious


respect much superior to that with which we look upon the most


active and useful servant of the commonwealth. The Meditations of


Marcus Antoninus, which turn principally upon this subject, have


contributed more, perhaps, to the general admiration of his


character, than all the different transactions of his just,


merciful, and beneficent reign.


    The administration of the great system of the universe,


however, the care of the universal happiness of all rational and


sensible beings, is the business of God and not of man. To man is


allotted a much humbler department, but one much more suitable to


the weakness of his powers, and to the narrowness of his


comprehension; the care of his own happiness, of that of his


family, his friends, his country: that he is occupied in


contemplating the more sublime, can never be an excuse for his


neglecting the more humble department; and he must not expose


himself to the charge which Avidius Cassius is said to have


brought, perhaps unjustly, against Marcus Antoninus; that while


he employed himself in philosophical speculations, and


contemplated the prosperity of the universe, he neglected that of


the Roman empire. The most sublime speculation of the


contemplative philosopher can scarce compensate the neglect of


the smallest active duty. 





Section III





Of Self-command





    The man who acts according to the rules of perfect prudence,


of strict justice, and of proper benevolence, may be said to be


perfectly virtuous. But the most perfect knowledge of those rules


will not alone enable him to act in this manner: his own passions


are very apt to mislead him; sometimes to drive him and sometimes


to seduce him to violate all the rules which he himself, in all


his sober and cool hours, approves of. The most perfect


knowledge, if it is not supported by the most perfect


self-command, will not always enable him to do his duty.


    Some of the best of the ancient moralists seem to have


considered those passions as divided into two different classes:


first, into those which it requires a considerable exertion of


self-command to restrain even for a single moment; and secondly,


into those which it is easy to restrain for a single moment, or


even for a short period of time; but which, by their continual


and almost incessant solicitations, are, in the course of a life,


very apt to mislead into great deviations.


    Fear and anger, together with some other passions which are


mixed or connected with them, constitute the first class. The


love of ease, of pleasure, of applause, and of many other selfish


gratifications, constitute the second. Extravagant fear and


furious anger, it is often difficult to restrain even for a


single moment. The love of ease, of pleasure, of applause, and


other selfish gratifications, it is always easy to restrain for a


single moment, or even for a short period of time; but, by their


continual solicitations, they often mislead us into many


weaknesses which we have afterwards much reason to be ashamed of.


The former set of passions may often be said to drive, the


latter, to seduce us from our duty. The command of the former


was, by the ancient moralists above alluded to, denominated


fortitude, manhood, and strength of mind; that of the latter,


temperance, decency, modesty, and moderation.


    The command of each of those two sets of passions,


independent of the beauty which it derives from its utility; from


its enabling us upon all occasions to act according to the


dictates of prudence, of justice, and of proper benevolence; has


a beauty of its own, and seems to deserve for its own sake a


certain degree of esteem and admiration. In the one case, the


strength and greatness of the exertion excites some degree of


that esteem and admiration. In the other, the uniformity, the


equality and unremitting steadiness of that exertion.


    The man who, in danger, in torture, upon the approach of


death, preserves his tranquillity unaltered, and suffers no word,


no gesture to escape him which does not perfectly accord with the


feelings of the most indifferent spectator, necessarily commands


a very high degree of admiration. If he suffers in the cause of


liberty and justice, for the sake of humanity and the love of his


country, the most tender compassion for his sufferings, the


strongest indignation against the injustice of his persecutors,


the warmest sympathetic gratitude for his beneficent intentions,


the highest sense of his merit, all join and mix themselves with


the admiration of his magnanimity, and often inflame that


sentiment into the most enthusiastic and rapturous veneration.


The heroes of ancient and modern history, who are remembered with


the most peculiar favour and affection, are, many of them, those


who, in the cause of truth, liberty, and justice, have perished


upon the scaffold, and who behaved there with that ease and


dignity which became them. Had the enemies of Socrates suffered


him to die quietly in his bed, the glory even of that great


philosopher might possibly never have acquired that dazzling


splendour in which it has been beheld in all succeeding ages. In


the english history, when we look over the illustrious heads


which have been engraven by Vertue and Howbraken, there is scarce


any body, I imagine, who does not feel that the axe, the emblem


of having been beheaded, which is engraved under some of the most


illustrious of them. under those of the Sir Thomas Mores, of the


Rhaleighs, the Russels, the Sydneys, etc. sheds a real dignity


and interestingness over the characters to which it is affixed,


much superior to what they can derive from all the futile


ornaments of heraldry, with which they are sometimes accompanied.


    Nor does this magnanimity give lustre only to the characters


of innocent and virtuous men. It draws some degree of favourable


regard even upon those of the greatest criminals; and when a


robber or highwayman is brought to the scaffold, and behaves


there with decency and firmness, though we perfectly approve of


his punishment, we often cannot help regretting that a man who


possessed such great and noble powers should have been capable of


such mean enormities.


    War is the great school both for acquiring and exercising


this species of magnanimity. Death, as we say, is the king of


terrors; and the man who has conquered the fear of death, is not


likely to lose his presence of mind at the approach of any other


natural evil. In war, men become Familiar with death, and are


thereby necessarily cured of that superstitious horror with which


it is viewed by the weak and unexperienced. They consider it


merely as the loss of life, and as no further the object of


aversion than as life may happen to be that of desire. They learn


from experience, too, that many seemingly great dangers are not


so great as they appear; and that, with courage, activity, and


presence of mind, there is often a good probability of


extricating themselves with honour from situations where at first


they could see no hope. The dread of death is thus greatly


diminished; and the confidence or hope of escaping it, augmented.


They learn to expose themselves to danger with less reluctance.


They are less anxious to get out of it, and less apt to lose


their presence of mind while they are in it. It is this habitual


contempt of danger and death which ennobles the profession of a


soldier, and bestows upon it, in the natural apprehensions of


mankind, a rank and dignity superior to that of any other


profession. The skilful and successful exercise of this


profession, in the service of their country, seems to have


constituted the most distinguishing feature in the character of


the favourite heroes of all ages.


    Great warlike exploit, though undertaken contrary to every


principle of justice, and carried on without any regard to


humanity, sometimes interests us, and commands even some degree


of a certain sort of esteem for the very worthless characters


which conduct it. We are interested even in the exploits of the


Buccaneers; and read with some sort of esteem and admiration, the


history of the most worthless men, who, in pursuit of the most


criminal purposes, endured greater hardships, surmounted greater


difficulties, and encountered greater dangers, than, perhaps, any


which the ordinary course of history gives an account of.


    The command of anger appears upon many occasions not less


generous and noble than that of fear. The proper expression of


just indignation composes many of the most splendid and admired


passages both of ancient and modern eloquence. The Philippics of


Demosthenes, the Catalinarians of Cicero, derive their whole


beauty from the noble propriety with which this passion is


expressed. But this just indignation is nothing but anger


restrained and properly attempered to what the impartial


spectator can enter into. The blustering and noisy passion which


goes beyond this, is always odious and offensive, and interests


us, not for the angry man, but for the man with whom he is angry.


The nobleness of pardoning appears, upon many occasions, superior


even to the most perfect propriety of resenting. When either


proper acknowledgments have been made by the offending party; or,


even without any such acknowledgments, when the public interest


requires that the most mortal enemies should unite for the


discharge of some important duty, the man who can cast away all


animosity, and act with confidence and cordiality towards the


person who had most grievously offended him, seems justly to


merit our highest admiration.


    The command of anger, however, does not always appear in such


splendid colours. Fear is contrary to anger, and is often the


motive which restrains it; and in such cases the meanness of the


motive takes away all the nobleness of the restraint. Anger


prompts to attack, and the indulgence of it seems sometimes to


shew a sort of courage and superiority to fear. The indulgence of


anger is sometimes an object of vanity. That of fear never is.


Vain and weak men, among their inferiors, or those who dare not


resist them, often affect to be ostentatiously passionate, and


fancy that they show, what is called, spirit in being so. A bully


tells many stories of his own insolence, which are not true, and


imagines that he thereby renders himself, if not more amiable and


respectable, at least more formidable to his audience. Modern


manners, which, by favouring the practice of duelling, may be


said, in some cases, to encourage private revenge, contribute,


perhaps, a good deal to render, in modern times, the restraint of


anger by fear still more contemptible than it might otherwise


appear to be. There is always something dignified in the command


of fear, whatever may be the motive upon which it is founded. It


is not so with the command of anger. Unless it is founded


altogether in the sense of decency, of dignity, and propriety, it


never is perfectly agreeable.


    To act according to the dictates of prudence, of justice, and


proper beneficence, seems to have no great merit where there is


no temptation to do otherwise. But to act with cool deliberation


in the midst of the greatest dangers and difficulties; to observe


religiously the sacred rules of justice in spite both of the


greatest interests which might tempt, and the greatest injuries


which might provoke us to violate them; never to suffer the


benevolence of our temper to be damped or discouraged by the


malignity and ingratitude of the individuals towards whom it may


have been exercised; is the character of the most exalted wisdom


and virtue. Self-command is not only itself a great virtue, but


from it all the other virtues seem to derive their principal


lustre.


    The command of fear, the command of anger, are always great


and noble powers. When they are directed by justice and


benevolence, they are not only great virtues, but increase the


splendour of those other virtues. They may, however, sometimes be


directed by very different motives; and in this case, though


still great and respectable, they may be excessively dangerous.


The most intrepid valour may be employed in the cause of the


greatest injustice. Amidst great provocations, apparent


tranquillity and good humour may sometimes conceal the most


determined and cruel resolution to revenge. The strength of mind


requisite for such dissimulation, though always and necessarily


contaminated by the baseness of falsehood, has, however, been


often much admired by many people of no contemptible judgment.


The dissimulation of Catharine of Medicis is often celebrated by


the profound historian Davila; that of Lord Digby, afterwards


Earl of Bristol, by the grave and conscientious Lord Clarendon;


that of the first Ashley Earl of Shaftesbury, by the judicious Mr


Locke. Even Cicero seems to consider this deceitful character,


not indeed as of the highest dignity, but as not unsuitable to a


certain flexibility of manners, which, he thinks, may,


notwithstanding, be, upon the whole, both agreeable and


respectable. He exemplifies it by the characters of Homer's


Ulysses, of the Athenian Themistocles, of the Spartan Lysander,


and of the Roman Marcus Crassus. This character of dark and deep


dissimulation occurs most commonly in times of great public


disorder; amidst the violence of faction and civil war. When law


has become in a great measure impotent, when the most perfect


innocence cannot alone insure safety, regard to self-defence


obliges the greater part of men to have recourse to dexterity, to


address, and to apparent accommodation to whatever happens to be,


at the moment, the prevailing party. This false character, too,


is frequently accompanied with the coolest and most determined


courage. The proper exercise of it supposes that courage, as


death is commonly the certain consequence of detection. It may be


employed indifferently, either to exasperate or to allay those


furious animosities of adverse factions which impose the


necessity of assuming it; and though it may sometimes be useful,


it is at least equally liable to be excessively pernicious.


    The command of the less violent and turbulent passions seems


much less liable to be abused to any pernicious purpose.


Temperance, decency, modesty, and moderation, are always amiable,


and can seldom be directed to any bad end. It is from the


unremitting steadiness of those gentler exertions of


self-command, that the amiable virtue of chastity, that the


respectable virtues of industry and frugality, derive all that


sober lustre which attends them. The conduct of all those who are


contented to walk in the humble paths of private and peaceable


life, derives from the same principle the greater part of the


beauty and grace which belong to it; a beauty and grace, which,


though much less dazzling, is not always less pleasing than those


which accompany the more splendid actions of the hero, the


statesman, or the legislator.


    After what has already been said, in several different parts


of this discourse, concerning the nature of self-command, I judge


it unnecessary to enter into any further detail concerning those


virtues. I shall only observe at present, that the point of


propriety, the degree of any passion which the impartial


spectator approves of, is differently situated in different


passions. In some passions the excess is less disagreeable than


the defect; and in such passions the point of propriety seems to


stand high, or nearer to the excess than to the defect. In other


passions, the defect is less disagreeable than the excess; and in


such passions the point of propriety seems to stand low, or


nearer to the defect than to the excess. The former are the


passions which the spectator is most, the latter, those which he


is least disposed to sympathize with. The former, too, are the


passions of which the immediate feeling or sensation is agreeable


to the person principally concerned; the latter, those of which


it is disagreeable. It may be laid down as a general rule, that


the passions which the spectator is most disposed to sympathize


with, and in which, upon that account, the point of propriety may


be said to stand high, are those of which the immediate feeling


or sensation is more or less agreeable to the person principally


concerned: and that, on the contrary, the passions which the


spectator is least disposed to sympathize with, and in which,


upon that account, the point of propriety may be said to stand


low, are those of which the immediate feeling or sensation is


more or less disagreeable, or even painful, to the person


principally concerned. This general rule, so far as I have been


able to observe, admits not of a single exception. A few examples


will at once, both sufficiently explain it and demonstrate the


truth of it.


    The disposition to the affections which tend to unite men in


society, to humanity, kindness, natural affection, friendship,


esteem, may sometimes be excessive. Even the excess of this


disposition, however, renders a man interesting to every body.


Though we blame it, we still regard it with compassion, and even


with kindness, and never with dislike. We are more sorry for it


than angry at it. To the person himself, the indulgence even of


such excessive affections is, upon many occasions, not only


agreeable, but delicious. Upon some occasions, indeed, especially


when directed, as is too often the case, towards unworthy


objects, it exposes him to much real and heartfelt distress. Even


upon such occasions, however, a well-disposed mind regards him


with the most exquisite pity, and feels the highest indignation


against those who affect to despise him for his weakness and


imprudence. The defect of this disposition, on the contrary, what


is called hardness of heart, while it renders a man insensible to


the feelings and distresses of other people, renders other people


equally insensible to his; and, by excluding him from the


friendship of all the world, excludes him from the best and most


comfortable of all social enjoyments.


    The disposition to the affections which drive men from one


another, and which tend, as it were, to break the bands of human


society; the disposition to anger, hatred, envy, malice, revenge;


is, on the contrary, much more apt to offend by its excess than


by its defect. The excess renders a man wretched and miserable in


his own mind, and the object of hatred, and sometimes even of


horror, to other people. The defect is very seldom complained of.


It may, however, be defective. The want of proper indignation is


a most essential defect in the manly character, and, upon many


occasions, renders a man incapable of protecting either himself


or his friends from insult and injustice. Even that principle, in


the excess and improper direction of which consists the odious


and detestable passion of envy, may be defective. Envy is that


passion which views with malignant dislike the superiority of


those who are really entitled to all the superiority they


possess. The man, however, who, in matters of consequence, tamely


suffers other people, who are entitled to no such superiority, to


rise above him or get before him, is justly condemned as


mean-spirited. This weakness is commonly founded in indolence,


sometimes in good nature, in an aversion to opposition, to bustle


and solicitation, and sometimes, too, in a sort of ill-judged


magnanimity, which fancies that it can always continue to despise


the advantage which it then despises, and, therefore, so easily


gives up. Such weakness, however, is commonly followed by much


regret and repentance; and what had some appearance of


magnanimity in the beginning frequently gives place to a most


malignant envy in the end, and to a hatred of that superiority,


which those who have once attained it, may often become really


entitled to, by the very circumstance of having attained it. In


order to live comfortably in the world, it is, upon all


occasions, as necessary to defend our dignity and rank, as it is


to defend our life or our fortune.


    Our sensibility to personal danger and distress, like that to


personal provocation, is much more apt to offend by its excess


than by its defect. No character is more contemptible than that


of a coward; no character is more admired than that of the man


who faces death with intrepidity, and maintains his tranquillity


and presence of mind amidst the most dreadful dangers. We esteem


the man who supports pain and even torture with manhood and


firmness; and we can have little regard for him who sinks under


them, and abandons himself to useless outcries and womanish


lamentations. A fretful temper, which feels, with too much


sensibility, every little cross accident, renders a man miserable


in himself and offensive to other people. A calm one, which does


not allow its tranquillity to be disturbed, either by the small


injuries, or by the little disasters incident to the usual course


of human affairs; but which, amidst the natural and moral evils


infesting the world, lays its account and is contented to suffer


a little from both, is a blessing to the man himself, and gives


ease and security to all his companions.


    Our sensibility, however, both to our own injuries and to our


own misfortunes, though generally too strong, may likewise be too


weak. The man who feels little for his own misfortunes must


always feel less for those of other people, and be less disposed


to relieve them. The man who has little resentment for the


injuries which are done to himself, must always have less for


those which are done to other people, and be less disposed either


to protect or to avenge them. A stupid insensibility to the


events of human life necessarily extinguishes all that keen and


earnest attention to the propriety of our own conduct, which


constitutes the real essence of virtue. We can feel little


anxiety about the propriety of our own actions, when we are


indifferent about the events which may result from them. The man


who feels the full distress of the calamity which has befallen


him, who feels the whole baseness of the injustice which has been


done to him, but who feels still more strongly what the dignity


of his own character requires; who does not abandon himself to


the guidance of the undisciplined passions which his situation


might naturally inspire; but who governs his whole behaviour and


conduct according to those restrained and corrected emotions


which the great inmate, the great demi-god within the breast


prescribes and approves of; is alone the real man of virtue, the


only real and proper object of love, respect, and admiration.


Insensibility and that noble firmness, that exalted self-command,


which is founded in the sense of dignity and propriety, are so


far from being altogether the same, that in proportion as the


former takes place, the merit of the latter is, in many cases,


entirely taken away.


    But though the total want of sensibility to personal injury,


to personal danger and distress, would, in such situations, take


away the whole merit of self-command, that sensibility, however,


may very easily be too exquisite, and it frequently is so. When


the sense of propriety, when the authority of the judge within


the breast, can control this extreme sensibility, that authority


must no doubt appear very noble and very great. But the exertion


of it may be too fatiguing; it may have too much to do. The


individual, by a great effort, may behave perfectly well. But the


contest between the two principles, the warfare within the


breast, may be too violent to be at all consistent with internal


tranquillity and happiness. The wise man whom Nature has endowed


with this too exquisite sensibility, and whose too lively


feelings have not been sufficiently blunted and hardened by early


education and proper exercise, will avoid, as much as duty and


propriety will permit, the situations for which he is not


perfectly fitted. The man whose feeble and delicate constitution


renders him too sensible to pain, to hardship, and to every sort


of bodily distress, should not wantonly embrace the profession of


a soldier. The man of too much sensibility to injury, should not


rashly engage in the contests of faction. Though the sense of


propriety should be strong enough to command all those


sensibilities, the composure of the mind must always be disturbed


in the struggle. In this disorder the judgment cannot always


maintain its ordinary acuteness and precision; and though he may


always mean to act properly, he may often act rashly and


imprudently, and in a manner which he himself will, in the


succeeding part of his life, be for ever ashamed of. A certain


intrepidity, a certain firmness of nerves and hardiness of


constitution, whether natural or acquired, are undoubtedly the


best preparatives for all the great exertions of self-command.


    Though war and faction are certainly the best schools for


forming every man to this hardiness and firmness of temper,


though they are the best remedies for curing him of the opposite


weaknesses, yet, if the day of trial should happen to come before


he has completely learned his lesson, before the remedy has had


time to produce its proper effect, the consequences might not be


agreeable.


    Our sensibility to the pleasures, to the amusements and


enjoyments of human life, may offend, in the same manner, either


by its excess or by its defect. Of the two, however, the excess


seems less disagreeable than the defect. Both to the spectator


and to the person principally concerned, a strong propensity to


joy is certainly more pleasing than a dull insensibility to the


objects of amusement and diversion. We are charmed with the


gaiety of youth, and even with the playfulness of childhood: but


we soon grow weary of the flat and tasteless gravity which too


frequently accompanies old age. When this propensity, indeed, is


not restrained by the sense of propriety, when it is unsuitable


to the time or to the place, to the age or to the situation of


the person, when, to indulge it, he neglects either his interest


or his duty; it is justly blamed as excessive, and as hurtful


both to the individual and to the society. In the greater part of


such cases, however, what is chiefly to be found fault with is,


not so much the strength of the propensity to joy, as the


weakness of the sense of propriety and duty. A young man who has


no relish for the diversions and amusements that are natural and


suitable to his age, who talks of nothing but his book or his


business, is disliked as formal and pedantic; and we give him no


credit for his abstinence even from improper indulgences, to


which he seems to have so little inclination.


    The principle of self-estimation may be too high, and it may


likewise be too low. It is so very agreeable to think highly, and


so very disagreeable to think meanly of ourselves, that, to the


person himself, it cannot well be doubted, but that some degree


of excess must be much less disagreeable than any degree of


defect. But to the impartial spectator, it may perhaps be


thought, things must appear quite differently, and that to him,


the defect must always be less disagreeable than the excess. And


in our companions, no doubt, we much more frequently complain of


the latter than of the former. When they assume upon us, or set


themselves before us, their self-estimation mortifies our own.


Our own pride and vanity prompt us to accuse them of pride and


vanity, and we cease to be the impartial spectators of their


conduct. When the same companions, however, suffer any other man


to assume over them a superiority which does not belong to him,


we not only blame them, but often despise them as mean-spirited.


When, on the contrary, among other people, they push themselves a


little more forward, and scramble to an elevation


disproportioned, as we think, to their merit, though we may not


perfectly approve of their conduct, we are often, upon the whole,


diverted with it; and, where there is no envy in the case, we are


almost always much less displeased with them, than we should have


been, had they suffered themselves to sink below their proper


station.


    In estimating our own merit, in judging of our own character


and conduct, there are two different standards to which we


naturally compare them. The one is the idea of exact propriety


and perfection, so far as we are each of us capable of


comprehending that idea. The other is that degree of


approximation to this idea which is commonly attained in the


world, and which the greater part of our friends and companions,


of our rivals and competitors, may have actually arrived at. We


very seldom (I am disposed to think, we never) attempt to judge


of ourselves without giving more or less attention to both these


different standards. But the attention of different men, and even


of the same man at different times, is often very unequally


divided between them; and is sometimes principally directed


towards the one, and sometimes towards the other.


    So far as our attention is directed towards the first


standard, the wisest and best of us all, can, in his own


character and conduct, see nothing but weakness and imperfection;


can discover no ground for arrogance and presumption, but a great


deal for humility, regret and repentance. So far as our attention


is directed towards the second, we may be affected either in the


one way or in the other, and feel ourselves, either really above,


or really below, the standard to which we compare ourselves.


    The wise and virtuous man directs his principal attention to


the first standard; the idea of exact propriety and perfection.


There exists in the mind of every man, an idea of this kind,


gradually formed from his observations upon the character and


conduct both of himself and of other people. It is the slow,


gradual, and progressive work of the great demigod within the


breast, the great judge and arbiter of conduct. This idea is in


every man more or less accurately drawn, its colouring is more or


less just, its outlines are more or less exactly designed,


according to the delicacy and acuteness of that sensibility, with


which those observations were made, and according to the care and


attention employed in making them. In the wise and virtuous man


they have been made with the most acute and delicate sensibility,


and the utmost care and attention have been employed in making


them. Every day some feature is improved; every day some blemish


is corrected. He has studied this idea more than other people, he


comprehends it more distinctly, he has formed a much more correct


image of it, and is much more deeply enamoured of its exquisite


and divine beauty. He endeavours as well as he can, to assimilate


his own character to this archetype of perfection. But he


imitates the work of a divine artist, which can never be


equalled. He feels the imperfect success of all his best


endeavours, and sees, with grief and affliction, in how many


different features the mortal copy falls short of the immortal


original. He remembers, with concern and humilation, how often,


from want of attention, from want of judgment, from want of


temper, he has, both in words and actions, both in conduct and


conversation, violated the exact rules of perfect propriety; and


has so far departed from that model, according to which he wished


to fashion his own character and conduct. When he directs his


attention towards the second standard, indeed, that degree of


excellence which his friends and acquaintances have commonly


arrived at, he may be sensible of his own superiority. But, as


his principal attention is always directed towards the first


standard, he is necessarily much more humbled by the one


comparison, than he ever can be elevated by the other. He is


never so elated as to look down with insolence even upon those


who are really below him. He feels so well his own imperfection,


he knows so well the difficulty with which he attained his own


distant approximation to rectitude, that he cannot regard with


contempt the still greater imperfection of other people. Far from


insulting over their inferiority, he views it with the most


indulgent commiseration, and, by his advice as well as example,


is at all times willing to promote their further advancement. If,


in any particular qualification, they happen to be superior to


him (for who is so perfect as not to have many superiors in many


different qualifications?), far from envying their superiority,


he, who knows how difficult it is to excel, esteems and honours


their excellence, and never fails to bestow upon it the full


measure of applause which it deserves. His whole mind, in short,


is deeply impressed, his whole behaviour and deportment are


distinctly stamped with the character of real modesty; with that


of a very moderate estimation of his own merit, and, at the same


time, of a full sense of the merit of other people.


    In all the liberal and ingenious arts, in painting, in


poetry, in music, in eloquence, in philosophy, the great artist


feels always the real imperfection of his own best works, and is


more sensible than any man how much they fall short of that ideal


perfection of which he has formed some conception, which he


imitates as well as he can, but which he despairs of ever


equalling. It is the inferior artist only, who is ever perfectly


satisfied with his own performances. He has little conception of


this ideal perfection, about which he has little employed his


thoughts; and it is chiefly to the works of other artists, of,


perhaps, a still lower order, that he deigns to compare his own


works. Boileau, the great French poet (in some of his works,


perhaps not inferior to the greatest poet of the same kind,


either ancient or modern), used to say, that no great man was


ever completely satisfied with his own works. His acquaintance


Santeuil (a writer of Latin verses, and who, on account of that


schoolboy accomplishment, had the weakness to fancy himself a


poet), assured him, that he himself was always completely


satisfied with his own. Boileau replied, with, perhaps, an arch


ambiguity, that he certainly was the only great man that ever was


so. Boileau, in judging of his own works, compared them with the


standard of ideal perfection, which, in his own particular branch


of the poetic art, he had, I presume, meditated as deeply, and


conceived as distinctly, as it is possible for man to conceive


it. Santeuil, in judging of his own works, compared them, I


suppose, chiefly to those of the other Latin poets of his own


time, to the greater part of whom he was certainly very far from


being inferior. But to support and finish off, if I may say so,


the conduct and conversation of a whole life to some resemblance


of this ideal perfection, is surely much more difficult than to


work up to an equal resemblance any of the productions of any of


the ingenious arts. The artist sits down to his work undisturbed,


at leisure, in the full possession and recollection of all his


skill, experience, and knowledge. The wise man must support the


propriety of his own conduct in health and in sickness, in


success and in disappointment, in the hour of fatigue and drowsy


indolence, as well as in that of the most awakened attention. The


most sudden and unexpected assaults of difficulty and distress


must never surprise him. The injustice of other people must never


provoke him to injustice. The violence of faction must never


confound him. All the hardships and hazards of war must never


either dishearten or appal him.


    Of the persons who, in estimating their own merit, in judging


of their own character and conduct, direct by far the greater


part of their attention to the second standard, to that ordinary


degree of excellence which is commonly attained by other people,


there are some who really and justly feel themselves very much


above it, and who, by every intelligent and impartial spectator,


are acknowledged to be so. The attention of such persons,


however, being always principally directed, not to the standard


of ideal, but to that of ordinary perfection, they have little


sense of their own weaknesses and imperfections; they have little


modesty; are often assuming, arrogant, and presumptuous; great


admirers of themselves, and great contemners of other people.


Though their characters are in general much less correct, and


their merit much inferior to that of the man of real and modest


virtue; yet their excessive presumption, founded upon their own


excessive self-admiration, dazzles the multitude, and often


imposes even upon those who are much superior to the multitude.


The frequent, and often wonderful, success of the most ignorant


quacks and imposters, both civil and religious, sufficiently


demonstrate how easily the multitude are imposed upon by the most


extravagant and groundless pretensions. But when those


pretensions are supported by a very high degree of real and solid


merit, when they are displayed with all the splendour which


ostentation can bestow upon them, when they are supported by high


rank and great power, when they have often been successfully


exerted, and are, upon that account, attended by the loud


acclamations of the multitude; even the man of sober judgment


often abandons himself to the general admiration. The very noise


of those foolish acclamations often contributes to confound his


understanding, and while he sees those great men only at a


certain distance, he is often disposed to worship them with a


sincere admiration, superior even to that with which they appear


to worship themselves. When there is no envy in the case, we all


take pleasure in admiring, and are, upon that account, naturally


disposed, in our own fancies, to render complete and perfect in


every respect the characters which, in many respects, are so very


worthy of admiration. The excessive self-admiration of those


great men is well understood, perhaps, and even seen through,


with some degree of derision, by those wise men who are much in


their familiarity, and who secretly smile at those lofty


pretensions, which, by people at a distance, are often regarded


with reverence, and almost with adoration. Such, however, have


been, in all ages, the greater part of those men who have


procured to themselves the most noisy fame, the most extensive


reputation; a fame and reputation, too, which have often


descended to the remotest posterity.


    Great success in the world, great authority over the


sentiments and opinions of mankind, have very seldom been


acquired without some degree of this excessive self-admiration.


The most splendid characters, the men who have performed the most


illustrious actions, who have brought about the greatest


revolutions, both in the situations and opinions of mankind; the


most successful warriors, the greatest statesmen and legislators,


the eloquent founders and leaders of the most numerous and most


successful sects and parties; have many of them been, not more


distinguished for their very great merit, than for a degree of


presumption and self-admiration altogether disproportioned even


to that very great merit. This presumption was, perhaps,


necessary, not only to prompt them to undertakings which a more


sober mind would never have thought of, but to command the


submission and obedience of their followers to support them in


such undertakings. When crowned with success, accordingly, this


presumption has often betrayed them into a vanity that approached


almost to insanity and folly. Alexander the Great appears, not


only to have wished that other people should think him a God, but


to have been at least very well disposed to fancy himself such.


Upon his death-bed, the most ungodlike of all situations, he


requested of his friends that, to the respectable list of


Deities, into which himself had long before been inserted, his


old mother Olympia might likewise have the honour of being added.


Amidst the respectful admiration of his followers and disciples,


amidst the universal applause of the public, after the oracle,


which probably had followed the voice of that applause, had


pronounced him the wisest of men, the great wisdom of Socrates,


though it did not suffer him to fancy himself a God, yet was not


great enough to hinder him from fancying that he had secret and


frequent intimations from some invisible and divine Being. The


sound head of Caesar was not so perfectly sound as to hinder him


from being much pleased with his divine genealogy from the


goddess Venus; and, before the temple of this pretended


great-grandmother, to receive, without rising from his seat, the


Roman Senate, when that illustrious body came to present him with


some decrees conferring upon him the most extravagant honours.


This insolence, joined to some other acts of an almost childish


vanity, little to be expected from an understanding at once so


very acute and comprehensive, seems, by exasperating the public


jealousy, to have emboldened his assassins, and to have hastened


the execution of their conspiracy. The religion and manners of


modern times give our great men little encouragement to fancy


themselves either Gods or even Prophets. Success, however, joined


to great popular favour, has often so far turned the heads of the


greatest of them, as to make them ascribe to themselves both an


importance and an ability much beyond what they really possessed;


and, by this presumption, to precipitate themselves into many


rash and sometimes ruinous adventures. It is a characteristic


almost peculiar to the great Duke of Marlborough, that ten years


of such uninterrupted and such splendid success as scarce any


other general could boast of, never betrayed him into a single


rash action, scarce into a single rash word or expression. The


same temperate coolness and self-command cannot, I think, be


ascribed to any other great warrior of later times; not to Prince


Eugene, not to the late King of Prussia, not to the great Prince


of Conde, not even to Gustavus Adolphus. Turrenne seems to have


approached the nearest to it; but several different transactions


of his life sufficiently demonstrate that it was in him by no


means so perfect as in the great Duke of Marlborough.


    In the humble project of private life, as well as in the


ambitious and proud pursuit of high stations, great abilities and


successful enterprise, in the beginning, have frequently


encouraged to undertakings which necessarily led to bankruptcy


and ruin in the end.


    The esteem and admiration which every impartial spectator


conceives for the real merit of those spirited, magnanimous, and


high-minded persons, as it is a just and well-founded sentiment,


so it is a steady and permanent one, and altogether independent


of their good or bad fortune. It is otherwise with that


admiration which he is apt to conceive for their excessive


self-estimation and presumption. While they are successful,


indeed, he is often perfectly conquered and overborne by them.


Success covers from his eyes, not only the great imprudence, but


frequently the great injustice of their enterprises; and, far


from blaming this defective part of their character, he often


views it with the most enthusiastic admiration. When they are


unfortunate, however, things change their colours and their


names. What was before heroic magnanimity, resumes its proper


appellation of extravagant rashness and folly; and the blackness


of that avidity and injustice, which was before hid under the


splendour of prosperity, comes full into view, and blots the


whole lustre of their enterprise. Had Caesar, instead of gaining,


lost the battle of Pharsalia, his character would, at this hour,


have ranked a little above that of Catiline, and the weakest man


would have viewed his enterprise against the laws of his country


in blacker colours, than, perhaps, even Cato, with all the


animosity of a party-man, ever viewed it at the time. His real


merit, the justness of his taste, the simplicity and elegance of


his writings, the propriety of his eloquence, his skill in war,


his resources in distress, his cool and sedate judgment in


danger, his faithful attachment to his friends, his unexampled


generosity to his enemies, would all have been acknowledged; as


the real merit of Catiline, who had many great qualities, is


acknowledged at this day. But the insolence and injustice of his


all-grasping ambition would have darkened and extinguished the


glory of all that real merit. Fortune has in this, as well as in


some other respects already mentioned, great influence over the


moral sentiments of mankind, and, according as she is either


favourable or adverse, can render the same character the object,


either of general love and admiration, or of universal hatred and


contempt. This great disorder in our moral sentiments is by no


means, however, without its utility; and we may on this, as well


as on many other occasions, admire the wisdom of God even in the


weakness and folly of man. Our admiration of success is founded


upon the same principle with our respect for wealth and


greatness, and is equally necessary for establishing the


distinction of ranks and the order of society. By this admiration


of success we are taught to submit more easily to those


superiors, whom the course of human affairs may assign to us; to


regard with reverence, and sometimes even with a sort of


respectful affection, that fortunate violence which we are no


longer capable of resisting; not only the violence of such


splendid characters as those of a Caesar or an Alexander, but


often that of the most brutal and savage barbarians, of an


Attila, a Gengis, or a Tamerlane. To all such mighty conquerors


the great mob of mankind are naturally disposed to look up with a


wondering, though, no doubt, with a very weak and foolish


admiration. By this admiration, however, they are taught to


acquiesce with less reluctance under that government which an


irresistible force imposes upon them, and from which no


reluctance could deliver them.


    Though in prosperity, however, the man of excessive


self-estimation may sometimes appear to have some advantage over


the man of correct and modest virtue; though the applause of the


multitude, and of those who see them both only at a distance, is


often much louder in favour of the one than it ever is in favour


of the other; yet, all things fairly computed, the real balance


of advantage is, perhaps in all cases, greatly in favour of the


latter and against the former. The man who neither ascribes to


himself, nor wishes that other people should ascribe to him, any


other merit besides that which really belongs to him, fears no


humiliation, dreads no detection; but rests contented and secure


upon the genuine truth and solidity of his own character. His


admirers may neither be very numerous nor very loud in their


applauses; but the wisest man who sees him the nearest and who


knows him the best, admires him the most. To a real wise man the


judicious and well-weighed approbation of a single wise man,


gives more heartfelt satisfaction than all the noisy applauses of


ten thousand ignorant though enthusiastic admirers. He may say


with Parmenides, who, upon reading a philosophical discourse


before a public assembly at Athens, and observing, that, except


Plato, the whole company had left him, continued,


notwithstanding, to read on, and said that Plato alone was


audience sufficient for him.


    It is otherwise with the man of excessive self-estimation.


The wise men who see him the nearest, admire him the least.


Amidst the intoxication of prosperity, their sober and just


esteem falls so far short of the extravagance of his own


self-admiration, that he regards it as mere malignity and envy.


He suspects his best friends. Their company becomes offensive to


him. He drives them from his presence, and often rewards their


services, not only with ingratitude, but with cruelty and


injustice. He abandons his confidence to flatterers and traitors,


who pretend to idolize his vanity and presumption; and that


character which in the beginning, though in some respects


defective, was, upon the whole, both amiable and respectable,


becomes contemptible and odious in the end. Amidst the


intoxication of prosperity, Alexander killed Clytus, for having


preferred the exploits of his father Philip to his own; put


Calisthenes to death in torture, for having refused to adore him


in the Persian manner; and murdered the great friend of his


father, the venerable Parmenio, after having, upon the most


groundless suspicions, sent first to the torture and afterwards


to the scaffold the only remaining son of that old man, the rest


having all before died in his own service. This was that Parmenio


of whom Philip used to say, that the Athenians were very


fortunate who could find ten generals every year, while he


himself, in the whole course of his life, could never find one


but Parmenio. It was upon the vigilance and attention of this


Parmenio that he reposed at all times with confidence and


security, and, in his hours of mirth and jollity, used to say,


Let us drink, my friends, we may do it with safety, for Parmenio


never drinks. It was this same Parmenio, with whose presence and


counsel, it had been said, Alexander had gained all his


victories; and without whose presence and counsel, he had never


gained a single victory. The humble, admiring, and flattering


friends, whom Alexander left in power and authority behind him,


divided his empire among themselves, and after having thus robbed


his family and kindred of their inheritance, put, one after


another, every single surviving individual of them, whether male


or female, to death.


    We frequently, not only pardon, but thoroughly enter into and


sympathize with the excessive self-estimation of those splendid


characters in which we observe a great and distinguished


superiority above the common level of mankind. We call them


spirited, magnanimous, and high-minded; words which all involve


in their meaning a considerable degree of praise and admiration.


But we cannot enter into anD sympathize with the excessive


self-estimation of those characters in which we can discern no


such distinguished superiority. We are disgusted and revolted by


it; and it is with some difficulty that we can either pardon or


suffer it: We call it pride or vanity; two words, of which the


latter always, and the former for the most part, involve in their


meaning a considerable degree of blame.


    Those two vices, however, though resembling, in some


respects, as being both modifications of excessive


self-estimation, are yet, in many respects, very different from


one another.


    The proud man is sincere, and, in the bottom of his heart, is


convinced of his own superiority; though it may sometimes be


difficult to guess upon what that conviction is founded. He


wishes you to view him in no other light than that in which, when


he places himself in your situation, he really views himself. He


demands no more of you than, what he thinks, justice. If you


appear not to respect him as he respects himself, he is more


offended than mortified, and feels the same indignant resentment


as if he had suffered a real injury. He does not even then,


however, deign to explain the grounds of his own pretensions. He


disdains to court your esteem. He affects even to despise it, and


endeavours to maintain his assumed station, not so much by making


you sensible of his superiority, as of your own meanness. He


seems to wish, not so much to excite your esteem for himself as


to mortify that for yourself.


    The vain man is not sincere, and, in the bottom of his heart,


is very seldom convinced of that superiority which he wishes you


to ascribe to him. He wishes you to view him in much more


splendid colours than those in which, when he places himself in


your situation, and supposes you to know all that he knows, he


can really view himself. When you appear to view him, therefore,


in different colours, perhaps in his proper colours, he is much


more mortified than offended. The grounds of his claim to that


character which he wishes you to ascribe to him, he takes every


opportunity of displaying, both by the most ostentatious and


unnecessary exhibition of the good qualities and accomplishments


which he possesses in some tolerable degree, and sometimes even


by false pretensions to those which he either possesses in no


degree, or in so very slender a degree that he may well enough be


said to possess them in no degree. Far from despising your


esteem, he courts it with the most anxious assiduity. Far from


wishing to mortify your self-estimation, he is happy to cherish


it, in hopes that in return you will cherish his own. He flatters


in order to be flattered. He studies to please, and endeavours to


bribe you into a good opinion of him by politeness and


complaisance, and sometimes even by real and essential good


offices, though often displayed, perhaps, with unnecessary


ostentation.


    The vain man sees the respect which is paid to rank and


fortune, and wishes to usurp this respect, as well as that for


talents and virtues. His dress, his equipage, his way of living,


accordingly, all announce both a higher rank and a greater


fortune than really belong to him; and in order to support this


foolish imposition for a few years in the beginning of his life,


he often reduces himself to poverty and distress long before the


end of it. As long as he can continue his expence, however, his


vanity is delighted with viewing himself, not in the light in


which you would view him if you knew all that he knows; but in


that in which, he imagines, he has, by his own address, induced


you actually to view him. Of all the illusions of vanity this is,


perhaps, the most common. Obscure strangers who visit foreign


countries, or who, from a remote province, come to visit, for a


short time, the capital of their own country, most frequently


attempt to practise it. The folly of the attempt, though always


very great and most unworthy of a man of sense, may not be


altogether so great upon such as upon most other occasions. If


their stay is short, they may escape any disgraceful detection;


and, after indulging their vanity for a few months or a few


years, they may return to their own homes, and repair, by future


parsimony, the waste of their past profusion.


    The proud man can very seldom be accused of this folly. His


sense of his own dignity renders him careful to preserve his


independency, and, when his fortune happens not to be large,


though he wishes to be decent, he studies to be frugal and


attentive in all his expences. The ostentatious expence of the


vain man is highly offensive to him. It outshines, perhaps, his


own. It provokes his indignation as an insolent assumption of a


rank which is by no means due; and he never talks of it without


loading it with the harshest and severest reproaches.


    The proud man does not always feel himself at his ease in the


company of his equals, and still less in that of his superiors.


He cannot lay down his lofty pretensions, and the countenance and


conversation of such company overawe him so much that he dare not


display them. He has recourse to humbler company, for which he


has little respect, which he would not willingly chuse; and which


is by no means agreeable to him; that of his inferiors, his


flatterers, and dependants. He seldom visits his superiors, or,


if he does, it is rather to show that he is entitled to live in


such company, than for any real satisfaction that he enjoys in


it. It is as Lord Clarendon says of the Earl of Arundel, that he


sometimes went to court, because he could there only find a


greater man than himself; but that he went very seldom, because


he found there a greater man than himself.


    It is quite otherwise with the vain man. He courts the


company of his superiors as much as the proud man shuns it. Their


splendour, he seems to think, reflects a splendour upon those who


are much about them. He haunts the courts of kings and the levees


of ministers, and gives himself the air of being a candidate for


fortune and preferment, when in reality he possesses the much


more precious happiness, if he knew how to enjoy it, of not being


one. He is fond of being admitted to the tables of the great, and


still more fond of magnifying to other people the familiarity


with which he is honoured there. He associates himself, as much


as he can, with fashionable people, with those who are supposed


to direct the public opinion, with the witty, with the learned,


with the popular; and he shuns the company of his best friends


whenever the very uncertain current of public favour happens to


run in any respect against them. With the people to whom he


wishes to recommend himself, he is not always very delicate about


the means which he employs for that purpose; unnecessary


ostentation, groundless pretensions, constant assentation,


frequently flattery, though for the most part a pleasant and a


sprightly flattery, and very seldom the gross and fulsome


flattery of a parasite. The proud man, on the contrary, never


flatters, and is frequently scarce civil to any body.


    Notwithstanding all its groundless pretensions, however,


vanity is almost always a sprightly and a gay, and very often a


good-natured passion. Pride is always a grave, a sullen, and a


severe one. Even the falsehoods of the vain man are all innocent


falsehoods, meant to raise himself, not to lower other people. To


do the proud man justice, he very seldom stoops to the baseness


of falsehood. When he does, however, his falsehoods are by no


means so innocent. They are all mischievous, and meant to lower


other people. He is full of indignation at the unjust


superiority, as he thinks it, which is given to them. He views


them with malignity and envy, and, in talking of them, often


endeavours, as much as he can, to extenuate and lessen whatever


are the grounds upon which their superiority is supposed to be


founded. Whatever tales are circulated to their disadvantage,


though he seldom forges them himself, yet he often takes pleasure


in believing them, is by no means unwilling to repeat them, and


even sometimes with some degree of exaggeration. The worst


falsehoods of vanity are all what we call white lies: those of


pride, whenever it condescends to falsehood, are all of the


opposite complexion.


    Our dislike to pride and vanity generally disposes us to rank


the persons whom we accuse of those vices rather below than above


the common level. In this judgment, however, I think, we are most


frequently in the wrong, and that both the proud and the vain man


are often (perhaps for the most part) a good deal above it;


though not near so much as either the one really thinks himself,


or as the other wishes you to think him. If we compare them with


their own pretensions, they may appear the just objects of


contempt. But when we compare them with what the greater part of


their rivals and competitors really are, they may appear quite


otherwise, and very much above the common level. Where there is


this real superiority, pride is frequently attended with many


respectable virtues; with truth, with integrity, with a high


sense of honour, with cordial and steady friendship, with the


most inflexible firmness and resolution. Vanity, with many


amiable ones; with humanity, with politeness, with a desire to


oblige in all little matters, and sometimes with a real


generosity in great ones; a generosity, however, which it often


wishes to display in the most splendid colours that it can. By


their rivals and enemies, the French, in the last century, were


accused of vanity; the Spaniards, of pride; and foreign nations


were disposed to consider the one as the more amiable; the other,


as the more respectable people.


    The words vain and vanity are never taken in a good sense. We


sometimes say of a man, when we are talking of him in good


humour, that he is the better for his vanity, or that his vanity


is more diverting than offensive; but we still consider it as a


foible and a ridicule in his character.


    The words proud and pride, on the contrary, are sometimes


taken in a good sense. We frequently say of a man, that he is too


proud, or that he has too much noble pride, ever to suffer


himself to do a mean thing. Pride is, in this case, confounded


with magnanimity. Aristotle, a Philosopher who certainly knew the


world, in drawing the character of the magnanimous man, paints


him with many features which, in the two last centuries, were


commonly ascribed to the Spanish character: that he was


deliberate in all his resolutions; slow, and even tardy, in all


his actions; that his voice was grave, his speech deliberate, his


step and motion slow; that he appeared indolent and even


slothful, not at all disposed to bustle about little matters, but


to act with the most determined and vigorous resolution upon all


great and illustrious occasions; that he was not a lover of


danger, or forward to expose himself to little dangers, but to


great dangers; and that, when he exposed himself to danger, he


was altogether regardless of his life.


    The proud man is commonly too well contented with himself to


think that his character requires any amendment. The man who


feels himself all-perfect, naturally enough despises all further


improvement. His self-sufficiency and absurd conceit of his own


superiority, commonly attend him from his youth to his most


advanced age; and he dies, as Hamlet says, with all his sins upon


his head, unanointed, unanealed.


    It is frequently otherwise with the vain man. The desire of


the esteem and admiration of other people, when for qualities and


talents which are the natural and proper objects of esteem and


admiration, is the real love of true glory; a passion which, if


not the very best passion of human nature, is certainly one of


the best. Vanity is very frequently no more than an attempt


prematurely to usurp that glory before it is due. Though your


son, under five-and-twenty years of age, should be but a coxcomb;


do not, upon that account, despair of his becoming, before he is


forty, a very wise and worthy man, and a real proficient in all


those talents and virtues to which, at present, he may only be an


ostentatious and empty pretender. The great secret of education


is to direct vanity to proper objects. Never suffer him to value


himself upon trivial accomplishments. But do not always


discourage his pretensions to those that are of real importance.


He would not pretend to them if he did not earnestly desire to


possess them. encourage this desire; afford him every means to


facilitate the acquisition; and do not take too much offence,


although he should sometimes assume the air of having attained it


a little before the time.


    Such, I say, are the distinguishing characteristics of pride


and vanity, when each of them acts according to its proper


character. But the proud man is often vain; and the vain man is


often proud. Nothing can be more natural than that the man, who


thinks much more highly of himself than he deserves, should wish


that other people should think still more highly of him: or that


the man, who wishes that other people should think more highly of


him than he thinks of himself, should, at the same time, think


much more highly of himself than he deserves. Those two vices


being frequently in the same character, the characteristics of


both are necessarily confounded; and we sometimes find the


superficial and impertinent ostentation of vanity joined to the


most malignant and derisive insolence of pride. We are sometimes,


upon that account, at a loss how to rank a particular character,


or whether to place it among the proud or among the vain.


    Men of merit considerably above the common level, sometimes


underrate as well as over-rate themselves. Such characters,


though not very dignified, are often, in private society, far


from being disagreeable. His companions all feel themselves much


at their ease in the society of a man so perfectly modest and


unassuming. If those companions, however, have not both more


discernment and more generosity than ordinary, though they may


have some kindness for him, they have seldom much respect; and


the warmth of their kindness is very seldom sufficient to


compensate the coldness of their respect. Men of no more than


ordinary discernment never rate any person higher than he appears


to rate himself. He seems doubtful himself, they say, whether he


is perfectly fit for such a situation or such an office; and


immediately give the preference to some impudent blockhead who


entertains no doubt about his own qualifications. Though they


should have discernment, yet, if they want generosity, they never


fail to take advantage of his simplicity, and to assume over him


an impertinent superiority which they are by no means entitled


to. His good-nature may enable him to bear this for some time;


but he grows weary at last, and frequently when it is too late,


and when that rank, which he ought to have assumed, is lost


irrecoverably, and usurped, in consequence of his own


backwardness, by some of his more forward, though much less


meritorious companions. A man of this character must have been


very fortunate in the early choice of his companions, if, in


going through the world, he meets always with fair justice, even


from those whom, from his own past kindness, he might have some


reason to consider as his best friends; and a youth, too


unassuming and too unambitious, is frequently followed by an


insignificant, complaining, and discontented old age.


    Those unfortunate persons whom nature has formed a good deal


below the common level, seem sometimes to rate themselves still


more below it than they really are. This humility appears


sometimes to sink them into idiotism. Whoever has taken the


trouble to examine idiots with attention, will find that, in many


of them, the faculties of the understanding are by no means


weaker than in several other people, who, though acknowledged to


be dull and stupid, are not, by any body, accounted idiots. Many


idiots, with no more than ordinary education, have been taught to


read, write, and account tolerably well. Many persons, never


accounted idiots, notwithstanding the most careful education, and


notwithstanding that, in their advanced age, they have had spirit


enough to attempt to learn what their early education had not


taught them, have never been able to acquire, in any tolerable


degree, any one of those three accomplishments. By an instinct of


pride, however, they set themselves upon a level with their


equals in age and situation; and, with courage and firmness,


maintain their proper station among their companions. By an


opposite instinct, the idiot feels himself below every company


into which you can introduce him. Ill-usage, to which he is


extremely liable, is capable of throwing him into the most


violent fits of rage and fury. But no good usage, no kindness or


indulgence, can ever raise him to converse with you as your


equal. If you can bring him to converse with you at all, however,


you will frequently find his answers sufficiently pertinent, and


even sensible. But they are always stamped with a distinct


consciousness of his own great inferiority. He seems to shrink


and, as it were, to retire from your look and conversation; and


to feel, when he places himself in your situation, that,


notwithstanding your apparent condescension, you cannot help


considering him as immensely below you. Some idiots, perhaps the


greater part, seem to be so, chiefly or altogether, from a


certain numbness or torpidity in the faculties of the


understanding. But there are others, in whom those faculties do


not appear more torpid or benumbed than in many other people who


are not accounted idiots. But that instinct of pride, necessary


to support them upon an equality with their brethren, seems


totally wanting in the former and not in the latter.


    That degree of self-estimation, therefore, which contributes


most to the happiness and contentment of the person himself,


seems likewise most agreeable to the impartial spectator. The man


who esteems himself as he ought, and no more than he ought,


seldom fails to obtain from other people all the esteem that he


himself thinks due. He desires no more than is due to him, and he


rests upon it with complete satisfaction.


    The proud and the vain man, on the contrary, are constantly


dissatisfied. The one is tormented with indignation at the unjust


superiority, as he thinks it, of other people. The other is in


continual dread of the shame which, he foresees, would attend


upon the detection of his groundless pretensions. Even the


extravagant pretensions of the man of real magnanimity, though,


when supported by splendid abilities and virtues, and, above all,


by good fortune, they impose upon the multitude, whose applauses


he little regards, do not impose upon those wise men whose


approbation he can only value, and whose esteem he is most


anxious to acquire. He feels that they see through, and suspects


that they despise his excessive presumption; and he often suffers


the cruel misfortune of becoming, first the jealous and secret,


and at last the open, furious, and vindictive enemy of those very


persons, whose friendship it would have given him the greatest


happiness to enjoy with unsuspicious security.


    Though our dislike to the proud and the vain often disposes


us to rank them rather below than above their proper station,


yet, unless we are provoked by some particular and personal


impertinence, we very seldom venture to use them ill. In common


cases, we endeavour, for our own ease, rather to acquiesce, and,


as well as we can, to accommodate ourselves to their folly. But,


to the man who under-rates himself, unless we have both more


discernment and more generosity than belong to the greater part


of men, we seldom fail to do, at least, all the injustice which


he does to himself, and frequently a great deal more. He is not


only more unhappy in his own feelings than either the proud or


the vain, but he is much more liable to every sort of ill-usage


from other people. In almost all cases, it is better to be a


little too proud, than, in any respect, too humble; and, in the


sentiment of self-estimation, some degree of excess seems, both


to the person and to the impartial spectator, to be less


disagreeable than any degree of defect.


    In this, therefore, as well as in every other emotion,


passion, and habit, the degree that is most agreeable to the


impartial spectator is likewise most agreeable to the person


himself; and according as either the excess or the defect is


least offensive to the former, so, either the one or the other is


in proportion least disagreeable to the latter.





Conclusion of the Sixth Part





    Concern for our own happiness recommends to us the virtue of


prudence: concern for that of other people, the virtues of


justice and beneficence; of which, the one restrains us from


hurting, the other prompts us to promote that happiness.


Independent of any regard either to what are, or to what ought to


be, or to what upon a certain condition would be, the sentiments


of other people, the first of those three virtues is originally


recommended to us by our selfish, the other two by our benevolent


affections. Regard to the sentiments of other people, however,


comes afterwards both to enforce and to direct the practice of


all those virtues; and no man during, either the whole of his


life, or that of any considerable part of it, ever trod steadily


and uniformly in the paths of prudence, of justice, or of proper


beneficence, whose conduct was not principally directed by a


regard to the sentiments of the supposed impartial spectator, of


the great inmate of the breast, the great judge and arbiter of


conduct. If in the course of the day we have swerved in any


respect from the rules which he prescribes to us; if we have


either exceeded or relaxed in our frugality; if we have either


exceeded or relaxed in our industry; if, through passion or


inadvertency, we have hurt in any respect the interest or


happiness of our neighbour; if we have neglected a plain and


proper opportunity of promoting that interest and happiness; it


is this inmate who, in the evening, calls us to an account for


all those omissions and violations, and his reproaches often make


us blush inwardly both for our folly and inattention to our own


happiness, and for our still greater indifference and


inattention, perhaps, to that of other people.


    But though the virtues of prudence, justice, and beneficence,


may, upon different occasions, be recommended to us almost


equally by two different principles; those of self-command are,


upon most occasions, principally and almost entirely recommended


to us by one; by the sense of propriety, by regard to the


sentiments of the supposed impartial spectator. Without the


restraint which this principle imposes, every passion would, upon


most occasions, rush headlong, if I may say so, to its own


gratification. Anger would follow the suggestions of its own


fury; fear those of its own violent agitations. Regard to no time


or place would induce vanity to refrain from the loudest and most


impertinent ostentation; or voluptuousness from the most open,


indecent, and scandalous indulgence. Respect for what are, or for


what ought to be, or for what upon a certain condition would be,


the sentiments of other people, is the sole principle which, upon


most occasions, overawes all those mutinous and turbulent


passions into that tone and temper which the impartial spectator


can enter into and sympathize with.


    Upon some occasions, indeed, those passions are restrained,


not so much by a sense of their impropriety, as by prudential


considerations of the bad consequences which might follow from


their indulgence. In such cases, the passions, though restrained,


are not always subdued, but often remain lurking in the breast


with all their original fury. The man whose anger is restrained


by fear, does not always lay aside his anger, but only reserves


its gratification for a more safe opportunity. But the man who,


in relating to some other person the injury which has been done


to him, feels at once the fury of his passion cooled and becalmed


by sympathy with the more moderate sentiments of his companion,


who at once adopts those more moderate sentiments, and comes to


view that injury, not in the black and atrocious colours in which


he had originally beheld it, but in the much milder and fairer


light in which his companion naturally views it; not only


restrains, but in some measure subdues, his anger. The passion


becomes really less than it was before, and less capable of


exciting him to the violent and bloody revenge which at first,


perhaps, he might have thought of inflicting.


    Those passions which are restrained by the sense of


propriety, are all in some degree moderated and subdued by it.


But those which are restrained only by prudential considerations


of any kind, are, on the contrary, frequently inflamed by the


restraint, and sometimes (long after the provocation given, and


when nobody is thinking about it) burst out absurdly and


unexpectedly, and with tenfold fury and violence.


    Anger, however, as well as every other passion, may, upon


many occasions, be very properly restrained by prudential


considerations. Some exertion of manhood and self-command is even


necessary for this sort of restraint; and the impartial spectator


may sometimes view it with that sort of cold esteem due to that


species of conduct which he considers as a mere matter of vulgar


prudence; but never with that affectionate admiration with which


he surveys the same passions, when, by the sense of propriety,


they are moderated and subdued to what he himself can readily


enter into. In the former species of restraint, he may frequently


discern some degree of propriety, and, if you will, even of


virtue; but it is a propriety and virtue of a much inferior order


to those which he always feels with transport and admiration in


the latter.


    The virtues of prudence, justice, and beneficence, have no


tendency to produce any but the most agreeable effects. Regard to


those effects, as it originally recommends them to the actor, so


does it afterwards to the impartial spectator. In our approbation


of the character of the prudent man, we feel, with peculiar


complacency, the security which he must enjoy while he walks


under the safeguard of that sedate and deliberate virtue. In our


approbation of the character of the just man, we feel, with equal


complacency, the security which all those connected with him,


whether in neighbourhood, society, or business, must derive from


his scrupulous anxiety never either to hurt or offend. In our


approbation of the character of the beneficent man, we enter into


the gratitude of all those who are within the sphere of his good


offices, and conceive with them the highest sense of his merit.


In our approbation of all those virtues, our sense of their


agreeable effects, of their utility, either to the person who


exercises them, or to some other persons, joins with our sense of


their propriety, and constitutes always a considerable,


frequently the greater part of that approbation.


    But in our approbation of the virtues of self-command,


complacency with their effects sometimes constitutes no part, and


frequently but a small part, of that approbation. Those effects


may sometimes be agreeable, and sometimes disagreeable; and


though our approbation is no doubt stronger in the former case,


it is by no means altogether destroyed in the latter. The most


heroic valour may be employed indifferently in the cause either


of justice or of injustice; and though it is no doubt much more


loved and admired in the former case, it still appears a great


and respectable quality even in the latter. In that, and in all


the other virtues of self-command, the splendid and dazzling


quality seems always to be the greatness and steadiness of the


exertion, and the strong sense of propriety which is necessary in


order to make and to maintain that exertion. The effects are too


often but too little regarded.







