




Autobiography of Andrew Dickson White



Volume I



by Andrew Dickson White






NEW YORK

THE CENTURY CO.

1905









TO

MY OLD STUDENTS

THIS RECORD OF MY LIFE

IS INSCRIBED

WITH MOST KINDLY RECOLLECTIONS

AND BEST WISHES








AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF

ANDREW DICKSON WHITE



PART I

ENVIRONMENT AND EDUCATION







AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF

ANDREW DICKSON WHITE





CHAPTER I



BOYHOOD IN CENTRAL NEW YORK--1832-1850





At the close of the Revolution which separated the

colonies from the mother country, the legislature of

New York set apart nearly two million acres of land, in the

heart of the State, as bounty to be divided among her soldiers

who had taken part in the war; and this ``Military

Tract,'' having been duly divided into townships, an ill-

inspired official, in lack of names for so many divisions,

sprinkled over the whole region the contents of his classical

dictionary.  Thus it was that there fell to a beautiful

valley upon the headwaters of the Susquehanna the

name of ``Homer.''  Fortunately the surveyor-general

left to the mountains, lakes, and rivers the names the

Indians had given them, and so there was still some poetical

element remaining in the midst of that unfortunate

nomenclature.  The counties, too, as a rule, took Indian

names, so that the town of Homer, with its neighbors,

Tully, Pompey, Fabius, Lysander, and the rest, were embedded

in the county of Onondaga, in the neighborhood

of lakes Otisco and Skaneateles, and of the rivers Tioughnioga

and Susquehanna.



Hither came, toward the close of the eighteenth century,

a body of sturdy New Englanders, and, among them, my

grandfathers and grandmothers.  Those on my father's

side: Asa White and Clara Keep, from Munson, Massa-

chusetts; those on my mother's side, Andrew Dickson,

from Middlefield, Massachusetts, and Ruth Hall from

Guilford, Connecticut.  They were all of ``good stock.'' 

When I was ten years old I saw my great-grandfather at

Middlefield, eighty-two years of age, sturdy and vigorous;

he had mowed a broad field the day before, and he walked

four miles to church the day after.  He had done his duty

manfully during the war, had been a member of the

``Great and General Court'' of Massachusetts, and had

held various other offices, which showed that he enjoyed

the confidence of his fellow-citizens.  As to the other side

of the house, there was a tradition that we came from

Peregrine White of the Mayflower; but I have never had

time to find whether my doubts on the subject were well

founded or not.  Enough for me to know that my yeomen

ancestors did their duty in war and peace, were honest,

straightforward, God-fearing men and women, who

owned their own lands, and never knew what it was to

cringe before any human being.



These New Englanders literally made the New York

wilderness to blossom as the rose; and Homer, at my

birth in 1832, about forty years after the first settlers

came, was, in its way, one of the prettiest villages

imaginable.  In the heart of it was the ``Green,'' and along

the middle of this a line of church edifices, and the academy. 

In front of the green, parallel to the river, ran,

north and south, the broad main street, beautifully shaded

with maples, and on either side of this, in the middle of

the village, were stores, shops, and the main taverns; while

north and south of these were large and pleasant dwellings,

each in its own garden or grove or orchard, and

separated from the street by light palings,--all, without

exception, neat, trim, and tidy.



My first recollections are of a big, comfortable house

of brick, in what is now called ``colonial style,'' with a

``stoop,'' long and broad, on its southern side, which in

summer was shaded with honeysuckles.  Spreading out

southward from this was a spacious garden filled with

old-fashioned flowers, and in this I learned to walk.  To

this hour the perfume of a pink brings the whole scene

before me, and proves the justice of Oliver Wendell

Holmes's saying that we remember past scenes more vividly

by the sense of smell than by the sense of sight.



I can claim no merit for clambering out of poverty. 

My childhood was happy; my surroundings wholesome;

I was brought up neither in poverty nor riches; my parents

were what were called ``well-to-do-people''; everything

about me was good and substantial; but our mode

of life was frugal; waste or extravagance or pretense was

not permitted for a moment.  My paternal grandfather

had been, in the early years of the century, the richest

man in the township; but some time before my birth he

had become one of the poorest; for a fire had consumed

his mills, there was no insurance, and his health gave way. 

On my father, Horace White, had fallen, therefore, the

main care of his father's family.  It was to the young

man, apparently, a great calamity:--that which grieved

him most being that it took him--a boy not far in his

teens--out of school.  But he met the emergency

manfully, was soon known far and wide for his energy,

ability, and integrity, and long before he had reached

middle age was considered one of the leading men of business

in the county.



My mother had a more serene career.  In another part

of these Reminiscences, saying something of my religious

and political development, I shall speak again of her and

of her parents.  Suffice it here that her father prospered

as a man of business, was known as ``Colonel,'' and also

as ``Squire'' Dickson, and represented his county in the

State legislature.  He died when I was about three years

old, and I vaguely remember being brought to him as he

lay upon his death-bed.  On one account, above all others,

I have long looked back to him with pride.  For the first

public care of the early settlers had been a church, and

the second a school.  This school had been speedily

developed into Cortland Academy, which soon became fa-

mous throughout all that region, and, as a boy of five or

six years of age, I was very proud to read on the corner-

stone of the Academy building my grandfather's name

among those of the original founders.



Not unlikely there thus came into my blood the strain

which has led me ever since to feel that the building up of

goodly institutions is more honorable than any other

work,--an idea which was at the bottom of my efforts in

developing the University of Michigan, and in founding

Cornell University.



To Cortland Academy students came from far and

near; and it soon began sending young men into the foremost

places of State and Church.  At an early day, too,

it began receiving young women and sending them forth

to become the best of matrons.  As my family left the

place when I was seven years old I was never within

its walls as a student, but it acted powerfully on my

education in two ways,--it gave my mother the best of

her education, and it gave to me a respect for scholarship. 

The library and collections, though small, suggested

pursuits better than the scramble for place or pelf; the

public exercises, two or three times a year, led my

thoughts, no matter how vaguely, into higher regions, and

I shall never forget the awe which came over me when

as a child, I saw Principal Woolworth, with his best

students around him on the green, making astronomical

observations through a small telescope.



Thus began my education into that great truth, so

imperfectly understood, as yet, in our country, that stores,

shops, hotels, facilities for travel and traffic are not the

highest things in civilization.



This idea was strengthened in the family.  Devoted as

my father was to business, he always showed the greatest

respect for men of thought.  I have known him, even

when most absorbed in his pursuits, to watch occasions

for walking homeward with a clergyman or teacher,

whose conversation he especially prized.  There was scant

respect in the family for the petty politicians of the

region; but there was great respect for the instructors

of the academy, and for any college professor who happened

to be traveling through the town.  I am now in my

sixty-eighth year, and I write these lines from the American

Embassy in Berlin.  It is my duty here, as it has

been at other European capitals, to meet various high

officials; but that old feeling, engendered in my childhood,

continues, and I bow to the representatives of

the universities,--to the leaders in science, literature, and

art, with a feeling of awe and respect far greater than

to their so-called superiors,--princelings and high military

or civil officials.



Influences of a more direct sort came from a primary

school.  To this I was taken, when about three years old,

for a reason which may strike the present generation

as curious.  The colored servant who had charge of me

wished to learn to read--so she slipped into the school and

took me with her.  As a result, though my memory runs

back distinctly to events near the beginning of my fourth

year, it holds not the faintest recollection of a time when

I could not read easily.  The only studies which I recall

with distinctness, as carried on before my seventh year,

are arithmetic and geography.  As to the former, the

multiplication-table was chanted in chorus by the whole

body of children, a rhythmical and varied movement of

the arms being carried on at the same time.  These exercises

gave us pleasure and fastened the tables in our

minds.  As to geography, that gave pleasure in another

way.  The books contained pictures which stimulated my

imagination and prompted me to read the adjacent text.

There was no over-pressure.  Mental recreation and

information were obtained in a loose way from ``Rollo

Books,'' ``Peter Parley Books,'' ``Sanford and Merton,''

the ``Children's Magazine,'' and the like.  I now

think it a pity that I was not allowed to read, instead of

these, the novels of Scott and Cooper, which I discovered

later.  I devoutly thank Heaven that no such thing as

a sensation newspaper was ever brought into the house,--

even if there were one at that time,--which I doubt.  As

to physical recreation, there was plenty during the summer

in the fields and woods, and during the winter in

coasting, building huts in the deep snow, and in storming

or defending the snow forts on the village green.  One

of these childish sports had a historical connection with

a period which now seems very far away.  If any old

settler happened to pass during our snow-balling or

our shooting with bows and arrows, he was sure to look

on with interest, and, at some good shot, to cry out,--

``SHOOT BURGOYNE!''--thus recalling his remembrances

of the sharpshooters who brought about the great

surrender at Saratoga.



In my seventh year my father was called to take charge

of the new bank established at Syracuse, thirty miles

distant, and there the family soon joined him.  I remember

that coming through the Indian Reservation, on the road

between the two villages, I was greatly impressed by the

bowers and other decorations which had been used

shortly before at the installation of a new Indian chief. 

It was the headquarters of the Onondagas,--formerly the

great central tribe of the Iroquois,--the warlike confederacy

of the Six Nations; and as, in a general way, the

story was told me on that beautiful day in September a

new world of romance was opened to me, so that Indian

stories, and especially Cooper's novels, when I was

allowed to read them, took on a new reality.



Syracuse, which is now a city of one hundred and

twenty thousand inhabitants, was then a straggling

village of about five thousand.  After much time lost in

sundry poor ``select schools'' I was sent to one of the

public schools which was very good, and thence, when

about twelve years old, to the preparatory department

of the Syracuse Academy.



There, by good luck, was Joseph A. Allen, the best

teacher of English branches I have ever known.  He had

no rules and no system; or, rather, his rule was to have

no rules, and his system was to have no system.  To

genius.  He seemed to divine the character and enter into

the purpose of every boy.  Work under him was a pleasure. 

His methods were very simple.  Great attention

was given to reading aloud from a book made up of

selections from the best authors, and to recitals from these. 

Thus I stored up not only some of the best things in

the older English writers, but inspiring poems of Bryant,

Whittier, Longfellow, and other moderns.  My only regret

is that more of this was not given us.  I recall, among

treasures thus gained, which have been precious to me

ever since, in many a weary or sleepless hour on land

and sea, extracts from Shakspere, parts of Milton's

``Samson Agonistes,'' and of his sonnets; Gray's

``Elegy,'' Byron's ``Ode to the Ocean,'' Campbell's

``What's Hallowed Ground?'' Goldsmith's ``Deserted

Village,'' Longfellow's ``Psalm of Life,'' Irving's ``Voyage

to Europe,'' and parts of Webster's ``Reply to Hayne.''



At this school the wretched bugbear of English spelling

was dealt with by a method which, so long as our present

monstrous orthography continues, seems to me the

best possible.  During the last half-hour of every day,

each scholar was required to have before him a copy-

book, of which each page was divided into two columns. 

At the head of the first column was the word ``Spelling'';

at the head of the second column was the word ``Corrected.'' 

The teacher then gave out to the school about

twenty of the more important words in the reading-

lesson of the day, and, as he thus dictated each word, each

scholar wrote it in the column headed ``Spelling.''  When

all the words were thus written, the first scholar was asked

to spell from his book the first word; if misspelled, it

was passed to the next, and so on until it was spelled

correctly; whereupon all who had made a mistake in writing

it made the proper correction on the opposite column. 

The result of this was that the greater part of us learned

orthography PRACTICALLY.  For the practical use of spelling

comes in writing.



The only mistake in Mr. Allen's teaching was too much

attention to English grammar.  The order ought to be,

literature first, and grammar afterward.  Perhaps there

is no more tiresome trifling in the world for boys and

girls than rote recitations and parsing from one of the

usual grammatical text-books.



As to mathematics, arithmetic was, perhaps, pushed

too far into puzzles; but geometry was made fascinating

by showing its real applications and the beauty of its

reasoning.  It is the only mathematical study I ever loved. 

In natural science, though most of the apparatus of

schools nowadays was wanting, Mr. Allen's instruction

was far beyond his time.  Never shall I forget my excited

interest when, occasionally, the village surgeon came

in, and the whole school was assembled to see him dissect

the eye or ear or heart of an ox.  Physics, as then

understood, was studied in a text-book, but there was

illustration by simple apparatus, which fastened firmly

in my mind the main facts and principles.



The best impulse by this means came from the principal

of the academy, Mr. Oren Root,--one of the pioneers

of American science, whose modesty alone stood in

the way of his fame.  I was too young to take direct

instruction from him, but the experiments which I saw him

perform led me, with one or two of my mates, to construct

an excellent electrical machine and subsidiary apparatus;

and with these, a small galvanic battery and an extemporized

orrery, I diluted Professor Root's lectures with the

teachings of my little books on natural philosophy and

astronomy to meet the capacities of the younger boys in

our neighborhood.



Salient among my recollections of this period are the

cries and wailing of a newly-born babe in the rooms at

the academy occupied by the principal, and adjacent to

our big school-room.  Several decades of years later I had

the honor of speaking on the platform of Cooper Institute

in company with this babe, who, as I write, is, I believe,

the very energetic Secretary of War in the Cabinet

of President McKinley.



Unfortunately for me, Mr. Root was soon afterward

called away to a professorship at Hamilton College, and

so, though living in the best of all regions for geological

study, I was never properly grounded in that science, and

as to botany, I am to this hour utterly ignorant of its

simplest facts and principles.  I count this as one of the

mistakes in my education,--resulting in the loss of much

valuable knowledge and high pleasure.



As to physical development, every reasonable encouragement

was given to play.  Mr. Allen himself came frequently

to the play-grounds.  He was an excellent musician

and a most helpful influence was exerted by singing,

which was a daily exercise of the school.  I then began

taking lessons regularly in music and became proficient

enough to play the organ occasionally in church; the best

result of this training being that it gave my life one of its

deepest, purest, and most lasting pleasures.



On the moral side, Mr. Allen influenced many of

us by liberalizing and broadening our horizon.  He was

a disciple of Channing and an abolitionist, and, though he

never made the slightest attempt to proselyte any of his

scholars, the very atmosphere of the school made sectarian

bigotry impossible.



As to my general education outside the school I browsed

about as best I could.  My passion in those days was for

machinery, and, above all, for steam machinery.  The

stationary and locomotive engines upon the newly-

established railways toward Albany on the east and Buffalo

on the west especially aroused my attention, and I came to

know every locomotive, its history, character, and capabilities,

as well as every stationary engine in the whole region. 

My holiday excursions, when not employed in boating

or skating on the Onondaga Creek, or upon the lake,

were usually devoted to visiting workshops, where the

engine drivers and stokers seemed glad to talk with a

youngster who took an interest in their business.  Especially

interested was I in a rotary engine on ``Barker's

centrifugal principle,'' with which the inventor had prom-

ised to propel locomotives at the rate of a hundred miles

an hour, but which had been degraded to grinding bark in

a tannery.  I felt its disgrace keenly, as a piece of gross

injustice; but having obtained a small brass model, fitted

to it a tin boiler and placed it on a little stern-wheel boat,

I speedily discovered the secret of the indignity which

had overtaken the machine, for no boat could carry a

boiler large enough to supply steam for it.



So, too, I knew every water-wheel in that part of the

county, whether overshot, undershot, breast, or turbine. 

Everything in the nature of a motor had an especial

fascination for me, and for the men in control of such power

I entertained a respect which approached awe.



Among all these, my especial reverence was given to the

locomotive engineers; in my youthful mind they took on

a heroic character.  Often during the night watches I

thought of them as braving storm and peril, responsible

for priceless freights of human lives.  Their firm, keen

faces come back to me vividly through the mists of sixty

years, and to this day I look up to their successors at the

throttle with respectful admiration.



After Professor Root's departure the Syracuse Academy

greatly declined, Mr. Allen being the only strong

man left among its teachers, and, as I was to go

to college, I was removed to a ``classical school.''  This

school was not at first very successful.  Its teacher was

a good scholar but careless.  Under him I repeated the

grammatical forms and rules in Latin and Greek, glibly,

term after term, without really understanding their

value.  His great mistake, which seems to me a not

infrequent one, was taking it for granted that repeating

rules and forms means understanding them and their

application.  But a catastrophe came.  I had been promoted

beyond my deserts from a lower into an upper Latin class,

and at a public examination the Rev. Samuel Joseph

May, who was present, asked me a question, to which I

made an answer revealing utter ignorance of one of the

simplest principles of Latin grammar.  He was discon-

certed at the result, I still more so, and our preceptor most

of all.  That evening my father very solemnly asked me

about it.  I was mortified beyond expression, did not

sleep at all that night, and of my own accord, began

reviewing my Andrews and Stoddard thoroughly and

vigorously.  But this did not save the preceptor.  A

successor was called, a man who afterward became an

eminent Presbyterian divine and professor in a Southern

university, James W. Hoyt, one of the best and truest

of men, and his manly, moral influence over his scholars

was remarkable.  Many of them have reached positions of

usefulness, and I think they will agree that his influence

upon their lives was most happy.  The only drawback

was that he was still very young, not yet through his

senior year in Union College, and his methods in classical

teaching were imperfect.  He loved his classics and taught

his better students to love them, but he was neither

thorough in grammar, nor sure in translation, and this I

afterward found to my sorrow.  My friend and schoolmate

of that time, W. O. S., published a few years since,

in the ``St. Nicholas Magazine,'' an account of this school. 

It was somewhat idealized, but we doubtless agree in

thinking that the lack of grammatical drill was more than

made up by the love of manliness, and the dislike of

meanness, which was in those days our very atmosphere. 

Probably the best thing for my mental training was that

Mr. Hoyt interested me in my Virgil, Horace, and Xenophon,

and required me to write out my translations in the

best English at my command.



But to all his pupils he did not prove so helpful.  One

of them, though he has since become an energetic man

of business on the Pacific Coast, was certainly not helped

into his present position by his Latin; for of all the

translations I have ever heard or read of, one of his was the

worst.  Being called to construe the first line of the

Aeneid, he proceeded as follows:



``Arma,--arms; virumque,--and a man; cano,--and a

dog.''  There was a roar, and Mr. Hoyt, though evidently

saddened, kept his temper.  He did not, like the great

and good Arnold of Rugby, under similar provocation,

knock the offender down with the text-book.



Still another agency in my development was the debating

club, so inevitable in an American village.  Its

discussions were sometimes pretentious and always crude,

but something was gained thereby.  I remember that one

of the subjects was stated as follows:  ``Which has done

most harm, intemperance or fanaticism.''  The debate

was without any striking feature until my schoolmate,

W. O. S., brought up heavy artillery on the side of the

anti-fanatics: namely, a statement of the ruin wrought

by Mohammedanism in the East, and, above all, the

destruction of the great Alexandrian library by Caliph

Omar; and with such eloquence that all the argumentation

which any of us had learned in the temperance meetings

was paralyzed.



On another occasion we debated the question:  ``Was

the British Government justified in its treatment of

Napoleon Bonaparte?''  Much historical lore had been

brought to bear on the question, when an impassioned

young orator wound up a bitter diatribe against the great

emperor as follows:  ``The British Government WAS justified,

and if for no other reason, by the Emperor Napoleon's

murder of the `Duck de Engine' '' (Duc d'Enghien).



As to education outside of the school very important

to me had been the discovery, when I was about ten years

old, of `` `The Monastery,' by the author of `Waverley.' '' 

Who the ``author of `Waverley' '' was I neither knew nor

cared, but read the book three times, end over end, in a

sort of fascination.  Unfortunately, novels and romances

were kept under lock and key, as unfit reading for children,

and it was some years before I reveled in Scott's

other novels.  That they would have been thoroughly

good and wholesome reading for me I know, and about

my sixteenth year they opened a new world to me and

gave healthful play to my imagination.  I also read and

re-read Bunyan's ``Pilgrim's Progress,'' and, with plea-

sure even more intense, the earlier works of Dickens,

which were then appearing.



My only regret, as regards that time, is that, between the

rather trashy ``boys' books'' on one side and the rather

severe books in the family library on the other, I read

far less of really good literature than I ought to have

done.  My reading was absolutely without a guide, hence

fitful and scrappy; parts of Rollin's ``Ancient History''

and Lander's ``Travels in Africa'' being mixed up with

``Robinson Crusoe'' and ``The Scottish Chiefs.''  Reflection

on my experience has convinced me that some

kindly guidance in the reading of a fairly scholarly boy

is of the utmost importance, and never more so than now,

when books are so many and attractive.  I should lay

much stress, also, on the hearing of good literature well

read, and the interspersing of such reading with some

remarks by the reader, pointing out the main beauties

of the pieces thus presented.



About my tenth year occurred an event, apparently

trivial, but really very important in my mental

development during many years afterward.  My father

brought home one day, as a gift to my mother, a

handsome quarto called ``The Gallery of British Artists.'' 

It contained engravings from pictures by Turner, Stanfield,

Cattermole, and others, mainly representing scenes

from Shakspere, Scott, Burns, picturesque architecture,

and beautiful views in various parts of Europe.  Of this

book I never tired.  It aroused in me an intense desire

to know more of the subjects represented, and this desire

has led me since to visit and to study every cathedral,

church, and town hall of any historical or architectural

significance in Europe, outside the Spanish peninsula. 

But, far more important, it gave an especial zest to nearly

all Scott's novels, and especially to the one which I have

always thought the most fascinating, ``Quentin Durward.'' 

This novel led me later, not merely to visit Liege,

and Orl<e'>ans, and Cl<e'>ry, and Tours, but to devour the

chronicles and histories of that period, to become deeply

interested in historical studies, and to learn how great

principles lie hidden beneath the surface of events.  The

first of these principles I ever clearly discerned was

during my reading of ``Quentin Durward'' and ``Anne of

Geierstein,'' when there was revealed to me the secret

of the centralization of power in Europe, and of the

triumph of monarchy over feudalism.



In my sixteenth and seventeenth years another element

entered into my education.  Syracuse, as the central city

of the State, was the scene of many conventions and public

meetings.  That was a time of very deep earnestness in

political matters.  The last great efforts were making,

by the more radical, peaceably to prevent the extension

of slavery, and, by the more conservative, peaceably to

preserve the Union.  The former of these efforts interested

me most.  There were at Syracuse frequent public debates

between the various groups of the anti-slavery

party represented by such men as Gerrit Smith, Wendell

Phillips, William Lloyd Garrison, John Parker Hale,

Samuel Joseph May, and Frederick Douglass.  They took

strong hold upon me and gave me a higher idea of a man's

best work in life.  That was the bloom period of the old

popular lecture.  It was the time when lectures were

expected to build character and increase knowledge; the

sensation and buffoon business which destroyed the system

had not yet come in.  I feel to this hour the good

influence of lectures then heard, in the old City Hall at

Syracuse, from such men as President Mark Hopkins,

Bishop Alonzo Potter, Senator Hale of New Hampshire,

Emerson, Ware, Whipple, and many others.



As to recreative reading at this period, the author who

exercised the strongest influence over me was Charles

Kingsley.  His novels ``Alton Locke'' and ``Yeast''

interested me greatly in efforts for doing away with old

abuses in Europe, and his ``Two Years After'' increased

my hatred for negro slavery in America.  His ``Westward

Ho!'' extended my knowledge of the Elizabethan

period and increased my manliness.  Of this period, too,

was my reading of Lowell's Poems, many of which I

greatly enjoyed.  His ``Biglow Papers'' were a perpetual

delight; the dialect was familiar to me since, in the

little New England town transplanted into the heart of

central New York, in which I was born, the less educated

people used it, and the dry and droll Yankee expressions

of our ``help'' and ``hired man'' were a source of

constant amusement in the family.



In my seventeenth year came a trial.  My father had

taken a leading part in establishing a parish school for

St. Paul's church in Syracuse, in accordance with the

High Church views of our rector, Dr. Gregory, and there

was finally called to the mastership a young candidate

for orders, a brilliant scholar and charming man, who has

since become an eminent bishop of the Protestant Episcopal

Church.  To him was intrusted my final preparation

for college.  I had always intended to enter one

of the larger New England universities, but my teacher

was naturally in favor of his Alma Mater, and the influence

of our bishop, Dr. de Lancey, being also thrown

powerfully into the scale, my father insisted on placing

me at a small Protestant Episcopal college in western

New York.  I went most reluctantly.  There were in the

faculty several excellent men, one of whom afterward

became a colleague of my own in Cornell University, and

proved of the greatest value to it.  Unfortunately, we of

the lower college classes could have very little instruction

from him; still there was good instruction from

others; the tutor in Greek, James Morrison Clarke, was

one of the best scholars I have ever known.



It was in the autumn of 1849 that I went into residence

at the little college and was assigned a very unprepossessing

room in a very ugly barrack.  Entering my new

quarters I soon discovered about me various cabalistic

signs, some of them evidently made by heating large iron

keys, and pressing them against the woodwork.  On

inquiring I found that the room had been occupied some

years before by no less a personage than Philip Spencer,

a member of the famous Spencer family of Albany, who,

having passed some years at this little college, and never

having been able to get out of the freshman class, had

gone to another institution of about the same grade, had

there founded a Greek letter fraternity which is now

widely spread among American universities, and then,

through the influence of his father, who was Secretary

of War, had been placed as a midshipman under

Commodore McKenzie on the brig-of-war Somers.  On the

coast of Africa a mutiny was discovered, and as, on

examination, young Spencer was found at the head of it,

and papers discovered in his cabin revealed the plan of

seizing the ship and using it in a career of piracy, the

young man, in spite of his connection with a member of

the Cabinet, was hanged at the yard-arm with two of his

associates.



The most curious relic of him at the college was

preserved in the library of the Hermean Society.  It was a

copy of ``The Pirates' Own Book'': a glorification of the

exploits of ``Blackbeard'' and other great freebooters,

profusely adorned with illustrations of their joys and

triumphs.  This volume bore on the fly-leaf the words,

``Presented to the Hermean Society by Philip Spencer,'' and

was in those days shown as a great curiosity.



The college was at its lowest ebb; of discipline there

was none; there were about forty students, the majority

of them, sons of wealthy churchmen, showing no inclination

to work and much tendency to dissipation.  The

authorities of the college could not afford to expel or even

offend a student.  for its endowment was so small that it

must have all the instruction fees possible, and must keep

on good terms with the wealthy fathers of its scapegrace

students.  The scapegraces soon found this out, and the

result was a little pandemonium.  Only about a dozen

of our number studied at all; the rest, by translations,

promptings, and evasions escaped without labor.  I have

had to do since, as student, professor, or lecturer, with

some half-dozen large universities at home and abroad,

and in all of these together have not seen so much

carousing and wild dissipation as I then saw in this little

``Church college'' of which the especial boast was that,

owing to the small number of its students, it was ``able

to exercise a direct Christian influence upon every young

man committed to its care.''



The evidences of this Christian influence were not clear. 

The president of the college, Dr. Benjamin Hale, was a

clergyman of the highest character; a good scholar, an

excellent preacher, and a wise administrator; but his

stature was very small, his girth very large, and his hair

very yellow.  When, then, on the thirteenth day of the

month, there was read at chapel from the Psalter the

words, ``And there was little Benjamin, their ruler,''

very irreverent demonstrations were often made by the

students, presumably engaged in worship; demonstrations

so mortifying, indeed, that at last the president frequently

substituted for the regular Psalms of the day one of the

beautiful ``Selections'' of Psalms which the American

Episcopal Church has so wisely incorporated into its

prayer-book.



But this was by no means the worst indignity which

these youth ``under direct Christian influence''

perpetrated upon their reverend instructors.  It was my

privilege to behold a professor, an excellent clergyman,

seeking to quell hideous riot in a student's room, buried under

a heap of carpets, mattresses, counterpanes, and blankets;

to see another clerical professor forced to retire through

the panel of a door under a shower of lexicons, boots, and

brushes, and to see even the president himself, on one

occasion, obliged to leave his lecture-room by a ladder from

a window, and, on another, kept at bay by a shower of

beer-bottles.



One favorite occupation was rolling cannon-balls along

the corridors at midnight, with frightful din and much

damage: a tutor, having one night been successful

in catching and confiscating two of these, pounced from

his door the next night upon a third; but this having

been heated nearly to redness and launched from a shovel,

the result was that he wore bandages upon his hands for

many days.



Most ingenious were the methods for ``training freshmen,''--

one of the mildest being the administration of

soot and water by a hose-pipe thrust through the broken

panel of a door.  Among general freaks I remember seeing

a horse turned into the chapel, and a stuffed wolf,

dressed in a surplice, placed upon the roof of that sacred

edifice.



But the most elaborate thing of the kind I ever saw

was the breaking up of a ``Second Adventist'' meeting

by a score of student roysterers.  An itinerant fanatic had

taken an old wooden meeting-house in the lower part

of the town, had set up on either side of the pulpit large

canvas representations of the man of brass with feet of

clay, and other portentous characters of the prophecies,

and then challenged the clergy to meet him in public

debate.  At the appointed time a body of college youth

appeared, most sober in habit and demure in manner,

having at their head ``Bill'' Howell of Black Rock and

``Tom'' Clark of Manlius, the two wildest miscreants in

the sophomore class, each over six feet tall, the latter

dressed as a respectable farmer, and the former as a

country clergyman, wearing a dress-coat, a white cravat,

a tall black hat wrapped in crape, leaning on a heavy,

ivory-knobbed cane, and carrying ostentatiously a Greek

Testament.  These disguised malefactors, having taken

their seats in the gallery directly facing the pulpit, the

lecturer expressed his ``satisfaction at seeing clergymen

present,'' and began his demonstrations.  For about five

minutes all went well; then ``Bill'' Howell solemnly arose

and, in a snuffling voice, asked permission to submit a few

texts from scripture.  Permission being granted, he put

on a huge pair of goggles, solemnly opened his Greek

Testament, read emphatically the first passage which attracted

his attention and impressively asked the lecturer what

he had to say to it.  At this, the lecturer, greatly puzzled,

asked what the reverend gentleman was reading.  Upon

this Howell read in New Testament Greek another utterly

irrelevant passage.  In reply the lecturer said, rather

roughly, ``If you will speak English I will answer you.'' 

At this Howell said with the most humble suavity, ``Do

I understand that the distinguished gentleman does not

recognize what I have been reading?''  The preacher

answered, ``I don't understand any such gibberish;

speak English.''  Thereupon Howell threw back his long

black hair and launched forth into eloquent denunciation

as follows:  ``Sir, is it possible that you come here to

interpret to us the Holy Bible and do not recognize the

language in which that blessed book was written?  Sir,

do you dare to call the very words of the Almighty

`gibberish?' ''  At this all was let loose; some students put

asafetida on the stove; others threw pigeon-shot against

the ceiling and windows, making a most appalling din,

and one wretch put in deadly work with a syringe thrust

through the canvas representation of the man of brass

with feet of clay.  But, alas, Constable John Dey had

recognized Howell and Clark, even amid their disguises. 

He had dealt with them too often before.  The next

tableau showed them, with their tall hats crushed over their

heads, belaboring John Dey and his myrmidons, and presently,

with half a dozen other ingenuous youth, they were

haled to the office of justice.  The young judge who

officiated on this occasion was none other than a personage

who will be mentioned with great respect more than

once in these reminiscences,--Charles James Folger,--

afterward my colleague in the State Senate, Chief Justice

of the State and Secretary of the Treasury of the United

States.  He had met Howell often, for they were members

of the same Greek letter fraternity,--the thrice illustrious

Sigma Phi,--and, only a few days before, Howell had

presented me to him; but there was no fraternal bond

visible now; justice was sternly implacable, and good

round fines were imposed upon all the culprits caught.



The philosophy of all this waywardness and dissipation

was very simple.  There was no other outlet for the animal

spirits of these youth.  Athletics were unknown; there

was no gymnasium, no ball-playing, and, though the college

was situated on the shore of one of the most beautiful

lakes in the world, no boating.  As regards my own personal

relation to this condition of things I have pictured, it

was more that of a good-natured spectator than of an active

accomplice.  My nearest friends were in the thick of

it, but my tastes kept me out of most of it.  I was fond of

books, and, in the little student's library in my college

building I reveled.  Moreover, I then began to accumulate

for myself the library which has since grown to such large

proportions.  Still the whole life of the place became more

and more unsatisfactory to me, and I determined, at any

cost, to escape from it and find some seat of learning where

there was less frolic and more study.







CHAPTER II



YALE AND EUROPE--1850-1857



At the close of my year at the little Western New York

College I felt that it was enough time wasted, and,

anxious to try for something better, urged upon my father

my desire to go to one of the larger New England universities. 

But to this he would not listen.  He was assured by

the authorities of the little college that I had been doing

well, and his churchmanship, as well as his respect for the

bishop, led him to do what was very unusual with him--to

refuse my request.  Up to this period he had allowed me to

take my own course; but now he was determined that I

should take his.  He was one of the kindest of men, but he

had stern ideas as to proper subordination, and these he

felt it his duty to maintain.  I was obliged to make a coup

d'<e'>tat, and for a time it cost me dear.  Braving the

censure of family and friends, in the early autumn of 1850 I

deliberately left the college, and took refuge with my old

instructor P----, who had prepared me for college at

Syracuse, and who was now principal of the academy at

Moravia, near the head of Owasco Lake, some fifty miles

distant.  To thus defy the wishes of those dearest to me

was a serious matter.  My father at first took it deeply to

heart.  His letters were very severe.  He thought my

career wrecked, avowed that he had lost all interest in it,

and declared that he would rather have received news of

my death than of such a disgrace.  But I knew that my dear

mother was on my side.  Her letters remained as affectionate

as ever; and I determined to atone for my disobe-

dience by severe and systematic work.  I began to study

more earnestly than ever before, reviewed my mathematics

and classics vigorously, and began a course of reading

which has had great influence on all my life since. 

Among my books was D'Aubigne's ``History of the Reformation.'' 

Its deficiencies were not of a sort to harm me,

its vigor and enthusiasm gave me a great impulse.  I not

only read but studied it, and followed it with every other

book on the subject that I could find.  No reading ever did

a man more good.  It not only strengthened and deepened

my better purposes, but it continued powerfully the impulse

given me by the historical novels of Scott, and led

directly to my devoting myself to the study and teaching

of modern history.  Of other books which influenced me

about this period, Emerson's ``Representative Men'' was

one; another was Carlyle's ``Past and Present,'' in which

the old Abbot of Bury became one of my ideals; still

another was Buskin's ``Seven Lamps of Architecture'';

and to such a degree that this art has given to my life some

of its greatest pleasures.  Ruskin was then at his best. 

He had not yet been swept from his bearings by popular

applause, or intoxicated by his own verbosity.  In later

years he lost all influence over me, for, in spite of his

wonderful style, he became trivial, whimsical, peevish,

goody-goody;--talking to grown men and women as a

dyspeptic Sunday-school teacher might lay down the

law to classes of little girls.  As regards this later

period, Max Nordau is undoubtedly right in speaking of

Ruskin's mind as ``turbid and fallacious''; but the time

of which I speak was his best, and his influence upon

me was good.  I remember especially that his ``Lamp

of Power'' made a very deep impression upon me.  Carlyle,

too, was at his best.  He was the simple, strong

preacher;--with nothing of the spoiled cynic he afterward

became.



The stay of three months with my friend--the future

bishop--in the little country town, was also good for me

physically.  In our hours of recreation we roamed through

the neighboring woods, shooting squirrels and pigeons

with excellent effect on my health.  Meantime I kept up

my correspondence with all the members of the family

save my father;--from him there was no sign.  But at last

came a piece of good news.  He was very fond of music,

and on the arrival of Jenny Lind in the United States he

went to New York to attend her concerts.  During one of

these my mother turned suddenly toward him and said: 

``What a pity that the boy cannot hear this; how he would

enjoy it!''  My father answered, ``Tell him to come

home and see us.''  My mother, of course, was not slow in

writing me, and a few days later my father cordially

greeted my home-coming, and all difficulties seemed over. 

Shortly after Christmas he started with me for Yale; but

there soon appeared a lion in the path.  Our route lay

through Hartford, the seat of Trinity College, and to my

consternation I found at the last moment that he had

letters from our rector and others to the president and

professors of that institution.  Still more alarming, we

had hardly entered the train when my father discovered

a Trinity student on board.  Of course, the youth spoke

in the highest terms of his college and of his faculty, and

more and more my father was pleased with the idea of

staying a day or two at Hartford, taking a look at Trinity,

and presenting our letters of introduction.  During a

considerably extended career in the diplomatic service I have

had various occasions to exercise tact, care, and discretion,

but I do not think that my efforts on all these together

equaled those which I then put forth to avoid stopping

at Hartford.  At last my father asked me, rather severely,

why I cared so much about going to New Haven, and I

framed an answer offhand to meet the case, saying that

Yale had an infinitely finer library than Trinity.  Thereupon

he said, ``My boy, if you will go to Trinity College

I will give you the best private library in the United

States.''  I said, ``No, I am going to New Haven; I started

for New Haven, and I will go there.''  I had never braved

him before.  He said not a word.  We passed quietly

through Hartford, and a day or two later I was entered

at Yale.



It was a happy change.  I respected the institution, for

its discipline, though at times harsh, was, on the whole,

just, and thereby came a great gain to my own self-respect. 

But as to the education given, never was a man more

disappointed at first.  The president and professors were

men of high character and attainments; but to the lower

classes the instruction was given almost entirely by tutors,

who took up teaching for bread-winning while going

through the divinity school.  Naturally most of the

work done under these was perfunctory.  There was too

much reciting by rote and too little real intercourse

between teacher and taught.  The instructor sat in a box,

heard students' translations without indicating anything

better, and their answers to questions with very few

suggestions or remarks.  The first text-book in Greek was

Xenophon's ``Memorabilia,'' and one of the first men

called up was my classmate Delano Goddard.  He made an

excellent translation,--clean, clear, in thoroughly good

English; but he elicited no attention from the instructor,

and was then put through sundry grammatical puzzles,

among which he floundered until stopped by the word,

``Sufficient.''  Soon afterward another was called up who

rattled off glibly a translation without one particle of

literary merit, and was then plied with the usual grammatical

questions.  Being asked to ``synopsize'' the Greek verb,

he went through the various moods and tenses, in all sorts

of ways and in all possible combinations, his tongue

rattling like the clapper of a mill.  When he sat down my

next neighbor said to me, ``that man will be our

valedictorian.''  This disgusted me.  If that was the style of

classical scholarship at Yale, I knew that there was nothing

in it for me.  It turned out as my friend said.  That

glib reciter did become the valedictorian of the class, but

stepped from the commencement stage into nothingness,

and was never heard of more.  Goddard became the

editor of one of the most important metropolitan news-

papers of the United States, and, before his early death,

distinguished himself as a writer on political and historical

topics.



Nor was it any better in Latin.  We were reading, during

that term the ``De Senectute'' of Cicero,--a beautiful

book; but to our tutor it was neither more nor less than

a series of pegs on which to hang Zumpt's rules for the

subjunctive mood.  The translation was hurried through,

as of little account.  Then came questions regarding the

subjunctives;--questions to which very few members of

the class gave any real attention.  The best Latin scholar

in the class, G. W. S----, since so distinguished as the

London correspondent of the ``New York Tribune,'' and,

at present, as the New York correspondent of the London

``Times,'' having one day announced to some of us,--with

a very round expletive,--that he would answer no more

such foolish questions, the tutor soon discovered his

recalcitrancy, and thenceforward plied him with such

questions and nothing else.  S---- always answered that he

was not prepared on them; with the result that at the

Junior Exhibition he received no place on the programme.



In the junior year matters improved somewhat; but,

though the professors were most of them really distinguished

men, and one at least, James Hadley, a scholar

who, at Berlin or Leipsic, would have drawn throngs of

students from all Christendom, they were fettered by a

system which made everything of gerund-grinding and

nothing of literature.



The worst feature of the junior year was the fact that

through two terms, during five hours each week, ``recitations''

were heard by a tutor in ``Olmsted's Natural Philosophy.'' 

The text-book was simply repeated by rote.  Not

one student in fifty took the least interest in it; and

the man who could give the words of the text most glibly

secured the best marks.  One exceedingly unfortunate

result of this kind of instruction was that it so disgusted

the class with the whole subject, that the really excellent

lectures of Professor Olmsted, illustrated by probably

the best apparatus then possessed by any American

university, were voted a bore.  Almost as bad was the

historical instruction given by Professor James Hadley.  It

consisted simply in hearing the student repeat from memory

the dates from ``P<u:>tz's Ancient History.''  How a man

so gifted as Hadley could have allowed any part of his

work to be so worthless, it is hard to understand.  And,

worse remained behind.  He had charge of the class in

Thucydides; but with every gift for making it a means

of great good to us, he taught it in the perfunctory way of

that period;--calling on each student to construe a few

lines, asking a few grammatical questions, and then, with

hardly ever a note or comment, allowing him to sit down. 

Two or three times during a term something would occur

to draw Hadley out, and then it delighted us all to hear

him.  I recall, to this hour, with the utmost pleasure, some

of his remarks which threw bright light into the general

subject; but alas! they were few and far between.



The same thing must be said of Professor Thatcher's

instruction in Tacitus.  It was always the same mechanical

sort of thing, with, occasionally, a few remarks which

really aroused interest.



In the senior year the influence of President Woolsey

and Professor Porter was strong for good.  Though the

``Yale system'' fettered them somewhat, their personality

often broke through it.  Yet it amazes me to remember

that during a considerable portion of our senior year no

less a man than Woolsey gave instruction in history by

hearing men recite the words of a text-book;--and that

text-book the Rev. John Lord's little, popular treatise

on the ``Modern History of Europe!''  Far better was

Woolsey's instruction in Guizot.  That was stimulating. 

It not only gave some knowledge of history, but suggested

thought upon it.  In this he was at his best.  He had not

at that time begun his new career as a professor of

International Law, and that subject was treated by a kindly

old governor of the State, in a brief course of instruction,

which was, on the whole, rather inadequate.  Professor

Porter's instruction in philosophy opened our eyes and

led us to do some thinking for ourselves.  In political

economy, during the senior year, President Woolsey heard the

senior class ``recite'' from Wayland's small treatise,

which was simply an abridged presentation of the Manchester

view, the most valuable part of this instruction

being the remarks by Woolsey himself, who discussed

controverted questions briefly but well.  He also delivered,

during one term, a course of lectures upon the historical

relations between the German States, which had some

interest, but, not being connected with our previous

instruction, took little hold upon us.  As to natural science,

we had in chemistry and geology, doubtless, the best

courses then offered in the United States.  The first was

given by Benjamin Silliman, the elder, an American pioneer

in science, and a really great character; the second,

by James Dwight Dana, and in his lecture-room one felt

himself in the hands of a master.  I cannot forgive myself

for having yielded to the general indifference of the

class toward all this instruction.  It was listlessly heard,

and grievously neglected.  The fault was mainly our own;

--but it was partly due to ``The System,'' which led

students to neglect all studies which did not tell upon

``marks'' and ``standing.''



Strange to say, there was not, during my whole course

at Yale, a lecture upon any period, subject, or person in

literature, ancient or modern:--our only resource, in this

field, being the popular lecture courses in the town each

winter, which generally contained one or two presentations

of literary subjects.  Of these, that which made the

greatest impression upon me was by Ralph Waldo Emerson. 

Sundry lectures in my junior year, by Whipple, and

at a later period by George William Curtis, also influenced

me.  It was one of the golden periods of English literature,

the climax of the Victorian epoch;--the period of

Wordsworth, Tennyson, and the Brownings, of Thackeray

and Dickens, of Macaulay and Carlyle on one side

of the Atlantic, and of Emerson, Irving, Hawthorne, Ban-

croft, Prescott, Motley, Lowell, Longfellow, Horace

Bushnell, and their compeers on the other.  Hence came strong

influences; but in dealing with them we were left to ourselves.



Very important in shaping my intellectual development

at this time were my fellow-students.  The class of 1853

was a very large one for that day, and embraced far more

than the usual proportion of active-minded men.  Walks

and talks with these were of great value to me; thence

came some of my best impulses and suggestions to reading

and thought.



Especially fortunate was I in my ``chum,'' the friend

that stood closest to me.  He was the most conservative

young man I ever knew, and at the very opposite pole

from me on every conceivable subject.  But his deeply

religious character, his thorough scholarship, and his real

devotion to my welfare, were very precious to me.  Our

very differences were useful, since they obliged me to

revise with especial care all my main convictions and

trains of thought.  He is now, at this present writing, the

Bishop of Michigan, and a most noble and affectionate

pastor of his flock.



The main subjects of interest to us all had a political

bearing.  Literature was considered as mainly subsidiary

to political discussion.  The great themes, in the minds

of those who tried to do any thinking, were connected with

the tremendous political struggle then drawing toward

its climax in civil war.  Valuable to me was my membership

of sundry student fraternities.  They were vealy,

but there was some nourishment in them; by far the best

of all being a senior club which, though it had adopted

a hideous emblem, was devoted to offhand discussions of

social and political questions;--on the whole, the best club

I have ever known.



The studies which interested me most were political and

historical; from classical studies the gerund-grinding and

reciting by rote had completely weaned me.  One of our

Latin tutors, having said to me:  ``If you would try you

could become a first-rate classical scholar,'' I answered:

``Mr. B----, I have no ambition to become a classical

scholar, as scholarship is understood here.''



I devoted myself all the more assiduously to study on

my own lines, especially in connection with the subjects

taught by President Woolsey in the senior year, and the

one thing which encouraged me was that, at the public

reading of essays, mine seemed to interest the class.  Yet

my first trial of strength with my classmates in this

respect did not apparently turn out very well.  It was at

a prize debate, in one of the large open societies, but

while I had prepared my speech with care, I had given

no thought to its presentation, and, as a result, the judges

passed me by.  Next day a tutor told me that Professor

Porter wished to see me.  He had been one of the judges,

but it never occurred to me that he could have summoned

me for anything save some transgression of college rules. 

But, on my arrival at his room, he began discussing my

speech, said some very kind things of its matter, alluded

to some defects in its manner, and all with a kindness

which won my heart.  Thus began a warm personal friendship

which lasted through his professorship and presidency

to the end of his life.  His kindly criticism was

worth everything to me; it did far more for me than any

prize could have done.  Few professors realize how much

a little friendly recognition may do for a student.  To

this hour I bless Dr. Porter's memory.



Nor did my second effort, a competition in essay-writing,

turn out much better.  My essay was too labored, too

long, too crabbedly written, and it brought me only half

a third prize.



This was in the sophomore year.  But in the junior year

came a far more important competition; that for the Yale

Literary Gold Medal, and without any notice of my

intention to any person, I determined to try for it.  Being

open to the entire university, the universal expectation

was that it would be awarded to a senior, as had hitherto

been the case, and speculations were rife as to what mem-

ber of the graduating class would take it.  When the committee

made their award to the essay on ``The Greater

Distinctions in Statesmanship,'' opened the sealed

envelopes and assigned the prize to me, a junior, there was

great surprise.  The encouragement came to me just at

the right time, and did me great good.  Later, there were

awarded to me the first Clarke Prize for the discussion

of a political subject, and the De Forest Gold Medal, then

the most important premium awarded in the university,

my subject being, ``The Diplomatic History of Modern

Times.''  Some details regarding this latter success may

serve to show certain ways in which influence can be

exerted powerfully upon a young man.  The subject had

been suggested to me by hearing Edwin Forrest in Bulwer's

drama of ``Richelieu.''  The character of the great

cardinal, the greatest statesman that France has produced,

made a deep impression upon me, and suggested the

subjects in both the Yale Literary and the De Forest

competitions, giving me not only the initial impulse, but

maintaining that interest to which my success was largely due. 

Another spur to success was even more effective.  Having

one day received a telegram from my father, asking me

to meet him in New York, I did so, and passed an hour

with him, all the time at a loss to know why he had sent

for me.  But, finally, just as I was leaving the hotel to

return to New Haven, he said, ``By the way, there is still

another prize to be competed for, the largest of all.'' 

``Yes,'' I answered, ``the De Forest; but I have little

chance for that; for though I shall probably be one of the

six Townsend prize men admitted to the competition, there

are other speakers so much better, that I have little hope

of taking it.''  He gave me rather a contemptuous look,

and said, somewhat scornfully:  ``If I were one of the first

SIX competitors, in a class of over a hundred men, I would

try hard to be the first ONE.''  That was all.  He said

nothing more, except good-bye.  On my way to New Haven

I thought much of this, and on arriving, went to a student,

who had some reputation as an elocutionist, and engaged

him for a course in vocal gymnastics.  When he wished

me to recite my oration before him, I declined, saying that

it must be spoken in my own way, not in his; that his

way might be better, but that mine was my own, and I

would have no other.  He confined himself, therefore, to

a course of vocal gymnastics, and the result was a

surprise to myself and all my friends.  My voice, from

being weak and hollow, became round, strong, and flexible. 

I then went to a student in the class above my own, a

natural and forcible speaker, and made an arrangement

with him to hear me pronounce my oration, from time to

time, and to criticize it in a common-sense way.  This he

did.  At passages where he thought my manner wrong,

he raised his finger, gave me an imitation of my manner,

then gave the passage in the way he thought best, and

allowed me to choose between his and mine.  The result was

that, at the public competition, I was successful.  This

experience taught me what I conceive to be the true theory

of elocutionary training in our universities--vocal

gymnastics, on one side; common-sense criticism, on the other.



As to my physical education: with a constitution far

from robust, there was need of special care.  Fortunately,

I took to boating.  In an eight-oared boat, spinning down

the harbor or up the river, with G. W. S---- at the stroke

--as earnest and determined in the Undine then as in the

New York office of the London ``Times'' now, every condition

was satisfied for bodily exercise and mental recreation. 

I cannot refrain from mentioning that our club sent

the first challenge to row that ever passed between Yale

and Harvard, even though I am obliged to confess that we

were soundly beaten; but neither that defeat at Lake

Quinsigamond, nor the many absurdities which have grown out

of such competitions since, have prevented my remaining

an apostle of college boating from that day to this.  If

guarded by common-sense rules enforced with firmness

by college faculties, it gives the maximum of healthful

exercise, with a minimum of danger.  The most detestable

product of college life is the sickly cynic; and a thor-

ough course in boating, under a good stroke oar, does as

much as anything to make him impossible.



At the close of my undergraduate life at Yale I went

abroad for nearly three years, and fortunately had, for

a time, one of the best of companions, my college mate,

Gilman, later president of Johns Hopkins University, and

now of the Carnegie Institution, who was then, as he has

been ever since, a source of good inspirations to me,--

especially in the formation of my ideas regarding

education.  During the few weeks I then passed in England I

saw much which broadened my views in various ways. 

History was made alive to me by rapid studies of persons

and places while traveling, and especially was this the

case during a short visit to Oxford, where I received some

strong impressions, which will be referred to in another

chapter.  Dining at Christ Church with Osborne Gordon,

an eminent tutor of that period, I was especially interested

in his accounts of John Ruskin, who had been his pupil. 

Then, and afterward, while enjoying the hospitalities of

various colleges at Oxford and Cambridge, I saw the

excellencies of their tutorial system, but also had my eyes

opened to some of their deficiencies.



Going thence to Paris I settled down in the family of

a very intelligent French professor, where I remained

nearly a year.  Not a word of English was spoken in the

family; and, with the daily lesson in a French method,

and lectures at the Sorbonne and Coll<e!>ge de France, the

new language soon became familiar.  The lectures then

heard strengthened my conception of what a university

should be.  Among my professors were such men as St.

Marc Girardin, Arnould, and, at a later period, Laboulaye. 

In connection with the lecture-room work, my studies in

modern history were continued, especially by reading Guizot,

Thierry, Mignet, Thiers, Ch<a^>teaubriand, and others,

besides hearing various masterpieces in French dramatic

literature, as given at the Th<e'><a^>tre Fran<c,>ais, where

Rachel was then in her glory, and at the Od<e'>on, where Mlle.

Georges, who had begun her career under the first Napoleon,

was ending it under Napoleon III.



My favorite subject of study was the French Revolution,

and, in the intervals of reading and lectures, I sought

out not only the spots noted in its history, but the men

who had taken part in it.  At the H<o^>tel des Invalides I

talked with old soldiers, veterans of the Republic and of

the Napoleonic period, discussing with them the events

through which they had passed; and, at various other

places and times, with civilians who had heard orations

at the Jacobin and Cordelier clubs, and had seen the

guillotine at work.  The most interesting of my old soldiers

at the Invalides wore upon his breast the cross of the

Legion of Honor, which he had received from Napoleon

at Austerlitz.  Still another had made the frightful

marches through the Spanish Peninsula under Soult, and

evidently felt very humble in the presence of those who

had taken part in the more famous campaigns under Napoleon

himself.  The history of another of my old soldiers

was pathetic.  He was led daily into the cabaret, where my

guests were wont to fight their battles o'er again, his eyes

absolutely sightless, and his hair as white as snow.  Getting

into conversation with him I learned that he had gone

to Egypt with Bonaparte, had fought at the Battle of the

Pyramids, had been blinded by the glaring sun on the

sand of the desert, and had been an inmate at the Invalides

ever since;--more than half a century.  At a later period

I heard from another of my acquaintances how, as a

schoolboy, he saw Napoleon beside his camp-fire at

Cannes, just after his landing from Elba.



There still remained at Paris, in those days, one main

connecting link between the second empire and the first,

and this was the most contemptible of all the Bonapartes,--

the younger brother of the great Napoleon,--

J<e'>rome, ex-king of Westphalia.  I saw him, from time to

time, and was much struck by his resemblance to the first

emperor.  Though taller, he still had something of that

Roman imperial look, so remarkable in the founder of the

family; but in J<e'>rome, it always recalled to me such

Caesars as Tiberius and Vitellius.



It was well known that the ex-king, as well as his son,

Prince J<e'>rome Napoleon, were thorns in the side of

Napoleon III, and many stories illustrating this were

current during my stay in Paris, the best, perhaps, being an

answer made by Napoleon III to another representative

of his family.  The question having been asked, ``What

is the difference between an accident and a misfortune

(un accident et un malheur)?'' the emperor answered. 

``If my cousin, Prince Napoleon, should fall into the

Seine, it would be an ACCIDENT; if anybody were to pull him

out, it would be a MISFORTUNE.''  Although this cousin had

some oratorical ability, both he and his father were most

thoroughly despised.  The son bore the nickname of

``Plon-Plon,'' probably with some reference to his reputation

for cowardice; the father had won the appellation

of ``Le Roi Loustic,'' and, indeed, had the credit of

introducing into the French language the word ``loustic,''

derived from the fact that, during his short reign at Cassel,

King J<e'>rome was wont, after the nightly orgies at his

palace, to dismiss his courtiers with the words:  ``Morgen

wieder loustic, Messieurs.''



During the summer of 1854 I employed my vacation in

long walks and drives with a college classmate through

northern, western, and central France, including Picardy,

Normandy, Brittany, and Touraine, visiting the spots

of most historical and architectural interest.  There were,

at that time, few railways in those regions, so we put on

blouses and took to the road, sending our light baggage

ahead of us, and carrying only knapsacks.  In every way

it proved a most valuable experience.  Pleasantly come

back to me my walks and talks with the peasantry, and

vividly dwell in my memory the cathedrals of Beauvais,

Amiens, Rouen, Bayeux, Coutances, Le Mans, Tours,

Chartres, and Orl<e'>ans, the fortress of Mont St. Michel,

the Ch<a^>teaux of Chenonceaux, Chambord, Nantes, Am-

boise, and Angers, the tombs of the Angevine kings at

Fontevrault, and the stone cottage of Louis XI at Cl<e'>ry. 

Visiting the grave of Ch<a^>teaubriand at St. Malo, we met

a little old gentleman, bent with age, but very brisk and

chatty.  He was standing with a party of friends on one

side of the tomb, while we stood on the other.  Presently,

one of the gentlemen in his company came over and asked

our names, saying that his aged companion was a great

admirer of Ch<a^>teaubriand, and was anxious to know something

of his fellow pilgrims.  To this I made answer, when

my interlocutor informed me that the old gentleman was

the Prince de Rohan-Soubise.  Shortly afterward the old

gentleman came round to us and began conversation, and

on my making answer in a way which showed that I knew

his title, he turned rather sharply on me and said, ``How

do you know that?''  To this I made answer that even

in America we had heard the verse:



        ``Roi, je ne puis,

          Prince ne daigne,

          Rohan je suis.''



At this he seemed greatly pleased, grasped my hand, and

launched at once into extended conversation.  His great

anxiety was to know who was to be the future king of

our Republic, and he asked especially whether Washington

had left any direct descendants.  On my answering in the

negative, he insisted that we would have to find some

descendant in the collateral line, ``for,'' said he, ``you can't

escape it; no nation can get along for any considerable

time without a monarch.''



Returning to Paris I resumed my studies, and, at the

request of Mr. Randall, the biographer of Jefferson,

made some search in the French archives for correspondence

between Jefferson and Robespierre,--search made

rather to put an end to calumny than for any other

purpose.



At the close of this stay in France, by the kindness of

the American minister to Russia, Governor Seymour, of

Connecticut, I was invited to St. Petersburg, as an attach<e'>

of the American Legation, and resided for over six months

in his household.  It was a most interesting period.  The

Crimean War was going on, and the death of the Emperor

Nicholas, during my stay, enabled me to see how a great

change in autocratic administration is accomplished.  An

important part of my duty was to accompany the minister

as an interpreter, not only at court, but in his interviews

with Nesselrode, Gortschakoff, and others then in power. 

This gave me some chance also to make my historical

studies more real by close observation of a certain sort

of men who have had the making of far too much history;

but books interested me none the less.  An epoch in my

development, intellectual and moral, was made at this time

by my reading large parts of Gibbon, and especially by

a very careful study of Guizot's ``History of Civilization

in France,'' which greatly deepened and strengthened the

impression made by his ``History of Civilization in

Europe,'' as read under President Woolsey at Yale.  During

those seven months in St. Petersburg and Moscow, I read

much in modern European history, paying considerable

attention to the political development and condition of

Russia, and, for the first time, learned the pleasures of

investigating the history of our own country.  Governor

Seymour was especially devoted to the ideas of Thomas

Jefferson, and late at night, as we sat before the fire, after

returning from festivities or official interviews, we

frequently discussed the democratic system, as advocated by

Jefferson, and the autocratic system, as we saw it in the

capital of the Czar.  The result was that my beginning

of real study in American history was made by a very

close examination of the life and writings of Thomas

Jefferson, including his letters, messages, and other papers,

and of the diplomatic history revealed in the volumes of

correspondence preserved in the Legation.  The general

result was to strengthen and deepen my democratic creed,

and a special result was the preparation of an article on

``Jefferson and Slavery,'' which, having been at a later

period refused by the ``New Englander,'' at New Haven,

on account of its too pronounced sympathy with democracy

against federalism, was published by the ``Atlantic

Monthly,'' and led to some acquaintances of value to me

afterward.



Returning from St. Petersburg, I was matriculated at

the University of Berlin, and entered the family of a

very scholarly gymnasial professor, where nothing but

German was spoken.  During this stay at the Prussian

capital, in the years 1855 and 1856, I heard the lectures of

Lepsius, on Egyptology; August Boeckh, on the History

of Greece; Friedrich von Raumer, on the History of Italy;

Hirsch, on Modern History in general; and Carl Ritter,

on Physical Geography.  The lectures of Ranke, the most

eminent of German historians, I could not follow.  He had

a habit of becoming so absorbed in his subject, as to slide

down in his chair, hold his finger up toward the ceiling,

and then, with his eye fastened on the tip of it, to go

mumbling through a kind of rhapsody, which most of my

German fellow-students confessed they could not understand. 

It was a comical sight: half a dozen students

crowding around his desk, listening as priests might listen

to the sibyl on her tripod, the other students being

scattered through the room, in various stages of

discouragement.  My studies at this period were mainly in the

direction of history, though with considerable reading on

art and literature.  Valuable and interesting to me at this

time were the representations of the best dramas of Goethe,

Schiller, Lessing, and Gutzkow, at the Berlin theaters. 

Then, too, really began my education in Shakspere, and

the representations of his plays (in Schlegel and Tieck's

version) were, on the whole, the most satisfactory I have

ever known.  I thus heard plays of Shakspere which, in

English-speaking countries, are never presented, and,

even into those better known, wonderful light was at times

thrown from this new point of view.



As to music, the Berlin Opera was then at the height

of its reputation, the leading singer being the famous

Joanna Wagner.  But my greatest satisfaction was derived

from the ``Liebig Classical Concerts.''  These were,

undoubtedly, the best instrumental music then given in

Europe, and a small party of us were very assiduous in

our attendance.  Three afternoons a week we were, as a

rule, gathered about our table in the garden where the

concerts were given, and, in the midst of us, Alexander

Thayer, the biographer of Beethoven, who discussed the

music with us during its intervals.  Beethoven was, for

him, the one personage in human history, and Beethoven's

music the only worthy object of human concern.  He knew

every composition, every note, every variant, and had

wrestled for years with their profound meanings.  Many

of his explanations were fantastic, but some were

suggestive and all were interesting.  Even more inspiring

was another new-found friend, Henry Simmons Frieze; a

thorough musician, and a most lovely character.  He

broached no theories, uttered no comments, but sat rapt

by the melody and harmony--transfigured--``his face as

it had been the face of an angel.''  In these Liebig

concerts we then heard, for the first time, the music of a

new composer,--one Wagner,--and agreed that while it

was all very strange, there was really something in the

overture to ``Tannh<a:>user.''



At the close of this stay in Berlin, I went with a party

of fellow-students through Austria to Italy.  The whole

journey was a delight, and the passage by steamer from

Trieste to Venice was made noteworthy by a new

acquaintance,--James Russell Lowell.  As he had already

written the ``Vision of Sir Launfal,'' the ``Fable for

Critics,'' and the ``Biglow Papers,'' I stood in great awe of

him; but this feeling rapidly disappeared in his genial

presence.  He was a student like the rest of us,--for

he had been passing the winter at Dresden, working

in German literature, as a preparation for succeeding

Longfellow in the professorship at Harvard.  He

came to our rooms, and there linger delightfully in

my memory his humorous accounts of Italian life as he

had known it.



During the whole of the journey, it was my exceeding

good fortune to be thrown into very close relations with

two of our party, both of whom became eminent Latin

professors, and one of whom,--already referred to,--

Frieze, from his lecture-room in the University of

Michigan, afterward did more than any other man within my

knowledge to make classical scholarship a means of culture

throughout our Western States.  My excursions in

Rome, under that guidance, I have always looked upon

as among the fortunate things of life.  The day was given

to exploration, the evening to discussion, not merely of

archaeological theories, but of the weightier matters

pertaining to the history of Roman civilization and its

influence.  Dear Frieze and Fishburne!  How vividly come

back the days in the tower of the Croce di Malta, at Genoa,

in our sky-parlor of the Piazza di Spagna at Rome, and

in the old ``Capuchin Hotel'' at Amalfi, when we held high

debate on the analogies between the Roman Empire and

the British, and upon various kindred subjects.



An episode, of much importance to me at this time,

was my meeting our American minister at Naples, Robert

Dale Owen.  His talks on the political state of Italy, and

his pictures of the monstrous despotism of ``King

Bomba'' took strong hold upon me.  Not even the pages

of Colletta or of Settembrini have done so much to arouse

in me a sense of the moral value of political history.



Then, too, I made the first of my many excursions

through the historic towns of Italy.  My reading of

Sismondi's ``Italian Republics'' had deeply interested me in

their history, and had peopled them again with their old

turbulent population.  I seemed to see going on before my

eyes the old struggle between Guelphs and Ghibellines,

and between the demagogues and the city tyrants.  In the

midst of such scenes my passion for historical reading

was strengthened, and the whole subject took on new and

deeper meanings.



On my way northward, excursions among the cities

of southern France, especially Nismes, Arles, and Orange,

gave me a far better conception of Roman imperial power

than could be obtained in Italy alone, and Avignon,

Bourges, and Toulouse deepened my conceptions of

mediaeval history.



Having returned to America in the summer of 1856

and met my class, assembled to take the master's degree

in course at Yale, I was urged by my old Yale friends,

especially by Porter and Gilman, to remain in New Haven. 

They virtually pledged me a position in the school of art

about to be established; but my belief was in the value

of historical studies, and I accepted an election to a

professorship of history at the University of Michigan.  The

work there was a joy to me from first to last, and my

relations with my students of that period, before I had

become distracted from them by the cares of an executive

position, were among the most delightful of my life. 

Then, perhaps, began the most real part of my education. 

The historical works of Buckle, Lecky, and Draper, which

were then appearing, gave me a new and fruitful impulse;

but most stimulating of all was the atmosphere coming

from the great thought of Darwin and Herbert Spencer,--

an atmosphere in which history became less and less a

matter of annals, and more and more a record of the

unfolding of humanity.  Then, too, was borne in upon

me the meaning of the proverb docendo disces.  I found

energetic Western men in my classes ready to discuss

historical questions, and discovered that in order to keep

up my part of the discussions, as well as to fit myself for

my class-room duties, I must work as I had never worked

before.  The education I then received from my classes at

the University of Michigan was perhaps the most effective

of all.



