




                               BOOK III
                               Of Words



                              Chapter I
                   Of Words or Language in General



  1. Man fitted to form articulate sounds. God, having designed man
for a sociable creature, made him not only with an inclination, and
under a necessity to have fellowship with those of his own kind, but
furnished him also with language, which was to be the great instrument
and common tie of society. Man, therefore, had by nature his organs so
fashioned, as to be fit to frame articulate sounds, which we call
words. But this was not enough to produce language; for parrots, and
several other birds, will be taught to make articulate sounds distinct
enough, which yet by no means are capable of language.
  2. To use these sounds as signs of ideas. Besides articulate sounds,
therefore, it was further necessary that he should be able to use
these sounds as signs of internal conceptions; and to make them
stand as marks for the ideas within his own mind, whereby they might
be made known to others, and the thoughts of men's minds be conveyed
from one to another.
  3. To make them general signs. But neither was this sufficient to
make words so useful as they ought to be. It is not enough for the
perfection of language, that sounds can be made signs of ideas, unless
those signs can be so made use of as to comprehend several
particular things: for the multiplication of words would have
perplexed their use, had every particular thing need of a distinct
name to be signified by. To remedy this inconvenience, language had
yet a further improvement in the use of general terms, whereby one
word was made to mark a multitude of particular existences: which
advantageous use of sounds was obtained only by the difference of
the ideas they were made signs of: those names becoming general, which
are made to stand for general ideas, and those remaining particular,
where the ideas they are used for are particular.
  4. To make them signify the absence of positive ideas. Besides these
names which stand for ideas, there be other words which men make use
of, not to signify any idea, but the want or absence of some ideas,
simple or complex, or all ideas together; such as are nihil in
Latin, and in English, ignorance and barrenness. All which negative or
privative words cannot be said properly to belong to, or signify no
ideas: for then they would be perfectly insignificant sounds; but they
relate to positive ideas, and signify their absence.
  5. Words ultimately derived from such as signify sensible ideas.
It may also lead us a little towards the original of all our notions
and knowledge, if we remark how great a dependence our words have on
common sensible ideas; and how those which are made use of to stand
for actions and notions quite removed from sense, have their rise from
thence, and from obvious sensible ideas are transferred to more
abstruse significations, and made to stand for ideas that come not
under the cognizance of our senses; v.g. to imagine, apprehend,
comprehend, adhere, conceive, instil, disgust, disturbance,
tranquillity, &c., are all words taken from the operations of sensible
things, and applied to certain modes of thinking. Spirit, in its
primary signification, is breath; angel, a messenger: and I doubt
not but, if we could trace them to their sources, we should find, in
all languages, the names which stand for things that fall not under
our senses to have had their first rise from sensible ideas. By
which we may give some kind of guess what kind of notions they were,
and whence derived, which filled their minds who were the first
beginners of languages, and how nature, even in the naming of
things, unawares suggested to men the originals and principles of
all their knowledge: whilst, to give names that might make known to
others any operations they felt in themselves, or any other ideas that
came not under their senses, they were fain to borrow words from
ordinary known ideas of sensation, by that means to make others the
more easily to conceive those operations they experimented in
themselves, which made no outward sensible appearances; and then, when
they had got known and agreed names to signify those internal
operations of their own minds, they were sufficiently furnished to
make known by words all their other ideas; since they could consist of
nothing but either of outward sensible perceptions, or of the inward
operations of their minds about them; we having, as has been proved,
no ideas at all, but what originally come either from sensible objects
without, or what we feel within ourselves, from the inward workings of
our own spirits, of which we are conscious to ourselves within.
  6. Distribution of subjects to be treated of. But to understand
better the use and force of Language, as subservient to instruction
and knowledge, it will be convenient to consider:
  First, To what it is that names, in the use of language, are
immediately applied.
  Secondly, Since all (except proper) names are general, and so
stand not particularly for this or that single thing, but for sorts
and ranks of things, it will be necessary to consider, in the next
place, what the sorts and kinds, or, if you rather like the Latin
names, what the Species and Genera of things are, wherein they
consist, and how they come to be made. These being (as they ought)
well looked into, we shall the better come to find the right use of
words; the natural advantages and defects of language; and the
remedies that ought to be used, to avoid the inconveniences of
obscurity or uncertainty in the signification of words: without
which it is impossible to discourse with any clearness or order
concerning knowledge: which, being conversant about propositions,
and those most commonly universal ones, has greater connexion with
words than perhaps is suspected.
  These considerations, therefore, shall be the matter of the
following chapters.
                              Chapter II
                    Of the Signification of Words

  1. Words are sensible signs, necessary for communication of ideas.
Man, though he have great variety of thoughts, and such from which
others as well as himself might receive profit and delight; yet they
are all within his own breast, invisible and hidden from others, nor
can of themselves be made to appear. The comfort and advantage of
society not being to be had without communication of thoughts, it
was necessary that man should find out some external sensible signs,
whereof those invisible ideas, which his thoughts are made up of,
might be made known to others. For this purpose nothing was so fit,
either for plenty or quickness, as those articulate sounds, which with
so much ease and variety he found himself able to make. Thus we may
conceive how words, which were by nature so well adapted to that
purpose, came to be made use of by men as the signs of their ideas;
not by any natural connexion that there is between particular
articulate sounds and certain ideas, for then there would be but one
language amongst all men; but by a voluntary imposition, whereby
such a word is made arbitrarily the mark of such an idea. The use,
then, of words, is to be sensible marks of ideas; and the ideas they
stand for are their proper and immediate signification.
  2. Words, in their immediate signification, are the sensible signs
of his ideas who uses them. The use men have of these marks being
either to record their own thoughts, for the assistance of their own
memory or, as it were, to bring out their ideas, and lay them before
the view of others: words, in their primary or immediate
signification, stand for nothing but the ideas in the mind of him that
uses them, how imperfectly soever or carelessly those ideas are
collected from the things which they are supposed to represent. When a
man speaks to another, it is that he may be understood: and the end of
speech is, that those sounds, as marks, may make known his ideas to
the hearer. That then which words are the marks of are the ideas of
the speaker: nor can any one apply them as marks, immediately, to
anything else but the ideas that he himself hath: for this would be to
make them signs of his own conceptions, and yet apply them to other
ideas; which would be to make them signs and not signs of his ideas at
the same time, and so in effect to have no signification at all. Words
being voluntary signs, they cannot be voluntary signs imposed by him
on things he knows not. That would be to make them signs of nothing,
sounds without signification. A man cannot make his words the signs
either of qualities in things, or of conceptions in the mind of
another, whereof he has none in his own. Till he has some ideas of his
own, he cannot suppose them to correspond with the conceptions of
another man; nor can he use any signs for them of another man; nor can
he use any signs for them: for thus they would be the signs of he
knows not what, which is in truth to be the signs of nothing. But when
he represents to himself other men's ideas by some of his own, if he
consent to give them the same names that other men do, it is still
to his own ideas; to ideas that he has, and not to ideas that he has
not.
  3. Examples of this. This is so necessary in the use of language,
that in this respect the knowing and the ignorant, the learned and the
unlearned, use the words they speak (with any meaning) all alike.
They, in every man's mouth, stand for the ideas he has, and which he
would express by them. A child having taken notice of nothing in the
metal he hears called gold, but the bright shining yellow colour, he
applies the word gold only to his own idea of that colour, and nothing
else; and therefore calls the same colour in a peacock's tail gold.
Another that hath better observed, adds to shining yellow great
weight: and then the sound gold, when he uses it, stands for a complex
idea of a shining yellow and a very weighty substance. Another adds to
those qualities fusibility: and then the word gold signifies to him
a body, bright, yellow, fusible, and very heavy. Another adds
malleability. Each of these uses equally the word gold, when they have
occasion to express the idea which they have applied it to: but it
is evident that each can apply it only to his own idea; nor can he
make it stand as a sign of such a complex idea as he has not.
  4. Words are often secretly referred first to the ideas supposed
to be in other men's minds. But though words, as they are used by men,
can properly and immediately signify nothing but the ideas that are in
the mind of the speaker; yet they in their thoughts give them a secret
reference to two other things.
  First, They suppose their words to be marks of the ideas in the
minds also of other men, with whom they communicate: for else they
should talk in vain, and could not be understood, if the sounds they
applied to one idea were such as by the hearer were applied to
another, which is to speak two languages. But in this men stand not
usually to examine, whether the idea they, and those they discourse
with have in their minds be the same: but think it enough that they
use the word, as they imagine, in the common acceptation of that
language; in which they suppose that the idea they make it a sign of
is precisely the same to which the understanding men of that country
apply that name.
  5. To the reality of things. Secondly, Because men would not be
thought to talk barely of their own imagination, but of things as
really they are; therefore they often suppose the words to stand
also for the reality of things. But this relating more particularly to
substances and their names, as perhaps the former does to simple ideas
and modes, we shall speak of these two different ways of applying
words more at large, when we come to treat of the names of mixed modes
and substances in particular: though give me leave here to say, that
it is a perverting the use of words, and brings unavoidable
obscurity and confusion into whenever we make them stand for
anything but those ideas we have in our own minds.
  6. Words by use readily excite ideas of their objects. Concerning
words, also, it is further to be considered:
  First, that they being immediately the signs of men's ideas, and
by that means the instruments whereby men communicate their
conceptions, and express to one another those thoughts and
imaginations they have within their own their own breasts; there
comes, by constant use, to be such a connexion between certain
sounds and the ideas they stand for, that the names heard, almost as
readily excite certain ideas as if the objects themselves, which are
apt to produce them, did actually affect the senses. Which is
manifestly so in all obvious sensible qualities, and in all substances
that frequently and familiarly occur to us.
  7. Words are often used without signification, and why. Secondly,
That though the proper and immediate signification of words are
ideas in the mind of the speaker, yet, because by familiar use from
our cradles, we come to learn certain articulate sounds very
perfectly, and have them readily on our tongues, and always at hand in
our memories, but yet are not always careful to examine or settle
their significations perfectly; it often happens that men, even when
they would apply themselves to an attentive consideration, do set
their thoughts more on words than things. Nay, because words are
many of them learned before the ideas are known for which they
stand: therefore some, not only children but men, speak several
words no otherwise than parrots do, only because they have learned
them, and have been accustomed to those sounds. But so far as words
are of use and signification, so far is there a constant connexion
between the sound and the idea, and a designation that the one
stands for the other; without which application of them, they are
nothing but so much insignificant noise.
  8. Their signification perfectly arbitrary, not the consequence of a
natural connexion. Words, by long and familiar use, as has been
said, come to excite in men certain ideas so constantly and readily,
that they are apt to suppose a natural connexion between them. But
that they signify only men's peculiar ideas, and that by a perfect
arbitrary imposition, is evident, in that they often fail to excite in
others (even that use the same language) the same ideas we take them
to be signs of: and every man has so inviolable a liberty to make
words stand for what ideas he pleases, that no one hath the power to
make others have the same ideas in their minds that he has, when
they use the same words that he does. And therefore the great Augustus
himself, in the possession of that power which ruled the world,
acknowledged he could not make a new Latin word: which was as much
as to say, that he could not arbitrarily appoint what idea any sound
should be a sign of, in the mouths and common language of his
subjects. It is true, common use, by a tacit consent, appropriates
certain sounds to certain ideas in all languages, which so far
limits the signification of that sound, that unless a man applies it
to the same idea, he does not speak properly: and let me add, that
unless a man's words excite the same ideas in the hearer which he
makes them stand for in speaking, he does not speak intelligibly.
But whatever be the consequence of any man's using of words
differently, either from their general meaning, or the particular
sense of the person to whom he addresses them; this is certain,
their signification, in his use of them, is limited to his ideas,
and they can be signs of nothing else.
                             Chapter III
                           Of General Terms

  1. The greatest part of words are general terms. All things that
exist being particulars, it may perhaps be thought reasonable that
words, which ought to be conformed to things, should be so too,- I
mean in their signification: but yet we find quite the contrary. The
far greatest part of words that make all languages are general
terms: which has not been the effect of neglect or chance, but of
reason and necessity.
  2. That every particular thing should have a name for itself is
impossible. First, It is impossible that every particular thing should
have a distinct peculiar name. For, the signification and use of words
depending on that connexion which the mind makes between its ideas and
the sounds it uses as signs of them, it is necessary, in the
application of names to things, that the mind should have distinct
ideas of the things, and retain also the particular name that
belongs to every one, with its peculiar appropriation to that idea.
But it is beyond the power of human capacity to frame and retain
distinct ideas of all the particular things we meet with: every bird
and beast men saw; every tree and plant that affected the senses,
could not find a place in the most capacious understanding. If it be
looked on as an instance of a prodigious memory, that some generals
have been able to call every soldier in their army by his proper name,
we may easily find a reason why men have never attempted to give names
to each sheep in their flock, or crow that flies over their heads;
much less to call every leaf of plants, or grain of sand that came
in their way, by a peculiar name.
  3. And would be useless, if it were possible. Secondly, If it were
possible, it would yet be useless; because it would not serve to the
chief end of language. Men would in vain heap up names of particular
things, that would not serve them to communicate their thoughts. Men
learn names, and use them in talk with others, only that they may be
understood: which is then only done when, by use or consent, the sound
I make by the organs of speech, excites in another man's mind who
hears it, the idea I apply it to in mine, when I speak it. This cannot
be done by names applied to particular things; whereof I alone
having the ideas in my mind, the names of them could not be
significant or intelligible to another, who was not acquainted with
all those very particular things which had fallen under my notice.
  4. A distinct name for every particular thing, not fitted for
enlargement of knowledge. Thirdly, But yet, granting this also
feasible, (which I think is not), yet a distinct name for every
particular thing would not be of any great use for the improvement
of knowledge: which, though founded in particular things, enlarges
itself by general views; to which things reduced into sorts, under
general names, are properly subservient. These, with the names
belonging to them, come within some compass, and do not multiply every
moment, beyond what either the mind can contain, or use requires.
And therefore, in these, men have for the most part stopped: but yet
not so as to hinder themselves from distinguishing particular things
by appropriated names, where convenience demands it. And therefore
in their own species, which they have most to do with, and wherein
they have often occasion to mention particular persons, they make
use of proper names; and there distinct individuals have distinct
denominations.
  5. What things have proper names, and why. Besides persons,
countries also, cities, rivers, mountains, and other the like
distinctions of place have usually found peculiar names, and that
for the same reason; they being such as men have often an occasion
to mark particularly, and, as it were, set before others in their
discourses with them. And I doubt not but, if we had reason to mention
particular horses as often as we have to mention particular men, we
should have proper names for the one, as familiar as for the other,
and Bucephalus would be a word as much in use as Alexander. And
therefore we see that, amongst jockeys, horses have their proper names
to be known and distinguished by, as commonly as their servants:
because, amongst them, there is often occasion to mention this or that
particular horse when he is out of sight.
  6. How general words are made. The next thing to be considered
is,- How general words come to be made. For, since all things that
exist are only particulars, how come we by general terms; or where
find we those general natures they are supposed to stand for? Words
become general by being made the signs of general ideas: and ideas
become general, by separating from them the circumstances of time
and place, and any other ideas that may determine them to this or that
particular existence. By this way of abstraction they are made capable
of representing more individuals than one; each of which having in
it a conformity to that abstract idea, is (as we call it) of that
sort.
  7. Shown by the way we enlarge our complex ideas from infancy.
But, to deduce this a little more distinctly, it will not perhaps be
amiss to trace our notions and names from their beginning, and observe
by what degrees we proceed, and by what steps we enlarge our ideas
from our first infancy. There is nothing more evident, than that the
ideas of the persons children converse with (to instance in them
alone) are, like the persons themselves, only particular. The ideas of
the nurse and the mother are well framed in their minds; and, like
pictures of them there, represent only those individuals. The names
they first gave to them are confined to these individuals; and the
names of nurse and mamma, the child uses, determine themselves to
those persons. Afterwards, when time and a larger acquaintance have
made them observe that there are a great many other things in the
world, that in some common agreements of shape, and several other
qualities, resemble their father and mother, and those persons they
have been used to, they frame an idea, which they find those many
particulars do partake in; and to that they give, with others, the
name man, for example. And thus they come to have a general name,
and a general idea. Wherein they make nothing new; but only leave
out of the complex idea they had of Peter and James, Mary and Jane,
that which is peculiar to each, and retain only what is common to them
all.
  8. And further enlarge our complex ideas, by still leaving out
properties contained in them. By the same way that they come by the
general name and idea of man, they easily advance to more general
names and notions. For, observing that several things that differ from
their idea of man, and cannot therefore be comprehended under that
name, have yet certain qualities wherein they agree with man, by
retaining only those qualities, and uniting them into one idea, they
have again another and more general idea; to which having given a name
they make a term of a more comprehensive extension: which new idea
is made, not by any new addition, but only as before, by leaving out
the shape, and some other properties signified by the name man, and
retaining only a body, with life, sense, and spontaneous motion,
comprehended under the name animal.
  9. General natures are nothing but abstract and partial ideas of
more complex ones. That this is the way whereby men first formed
general ideas, and general names to them, I think is so evident,
that there needs no other proof of it but the considering of a man's
self, or others, and the ordinary proceedings of their minds in
knowledge. And he that thinks general natures or notions are
anything else but such abstract and partial ideas of more complex
ones, taken at first from particular existences, will, I fear, be at a
loss where to find them. For let any one effect, and then tell me,
wherein does his idea of man differ from that of Peter and Paul, or
his idea of horse from that of Bucephalus, but in the leaving out
something that is peculiar to each individual, and retaining so much
of those particular complex ideas of several particular existences
as they are found to agree in? Of the complex ideas signified by the
names man and horse, leaving out but those particulars wherein they
differ, and retaining only those wherein they agree, and of those
making a new distinct complex idea, and giving the name animal to
it, one has a more general term, that comprehends with man several
other creatures. Leave out of the idea of animal, sense and
spontaneous motion, and the remaining complex idea, made up of the
remaining simple ones of body, life, and nourishment, becomes a more
general one, under the more comprehensive term, vivens. And, not to
dwell longer upon this particular, so evident in itself; by the same
way the mind proceeds to body, substance, and at last to being, thing,
and such universal terms, which stand for any of our ideas whatsoever.
To conclude: this whole mystery of genera and species, which make such
a noise in the schools, and are with justice so little regarded out of
them, is nothing else but abstract ideas, more or less
comprehensive, with names annexed to them. In all which this is
constant and unvariable, That every more general term stands for
such an idea, and is but a part of any of those contained under it.
  10. Why the genus is ordinarily made use of in definitions. This may
show us the reason why, in the defining of words, which is nothing but
declaring their signification, we make use of the genus, or next
general word that comprehends it. Which is not out of necessity, but
only to save the labour of enumerating the several simple ideas
which the next general word or genus stands for; or, perhaps,
sometimes the shame of not being able to do it. But though defining by
genus and differentia (I crave leave to use these terms of art, though
originally Latin, since they most properly suit those notions they are
applied to), I say, though defining by the genus be the shortest
way, yet I think it may be doubted whether it be the best. This I am
sure, it is not the only, and so not absolutely necessary. For,
definition being nothing but making another understand by words what
idea the term defined stands for, a definition is best made by
enumerating those simple ideas that are combined in the
signification of the term defined: and if, instead of such an
enumeration, men have accustomed themselves to use the next general
term, it has not been out of necessity, or for greater clearness,
but for quickness and dispatch sake. For I think that, to one who
desired to know what idea the word man stood for; if it should be
said, that man was a solid extended substance, having life, sense,
spontaneous motion, and the faculty of reasoning, I doubt not but
the meaning of the term man would be as well understood, and the
idea it stands for be at least as clearly made known, as when it is
defined to be a rational animal: which, by the several definitions
of animal, vivens, and corpus, resolves itself into those enumerated
ideas. I have, in explaining the term man, followed here the
ordinary definition of the schools; which, though perhaps not the most
exact, yet serves well enough to my present purpose. And one may, in
this instance, see what gave occasion to the rule, that a definition
must consist of genus and differentia; and it suffices to show us
the little necessity there is of such a rule, or advantage in the
strict observing of it. For, definitions, as has been said, being only
the explaining of one word by several others, so that the meaning or
idea it stands for may be certainly known; languages are not always so
made according to the rules of logic, that every term can have its
signification exactly and clearly expressed by two others.
Experience sufficiently satisfies us to the contrary; or else those
who have made this rule have done ill, that they have given us so
few definitions conformable to it. But of definitions more in the next
chapter.
  11. General and universal are creatures of the understanding, and
belong not to the real existence of things. To return to general
words: it is plain, by what has been said, that general and
universal belong not to the real existence of things; but are the
inventions and creatures of the understanding, made by it for its
own use, and concern only signs, whether words or ideas. Words are
general, as has been said, when used for signs of general ideas, and
so are applicable indifferently to many particular things; and ideas
are general when they are set up as the representatives of many
particular things: but universality belongs not to things
themselves, which are all of them particular in their existence,
even those words and ideas which in their signification are general.
When therefore we quit particulars, the generals that rest are only
creatures of our own making; their general nature being nothing but
the capacity they are put into, by the understanding, of signifying or
representing many particulars. For the signification they have is
nothing but a relation that, by the mind of man, is added to them.
  12. Abstract ideas are the essences of genera and species. The
next thing therefore to be considered is, What kind of signification
it is that general words have. For, as it is evident that they do
not signify barely one particular thing; for then they would not be
general terms, but proper names, so, on the other side, it is as
evident they do not signify a plurality; for man and men would then
signify the same; and the distinction of numbers (as the grammarians
call them) would be superfluous and useless. That then which general
words signify is a sort of things; and each of them does that, by
being a sign of an abstract idea in the mind; to which idea, as things
existing are found to agree, so they come to be ranked under that
name, or, which is all one, be of that sort. Whereby it is evident
that the essences of the sorts, or, if the Latin word pleases
better, species of things, are nothing else but these abstract
ideas. For the having the essence of any species, being that which
makes anything to be of that species; and the conformity to the idea
to which the name is annexed being that which gives a right to that
name; the having the essence, and the having that conformity, must
needs be the same thing: since to be of any species, and to have a
right to the name of that species, is all one. As, for example, to
be a man, or of the species man, and to have right to the name man, is
the same thing. Again, to be a man, or of the species man, and have
the essence of a man, is the same thing. Now, since nothing can be a
man, or have a right to the name man, but what has a conformity to the
abstract idea the name man stands for, nor anything be a man, or
have a right to the species man, but what has the essence of that
species; it follows, that the abstract idea for which the name stands,
and the essence of the species, is one and the same. From whence it is
easy to observe, that the essences of the sorts of things, and,
consequently, the sorting of things, is the workmanship of the
understanding that abstracts and makes those general ideas.
  13. They are the workmanship of the understanding, but have their
foundation in the similitude of things. I would not here be thought to
forget, much less to deny, that Nature, in the production of things,
makes several of them alike: there is nothing more obvious, especially
in the race of animals, and all things propagated by seed. But yet I
think we may say, the sorting of them under names is the workmanship
of the understanding, taking occasion, from the similitude it observes
amongst them, to make abstract general ideas, and set them up in the
mind, with names annexed to them, as patterns or forms, (for, in
that sense, the word form has a very proper signification,) to which
as particular things existing are found to agree, so they come to be
of that species, have that denomination, or are put into that classis.
For when we say this is a man, that a horse; this justice, that
cruelty; this a watch, that a jack; what do we else but rank things
under different specific names, as agreeing to those abstract ideas,
of which we have made those names the signs? And what are the essences
of those species set out and marked by names, but those abstract ideas
in the mind; which are, as it were, the bonds between particular
things that exist, and the names they are to be ranked under? And when
general names have any connexion with particular beings, these
abstract ideas are the medium that unites them: so that the essences
of species, as distinguished and denominated by us, neither are nor
can be anything but those precise abstract ideas we have in our minds.
And therefore the supposed real essences of substances, if different
from our abstract ideas, cannot be the essences of the species we rank
things into. For two species may be one, as rationally as two
different essences be the essence of one species: and I demand what
are the alterations [which] may, or may not be made in a horse or
lead, without making either of them to be of another species? In
determining the species of things by our abstract ideas, this is
easy to resolve: but if any one will regulate himself herein by
supposed real essences, he will, I suppose, be at a loss: and he
will never be able to know when anything precisely ceases to be of the
species of a horse or lead.
  14. Each distinct abstract idea is a distinct essence. Nor will
any one wonder that I say these essences, or abstract ideas (which are
the measures of name, and the boundaries of species) are the
workmanship of the understanding, who considers that at least the
complex ones are often, in several men, different collections of
simple ideas; and therefore that is covetousness to one man, which
is not so to another. Nay, even in substances, where their abstract
ideas seem to be taken from the things themselves, they are not
constantly the same; no, not in that species which is most familiar to
us, and with which we have the most intimate acquaintance: it having
been more than once doubted, whether the foetus born of a woman were a
man, even so far as that it hath been debated, whether it were or were
not to be nourished and baptized: which could not be, if the
abstract idea or essence to which the name man belonged were of
nature's making; and were not the uncertain and various collection
of simple ideas, which the understanding put together, and then,
abstracting it, affixed a name to it. So that, in truth, every
distinct abstract idea is a distinct essence; and the names that stand
for such distinct ideas are the names of things essentially different.
Thus a circle is as essentially different from an oval as a sheep from
a goat; and rain is as essentially different from snow as water from
earth: that abstract idea which is the essence of one being impossible
to be communicated to the other. And thus any two abstract ideas, that
in any part vary one from another, with two distinct names annexed
to them, constitute two distinct sorts, or, if you please, species, as
essentially different as any two of the most remote or opposite in the
world.
  15. Several significations of the word "essence." But since the
essences of things are thought by some (and not without reason) to
be wholly unknown, it may not be amiss to consider the several
significations of the word essence.
  Real essences. First, Essence may be taken for the very being of
anything, whereby it is what it is. And thus the real internal, but
generally (in substances) unknown constitution of things, whereon
their discoverable qualities depend, may be called their essence. This
is the proper original signification of the word, as is evident from
the formation of it; essentia, in its primary notation, signifying
properly, being. And in this sense it is still used, when we speak
of the essence of particular things, without giving them any name.
  Nominal essences. Secondly, The learning and disputes of the schools
having been much busied about genus and species, the word essence
has almost lost its primary signification: and, instead of the real
constitution of things, has been almost wholly applied to the
artificial constitution of genus and species. It is true, there is
ordinarily supposed a real constitution of the sorts of things; and it
is past doubt there must be some real constitution, on which any
collection of simple ideas co-existing must depend. But, it being
evident that things are ranked under names into sorts or species, only
as they agree to certain abstract ideas, to which we have annexed
those names, the essence of each genus, or sort, comes to be nothing
but that abstract idea which the general, or sortal (if I may have
leave so to call it from sort, as I do general from genus), name
stands for. And this we shall find to be that which the word essence
imports in its most familiar use.
  These two sorts of essences, I suppose, may not unfitly be termed,
the one the real, the other nominal essence.
  16. Constant connexion between the name and nominal essence. Between
the nominal essence and the name there is so near a connexion, that
the name of any sort of things cannot be attributed to any
particular being but what has this essence, whereby it answers that
abstract idea whereof that name is the sign.
  17. Supposition, that species are distinguished by their real
essences, useless. Concerning the real essences of corporeal
substances (to mention these only) there are, if I mistake not, two
opinions. The one is of those who, using the word essence for they
know not what, suppose a certain number of those essences, according
to which all natural things are made, and wherein they do exactly
every one of them partake, and so become of this or that species.
The other and more rational opinion is of those who look on all
natural things to have a real, but unknown, constitution of their
insensible parts; from which flow those sensible qualities which serve
us to distinguish them one from another, according as we have occasion
to rank them into sorts, under common denominations. The former of
these opinions, which supposes these essences as a certain number of
forms or moulds, wherein all natural things that exist are cast, and
do equally partake, has, I imagine, very much perplexed the
knowledge of natural things. The frequent productions of monsters,
in all the species of animals, and of changelings, and other strange
issues of human birth, carry with them difficulties, not possible to
consist with this hypothesis; since it is as impossible that two
things partaking exactly of the same real essence should have
different properties, as that two figures partaking of the same real
essence of a circle should have different properties. But were there
no other reason against it, yet the supposition of essences that
cannot be known; and the making of them, nevertheless, to be that
which distinguishes the species of things, is so wholly useless and
unserviceable to any part of our knowledge, that that alone were
sufficient to make us lay it by, and content ourselves with such
essences of the sorts or species of things as come within the reach of
our knowledge: which, when seriously considered, will be found, as I
have said, to be nothing else but, those abstract complex ideas to
which we have annexed distinct general names.
  18. Real and nominal essence the same in simple ideas and modes,
different in substances. Essences being thus distinguished into
nominal and real, we may further observe, that, in the species of
simple ideas and modes, they are always the same; but in substances
always quite different. Thus, a figure including a space between three
lines, is the real as well as nominal essence of a triangle; it
being not only the abstract idea to which the general name is annexed,
but the very essentia or being of the thing itself; that foundation
from which all its properties flow, and to which they are all
inseparably annexed. But it is far otherwise concerning that parcel of
matter which makes the ring on my finger; wherein these two essences
are apparently different. For, it is the real constitution of its
insensible parts, on which depend all those properties of colour,
weight, fusibility, fixedness, &c., which are to be found in it; which
constitution we know not, and so, having no particular idea of, having
no name that is the sign of it. But yet it is its colour, weight,
fusibility, fixedness, &c., which makes it to be gold, or gives it a
right to that name, which is therefore its nominal essence. Since
nothing can be called gold but what has a conformity of qualities to
that abstract complex idea to which that name is annexed. But this
distinction of essences, belonging particularly to substances, we
shall, when we come to consider their names, have an occasion to treat
of more fully.
  19. Essences ingenerable and incorruptible. That such abstract
ideas, with names to them, as we have been speaking of are essences,
may further appear by what we are told concerning essences, viz.
that they are all ingenerable and incorruptible. Which cannot be
true of the real constitutions of things, which begin and perish
with them. All things that exist, besides their Author, are all liable
to change; especially those things we are acquainted with, and have
ranked into bands under distinct names or ensigns. Thus, that which
was grass to-day is to-morrow the flesh of a sheep; and, within a
few days after, becomes part of a man: in all which and the like
changes, it is evident their real essence- i.e. that constitution
whereon the properties of these several things depended- is destroyed,
and perishes with them. But essences being taken for ideas established
in the mind, with names annexed to them, they are supposed to remain
steadily the same, whatever mutations the particular substances are
liable to. For, whatever becomes of Alexander and Bucephalus, the
ideas to which man and horse are annexed, are supposed nevertheless to
remain the same; and so the essences of those species are preserved
whole and undestroyed, whatever changes happen to any or all of the
individuals of those species. By this means the essence of a species
rests safe and entire, without the existence of so much as one
individual of that kind. For, were there now no circle existing
anywhere in the world, (as perhaps that figure exists not anywhere
exactly marked out), yet the idea annexed to that name would not cease
to be what it is; nor cease to be as a pattern to determine which of
the particular figures we meet with have or have not a right to the
name circle, and so to show which of them, by having that essence, was
of that species. And though there neither were nor had been in
nature such a beast as an unicorn, or such a fish as a mermaid; yet,
supposing those names to stand for complex abstract ideas that
contained no inconsistency in them, the essence of a mermaid is as
intelligible as that of a man; and the idea of an unicorn as
certain, steady, and permanent as that of a horse. From what has
been said, it is evident, that the doctrine of the immutability of
essences proves them to be only abstract ideas; and is founded on
the relation established between them and certain sounds as signs of
them; and will always be true, as long as the same name can have the
same signification.
  20. Recapitulation. To conclude. This is that which in short I would
say, viz. that all the great business of genera and species, and their
essences, amounts to no more but this:- That men making abstract
ideas, and settling them in their minds with names annexed to them, do
thereby enable themselves to consider things, and discourse of them,
as it were in bundles, for the easier and readier improvement and
communication of their knowledge, which would advance but slowly
were their words and thoughts confined only to particulars.
                              Chapter IV
                     Of the Names of Simple Ideas

  1. Names of simple ideas, modes, and substances, have each something
peculiar. Though all words, as I have shown, signify nothing
immediately but the ideas in the mind of the speaker; yet, upon a
nearer survey, we shall find the names of simple ideas, mixed modes
(under which I comprise relations too), and natural substances, have
each of them something peculiar and different from the other. For
example:
  2. Names of simple ideas, and of substances intimate real existence.
First, the names of simple ideas and substances, with the abstract
ideas in the mind which they immediately signify, intimate also some
real existence, from which was derived their original pattern. But the
names of mixed modes terminate in the idea that is in the mind, and
lead not the thoughts any further; as we shall see more at large in
the following chapter.
  3. Names of simple ideas and modes signify always both real and
nominal essences. Secondly, The names of simple ideas and modes
signify always the real as well as nominal essence of their species.
But the names of natural substances signify rarely, if ever,
anything but barely the nominal essences of those species; as we shall
show in the chapter that treats of the names of substances in
particular.
  4. Names of simple ideas are undefinable. Thirdly, The names of
simple ideas are not capable of any definition; the names of all
complex ideas are. It has not, that I know, been yet observed by
anybody what words are, and what are not, capable of being defined;
the want whereof is (as I am apt to think) not seldom the occasion
of great wrangling and obscurity in men's discourses, whilst some
demand definitions of terms that cannot be defined; and others think
they ought not to rest satisfied in an explication made by a more
general word, and its restriction, (or to speak in terms of art, by
a genus and difference), when, even after such definition, made
according to rule, those who hear it have often no more a clear
conception of the meaning of the word than they had before. This at
least I think, that the showing what words are, and what are not,
capable of definitions, and wherein consists a good definition, is not
wholly besides our present purpose; and perhaps will afford so much
light to the nature of these signs and our ideas, as to deserve a more
particular consideration.
  5. If all names were definable, it would be a process in
infinitum. I will not here trouble myself to prove that all terms
are not definable, from that progress in infinitum, which it will
visibly lead us into, if we should allow that all names could be
defined. For, if the terms of one definition were still to be
defined by another, where at last should we stop? But I shall, from
the nature of our ideas, and the signification of our words, show
why some names can, and others cannot be defined; and which they are.
  6. What a definition is. I think it is agreed, that a definition
is nothing else but the showing the meaning of one word by several
other not synonymous terms. The meaning of words being only the
ideas they are made to stand for by him that uses them, the meaning of
any term is then showed, or the word is defined, when, by other words,
the idea it is made the sign of, and annexed to, in the mind of the
speaker, is as it were represented, or set before the view of another;
and thus its signification is ascertained. This is the only use and
end of definitions; and therefore the only measure of what is, or is
not a good definition.
  7. Simple ideas, why undefinable. This being premised, I say that
the names of simple ideas, and those only, are incapable of being
defined. The reason whereof is this, That the several terms of a
definition, signifying several ideas, they can all together by no
means represent an idea which has no composition at all: and therefore
a definition, which is properly nothing but the showing the meaning of
one word by several others not signifying each the same thing, can
in the names of simple ideas have no place.
  8. Instances: scholastic definitions of motion. The not observing
this difference in our ideas, and their names, has produced that
eminent trifling in the schools, which is so easy to be observed in
the definitions they give us of some few of these simple ideas. For,
as to the greatest part of them, even those masters of definitions
were fain to leave them untouched, merely by the impossibility they
found in it. What more exquisite jargon could the wit of man invent,
than this definition:- "The act of a being in power, as far forth as
in power"; which would puzzle any rational man, to whom it was not
already known by its famous absurdity, to guess what word it could
ever be supposed to be the explication of. If Tully, asking a Dutchman
what beweeginge was, should have received this explication in his
own language, that it was "actus entis in potentia quatenus in
potentia"; I ask whether any one can imagine he could thereby have
understood what the word beweeginge signified, or have guessed what
idea a Dutchman ordinarily had in his mind, and would signify to
another, when he used that sound?
  9. Modern definitions of motion. Nor have the modern philosophers,
who have endeavoured to throw off the jargon of the schools, and speak
intelligibly, much better succeeded in defining simple ideas,
whether by explaining their causes, or any otherwise. The atomists,
who define motion to be "a passage from one place to another," what do
they more than put one synonymous word for another? For what is
passage other than motion? And if they were asked what passage was,
how would they better define it than by motion? For is it not at least
as proper and significant to say, Passage is a motion from one place
to another, as to say, Motion is a passage, &c.? This is to translate,
and not to define, when we change two words of the same
signification one for another; which, when one is better understood
than the other, may serve to discover what idea the unknown stands
for; but is very far from a definition, unless we will say every
English word in the dictionary is the definition of the Latin word
it answers, and that motion is a definition of motus. Nor will the
"successive application of the parts of the superficies of one body to
those of another," which the Cartesians give us, prove a much better
definition of motion, when well examined.
  10. Definitions of light. "The act of perspicuous, as far forth as
perspicuous," is another Peripatetic definition of a simple idea;
which, though not more absurd than the former of motion, yet betrays
its uselessness and insignificancy more plainly; because experience
will easily convince any one that it cannot make the meaning of the
word light (which it pretends to define) at all understood by a
blind man, but the definition of motion appears not at first sight
so useless, because it escapes this way of trial. For this simple
idea, entering by the touch as well as sight, it is impossible to show
an example of any one who has no other way to get the idea of
motion, but barely by the definition of that name. Those who tell us
that light is a great number of little globules, striking briskly on
the bottom of the eye, speak more intelligibly than the Schools: but
yet these words never so well understood would make the idea the
word light stands for no more known to a man that understands it not
before, than if one should tell him that light was nothing but a
company of little tennis-balls, which fairies all day long struck with
rackets against some men's foreheads, whilst they passed by others.
For granting this explication of the thing to be true, yet the idea of
the cause of light, if we had it never so exact, would no more give us
the idea of light itself, as it is such a particular perception in us,
than the idea of the figure and motion of a sharp piece of steel would
give us the idea of that pain which it is able to cause in us. For the
cause of any sensation, and the sensation itself, in all the simple
ideas of one sense, are two ideas; and two ideas so different and
distant one from another, that no two can be more so. And therefore,
should Descartes's globules strike never so long on the retina of a
man who was blind by a gutta serena, he would thereby never have any
idea of light, or anything approaching it, though he understood
never so well what little globules were, and what striking on
another body was. And therefore the Cartesians very well distinguish
between that light which is the cause of that sensation in us, and the
idea which is produced in us by it, and is that which is properly
light.
  11. Simple ideas, why undefinable, further explained. Simple
ideas, as has been shown, are only to be got by those impressions
objects themselves make on our minds, by the proper inlets appointed
to each sort. If they are not received this way, all the words in
the world, made use of to explain or define any of their names, will
never be able to produce in us the idea it stands for. For, words
being sounds, can produce in us no other simple ideas than of those
very sounds; nor excite any in us, but by that voluntary connexion
which is known to be between them and those simple ideas which
common use has made them the signs of. He that thinks otherwise, let
him try if any words can give him the taste of a pine-apple, and
make him have the true idea of the relish of that celebrated delicious
fruit. So far as he is told it has a resemblance with any tastes
whereof he has the ideas already in his memory, imprinted there by
sensible objects, not strangers to his palate, so far may he
approach that resemblance in his mind. But this is not giving us
that idea by a definition, but exciting in us other simple ideas by
their known names; which will be still very different from the true
taste of that fruit itself. In light and colours, and all other simple
ideas, it is the same thing: for the signification of sounds is not
natural, but only imposed and arbitrary. And no definition of light or
redness is more fitted or able to produce either of those ideas in us,
than the sound light or red, by itself. For, to hope to produce an
idea of light or colour by a sound, however formed, is to expect
that sounds should be visible, or colours audible; and to make the
ears do the office of all the other senses. Which is all one as to
say, that we might taste, smell, and see by the ears: a sort of
philosophy worthy only of Sancho Panza, who had the faculty to see
Dulcinea by hearsay. And therefore he that has not before received
into his mind, by the proper inlet, the simple idea which any word
stands for, can never come to know the signification of that word by
any other words or sounds whatsoever, put together according to any
rules of definition. The only way is, by applying to his senses the
proper object; and so producing that idea in him, for which he has
learned the name already. A studious blind man, who had mightily
beat his head about visible objects, and made use of the explication
of his books and friends, to understand those names of light and
colours which often came in his way, bragged one day, That he now
understood what scarlet signified. Upon which, his friend demanding
what scarlet was? The blind man answered, It was like the sound of a
trumpet. Just such an understanding of the name of any other simple
idea will he have, who hopes to get it only from a definition, or
other words made use of to explain it.
  12. The contrary shown in complex ideas, by instances of a statue
and rainbow. The case is quite otherwise in complex ideas; which,
consisting of several simple ones, it is in the power of words,
standing for the several ideas that make that composition, to
imprint complex ideas in the mind which were never there before, and
so make their names be understood. In such collections of ideas,
passing under one name, definition, or the teaching the
signification of one word by several others, has place, and may make
us understand the names of things which never came within the reach of
our senses; and frame ideas suitable to those in other men's minds,
when they use those names: provided that none of the terms of the
definition stand for any such simple ideas, which he to whom the
explication is made has never yet had in his thought. Thus the word
statue may be explained to a blind man by other words, when picture
cannot; his senses having given him the idea of figure, but not of
colours, which therefore words cannot excite in him. This gained the
prize to the painter against the statuary: each of which contending
for the excellency of his art, and the statuary bragging that his
was to be preferred, because it reached further, and even those who
had lost their eyes could yet perceive the excellency of it. The
painter agreed to refer himself to the judgment of a blind man; who
being brought where there was a statue made by the one, and a
picture drawn by the other; he was first led to the statue, in which
he traced with his hands all the lineaments of the face and body,
and with great admiration applauded the skill of the workman. But
being led to the picture, and having his hands laid upon it, was told,
that now he touched the head, and then the forehead, eyes, nose,
&c., as his hand moved over the parts of the picture on the cloth,
without finding any the least distinction: whereupon he cried out,
that certainly that must needs be a very admirable and divine piece of
workmanship, which could represent to them all those parts, where he
could neither feel nor perceive anything.
  13. Colours indefinable to the born-blind. He that should use the
word rainbow to one who knew all those colours, but yet had never seen
that phenomenon, would, by enumerating the figure, largeness,
position, and order of the colours, so well define that word that it
might be perfectly understood. But yet that definition, how exact
and perfect soever, would never make a blind man understand it;
because several of the simple ideas that make that complex one,
being such as he never received by sensation and experience, no
words are able to excite them in his mind.
  14. Complex ideas definable only when the simple ideas of which they
consist have been got from experience. Simple ideas, as has been
shown, can only be got by experience from those objects which are
proper to produce in us those perceptions. When, by this means, we
have our minds stored with them, and know the names for them, then
we are in a condition to define, and by definition to understand,
the names of complex ideas that are made up of them. But when any term
stands for a simple idea that a man has never yet had in his mind,
it is impossible by any words to make known its meaning to him. When
any term stands for an idea a man is acquainted with, but is
ignorant that that term is the sign of it, then another name of the
same idea, which he has been accustomed to, may make him understand
its meaning. But in no case whatsoever is any name of any simple
idea capable of a definition.
  15. Names of simple ideas of less doubtful meaning than those of
mixed modes and substances. Fourthly, But though the names of simple
ideas have not the help of definition to determine their
signification, yet that hinders not but that they are generally less
doubtful and uncertain than those of mixed modes and substances;
because they, standing only for one simple perception, men for the
most part easily and perfectly agree in their signification; and there
is little room for mistake and wrangling about their meaning. He
that knows once that whiteness is the name of that colour he has
observed in snow or milk, will not be apt to misapply that word, as
long as he retains that idea; which when he has quite lost, he is
not apt to mistake the meaning of it, but perceives he understands
it not. There is neither a multiplicity of simple ideas to be put
together, which makes the doubtfulness in the names of mixed modes;
nor a supposed, but an unknown, real essence, with properties
depending thereon, the precise number whereof is also unknown, which
makes the difficulty in the names of substances. But, on the contrary,
in simple ideas the whole signification of the name is known at
once, and consists not of parts, whereof more or less being put in,
the idea may be varied, and so the signification of name be obscure,
or uncertain.
  16. Simple ideas have few ascents in linea praedicamentali. Fifthly,
This further may be observed concerning simple ideas and their
names, that they have but few ascents in linea praedicamentali, (as
they call it,) from the lowest species to the summum genus. The reason
whereof is, that the lowest species being but one simple idea, nothing
can be left out of it, that so the difference being taken away, it may
agree with some other thing in one idea common to them both; which,
having one name, is the genus of the other two: v.g. there is
nothing that can be left out of the idea of white and red to make them
agree in one common appearance, and so have one general name; as
rationality being left out of the complex idea of man, makes it
agree with brute in the more general idea and name of animal. And
therefore when, to avoid unpleasant enumerations, men would comprehend
both white and red, and several other such simple ideas, under one
general name, they have been fain to do it by a word which denotes
only the way they get into the mind. For when white, red, and yellow
are all comprehended under the genus or name colour, it signifies no
more but such ideas as are produced in the mind only by the sight, and
have entrance only through the eyes. And when they would frame yet a
more general term to comprehend both colours and sounds, and the
like simple ideas, they do it by a word that signifies all such as
come into the mind only by one sense. And so the general term quality,
in its ordinary acceptation, comprehends colours, sounds, tastes,
smells, and tangible qualities, with distinction from extension,
number, motion, pleasure, and pain, which make impressions on the mind
and introduce their ideas by more senses than one.
  17. Names of simple ideas not arbitrary, but perfectly taken from
the existence of things. Sixthly, The names of simple ideas,
substances, and mixed modes have also this difference: that those of
mixed modes stand for ideas perfectly arbitrary; those of substances
are not perfectly so, but refer to a pattern, though with some
latitude; and those of simple ideas are perfectly taken from the
existence of things, and are not arbitrary at an. Which, what
difference it makes in the significations of their names, we shall see
in the following chapters.
  Simple modes. The names of simple modes differ little from those
of simple ideas.
                              Chapter V
              Of the Names of Mixed Modes and Relations

  1. Mixed modes stand for abstract ideas, as other general names. The
names of mixed modes, being general, they stand, as has been shewed,
for sorts or species of things, each of which has its peculiar
essence. The essences of these species also, as has been shewed, are
nothing but the abstract ideas in the mind, to which the name is
annexed. Thus far the names and essences of mixed modes have nothing
but what is common to them with other ideas: but if we take a little
nearer survey of them, we shall find that they have something
peculiar, which perhaps may deserve our attention.
  2. First, The abstract ideas they stand for are made by the
understanding. The first particularity I shall observe in them, is,
that the abstract ideas, or, if you please, the essences, of the
several species of mixed modes, are made by the understanding, wherein
they differ from those of simple ideas: in which sort the mind has
no power to make any one, but only receives such as are presented to
it by the real existence of things operating upon it.
  3. Secondly, made arbitrarily, and without patterns. In the next
place, these essences of the species of mixed modes are not only
made by the mind, but made very arbitrarily, made without patterns, or
reference to any real existence. Wherein they differ from those of
substances, which carry with them the supposition of some real
being, from which they are taken, and to which they are comformable.
But, in its complex ideas of mixed modes, the mind takes a liberty not
to follow the existence of things exactly. It unites and retains
certain collections, as so many distinct specific ideas; whilst
others, that as often occur in nature, and are as plainly suggested by
outward things, pass neglected, without particular names or
specifications. Nor does the mind, in these of mixed modes, as in
the complex idea of substances, examine them by the real existence
of things; or verify them by patterns containing such peculiar
compositions in nature. To know whether his idea of adultery or incest
be right, will a man seek it anywhere amongst things existing? Or is
it true because any one has been witness to such an action? No: but it
suffices here, that men have put together such a collection into one
complex idea, that makes the archetype and specific idea, whether ever
any such action were committed in rerum natura or no.
  4. How this is done. To understand this right, we must consider
wherein this making of these complex ideas consists; and that is not
in the making any new idea, but putting together those which the
mind had before. Wherein the mind does these three things: First, It
chooses a certain number; Secondly, It gives them connexion, and makes
them into one idea; Thirdly, It ties them together by a name. If we
examine how the mind proceeds in these, and what liberty it takes in
them, we shall easily observe how these essences of the species of
mixed modes are the workmanship of the mind; and, consequently, that
the species themselves are of men's making. Evidently arbitrary, in
that the idea is often before the existence. Nobody can doubt but that
these ideas of mixed modes are made by a voluntary collection of
ideas, put together in the mind, independent from any original
patterns in nature, who will but reflect that this sort of complex
ideas may be made, abstracted, and have names given them, and so a
species be constituted, before any one individual of that species ever
existed. Who can doubt but the ideas of sacrilege or adultery might be
framed in the minds of men, and have names given them, and so these
species of mixed modes be constituted, before either of them was
ever committed; and might be as well discoursed of and reasoned about,
and as certain truths discovered of them, whilst yet they had no being
but in the understanding, as well as now, that they have but too
frequently a real existence? Whereby it is plain how much the sorts of
mixed modes are the creatures of the understanding, where they have
a being as subservient to all the ends of real truth and knowledge, as
when they really exist. And we cannot doubt but law-makers have
often made laws about species of actions which were only the creatures
of their own understandings; beings that had no other existence but in
their own minds. And I think nobody can deny but that the resurrection
was a species of mixed modes in the mind, before it really existed.
  6. Instances: murder, incest, stabbing. To see how arbitrarily these
essences of mixed modes are made by the mind, we need but take a
view of almost any of them. A little looking into them will satisfy
us, that it is the mind that combines several scattered independent
ideas into one complex one; and, by the common name it gives them,
makes them the essence of a certain species, without regulating itself
by any connexion they have in nature. For what greater connexion in
nature has the idea of a man than the idea of a sheep with killing,
that this is made a particular species of action, signified by the
word murder, and the other not? Or what union is there in nature
between the idea of the relation of a father with killing than that of
a son or neighbour, that those are combined into one complex idea, and
thereby made the essence of the distinct species parricide, whilst the
other makes no distinct species at all? But, though they have made
killing a man's father or mother a distinct species from killing his
son or daughter, yet, in some other cases, son and daughter are
taken in too, as well as father and mother: and they are all equally
comprehended in the same species, as in that of incest. Thus the
mind in mixed modes arbitrarily unites into complex ideas such as it
finds convenient; whilst others that have altogether as much union
in nature are left loose, and never combined into one idea, because
they have no need of one name. It is evident then that the mind, by
its free choice, gives a connexion to a certain number of ideas, which
in nature have no more union with one another than others that it
leaves out: why else is the part of the weapon the beginning of the
wound is made with taken notice of, to make the distinct species
called stabbing, and the figure and matter of the weapon left out? I
do not say this is done without reason, as we shall see more by and
by; but this I say, that it is done by the free choice of the mind,
pursuing its own ends; and that, therefore, these species of mixed
modes are the workmanship of the understanding. And there is nothing
more evident than that, for the most part, in the framing of these
ideas, the mind searches not its patterns in nature, nor refers the
ideas it makes to the real existence of things, but puts such together
as may best serve its own purposes, without tying itself to a
precise imitation of anything that really exists.
  7. But still subservient to the end of language, and not made at
random. But, though these complex ideas or essences of mixed modes
depend on the mind, and are made by it with great liberty, yet they
are not made at random, and jumbled together without any reason at
all. Though these complex ideas be not always copied from nature,
yet they are always suited to the end for which abstract ideas are
made: and though they be combinations made of ideas that are loose
enough, and have as little union in themselves as several others to
which the mind never gives a connexion that combines them into one
idea; yet they are always made for the convenience of communication,
which is the chief end of language. The use of language is, by short
sounds, to signify with ease and dispatch general conceptions; wherein
not only abundance of particulars may be contained, but also a great
variety of independent ideas collected into one complex one. In the
making therefore of the species of mixed modes, men have had regard
only to such combinations as they had occasion to mention one to
another. Those they have combined into distinct complex ideas, and
given names to; whilst others, that in nature have as near a union,
are left loose and unregarded. For, to go no further than human
actions themselves, if they would make distinct abstract ideas of
all the varieties which might be observed in them, the number must
be infinite, and the memory confounded with the plenty, as well as
overcharged to little purpose. It suffices that men make and name so
many complex ideas of these mixed modes as they find they have
occasion to have names for, in the ordinary occurrence of their
affairs. If they join to the idea of killing the idea of father or
mother, and so make a distinct species from killing a man's son or
neighbour, it is because of the different heinousness of the crime,
and the distinct punishment is, due to the murdering a man's father
and mother, different to what ought to be inflicted on the murderer of
a son or neighbour; and therefore they find it necessary to mention it
by a distinct name, which is the end of making that distinct
combination. But though the ideas of mother and daughter are so
differently treated, in reference to the idea of killing, that the one
is joined with it to make a distinct abstract idea with a name, and so
a distinct species, and the other not; yet, in respect of carnal
knowledge, they are both taken in under incest: and that still for the
same convenience of expressing under one name, and reckoning of one
species, such unclean mixtures as have a peculiar turpitude beyond
others; and this to avoid circumlocutions and tedious descriptions.
  8. Whereof the intranslatable words of divers languages are a proof.
A moderate skill in different languages will easily satisfy one of the
truth of this, it being so obvious to observe great store of words
in one language which have not any that answer them in another.
Which plainly shows that those of one country, by their customs and
manner of life, have found occasion to make several complex ideas, and
given names to them, which others never collected into specific ideas.
This could not have happened if these species were the steady
workmanship of nature, and not collections made and abstracted by
the mind, in order to naming, and for the convenience of
communication. The terms of our law, which are not empty sounds,
will hardly find words that answer them in the Spanish or Italian,
no scanty languages; much less, I think, could any one translate
them into the Caribbee or Westoe tongues: and the versura of the
Romans, or corban of the Jews, have no words in other languages to
answer them; the reason whereof is plain, from what has been said.
Nay, if we look a little more nearly into this matter, and exactly
compare different languages, we shall find that, though they have
words which in translations and dictionaries are supposed to answer
one another, yet there is scarce one of ten amongst the names of
complex ideas, especially of mixed modes, that stands for the same
precise idea which the word does that in dictionaries it is rendered
by. There are no ideas more common and less compounded than the
measures of time, extension and weight; and the Latin names, hora,
pes, libra, are without difficulty rendered by the English names,
hour, foot, and pound: but yet there is nothing more evident than that
the ideas a Roman annexed to these Latin names, were very far
different from those which an Englishman expresses by those English
ones. And if either of these should make use of the measures that
those of the other language designed by their names, he would be quite
out in his account. These are too sensible proofs to be doubted; and
we shall find this much more so in the names of more abstract and
compounded ideas, such as are the greatest part of those which make up
moral discourses: whose names, when men come curiously to compare with
those they are translated into, in other languages, they will find
very few of them exactly to correspond in the whole extent of their
significations.
  9. This shows species to be made for communication. The reason why I
take so particular notice of this is, that we may not be mistaken
about genera and species, and their essences, as if they were things
regularly and constantly made by nature, and had a real existence in
things; when they appear, upon a more wary survey, to be nothing
else but an artifice of the understanding, for the easier signifying
such collections of ideas as it should often have occasion to
communicate by one general term; under which divers particulars, as
far forth as they agreed to that abstract idea, might be comprehended.
And if the doubtful signification of the word species may make it
sound harsh to some, that I say the species of mixed modes are "made
by the understanding"; yet, I think, it can by nobody be denied that
it is the mind makes those abstract complex ideas to which specific
names are given. And if it be true, as it is, that the mind makes
the patterns for sorting and naming of things, I leave it to be
considered who makes the boundaries of the sort or species; since with
me species and sort have no other difference than that of a Latin
and English idiom.
  10. In mixed modes it is the name that ties the combination of
simple ideas together, and makes it a species. The near relation
that there is between species, essences, and their general name, at
least in mixed modes, will further appear when we consider, that it is
the name that seems to preserve those essences, and give them their
lasting duration. For, the connexion between the loose parts of
those complex ideas being made by the mind, this union, which has no
particular foundation in nature, would cease again, were there not
something that did, as it were, hold it together, and keep the parts
from scattering. Though therefore it be the mind that makes the
collection, it is the name which is as it were the knot that ties them
fast together. What a vast variety of different ideas does the word
triumphus hold together, and deliver to us as one species! Had this
name been never made, or quite lost, we might, no doubt, have had
descriptions of what passed in that solemnity: but yet, I think,
that which holds those different parts together, in the unity of one
complex idea, is that very word annexed to it; without which the
several parts of that would no more be thought to make one thing, than
any other show, which having never been made but once, had never
been united into one complex idea, under one denomination. How much,
therefore, in mixed modes, the unity necessary to any essence
depends on the mind; and how much the continuation and fixing of
that unity depends on the name in common use annexed to it, I leave to
be considered by those who look upon essences and species as real
established things in nature.
  11. Suitable to this, we find that men speaking of mixed modes,
seldom imagine or take any other for species of them, but such as
are set out by name: because they, being of man's making only, in
order to naming, no such species are taken notice of, or supposed to
be, unless a name be joined to it, as the sign of man's having
combined into one idea several loose ones; and by that name giving a
lasting union to the parts which would otherwise cease to have any, as
soon as the mind laid by that abstract idea, and ceased actually to
think on it. But when a name is once annexed to it, wherein the
parts of that complex idea have a settled and permanent union, then is
the essence, as it were, established, and the species looked on as
complete. For to what purpose should the memory charge itself with
such compositions, unless it were by abstraction to make them general?
And to what purpose make them general, unless it were that they
might have general names for the convenience of discourse and
communication? Thus we see, that killing a man with a sword or a
hatchet are looked on as no distinct species of action; but if the
point of the sword first enter the body, it passes for a distinct
species, where it has a distinct name, as in England, in whose
language it is called stabbing: but in another country, where it has
not happened to be specified under a peculiar name, it passes not
for a distinct species. But in the species of corporeal substances,
though it be the mind that makes the nominal essence, yet, since those
ideas which are combined in it are supposed to have an union in nature
whether the mind joins them or not, therefore those are looked on as
distinct species, without any operation of the mind, either
abstracting, or giving a name to that complex idea.
  12. For the originals of our mixed modes, we look no further than
the mind; which also shows them to he the workmanship of the
understanding. Conformable also to what has been said concerning the
essences of the species of mixed modes, that they are the creatures of
the understanding rather than the works of nature; conformable, I say,
to this, we find that their names lead our thoughts to the mind, and
no further. When we speak of justice, or gratitude, we frame to
ourselves no imagination of anything existing, which we would
conceive; but our thoughts terminate in the abstract ideas of those
virtues, and look not further; as they do when we speak of a horse, or
iron, whose specific ideas we consider not as barely in the mind,
but as in things themselves, which afford the original patterns of
those ideas. But in mixed modes, at least the most considerable
parts of them, which are moral beings, we consider the original
patterns as being in the mind, and to those we refer for the
distinguishing of particular beings under names. And hence I think
it is that these essences of the species of mixed modes are by a
more particular name called notions; as, by a peculiar right,
appertaining to the understanding.
  13. Their being made by the understanding without patterns, shows
the reason why they are so compounded. Hence, likewise, we may learn
why the complex ideas of mixed modes are commonly more compounded
and decompounded than those of natural substances. Because they
being the workmanship of the understanding, pursuing only its own
ends, and the conveniency of expressing in short those ideas it
would make known to another, it does with great liberty unite often
into one abstract idea things that, in their nature, have no
coherence; and so under one term bundle together a great variety of
compounded and decompounded ideas. Thus the name of procession: what a
great mixture of independent ideas of persons, habits, tapers, orders,
motions, sounds, does it contain in that complex one, which the mind
of man has arbitrarily put together, to express by that one name?
Whereas the complex ideas of the sorts of substances are usually
made up of only a small number of simple ones; and in the species of
animals, these two, viz. shape and voice, commonly make the whole
nominal essence.
  14. Names of mixed modes stand always for their real essences, which
are the workmanship of our minds. Another thing we may observe from
what has been said is, That the names of mixed modes always signify
(when they have any determined signification) the real essences of
their species. For, these abstract ideas being the workmanship of
the mind, and not referred to the real existence of things, there is
no supposition of anything more signified by that name, but barely
that complex idea the mind itself has formed; which is all it would
have expressed by it; and is that on which all the properties of the
species depend, and from which alone they all flow: and so in these
the real and nominal essence is the same; which, of what concernment
it is to the certain knowledge of general truth, we shall see
hereafter.
  15. Why their names are usually got before their ideas. This also
may show us the reason why for the most part the names of fixed
modes are got before the ideas they stand for are perfectly known.
Because there being no species of these ordinarily taken notice of but
what have names, and those species, or rather their essences, being
abstract complex ideas, made arbitrarily by the mind, it is
convenient, if not necessary, to know the names, before one
endeavour to frame these complex ideas: unless a man will fill his
head with a company of abstract complex ideas, which, others having no
names for, he has nothing to do with, but to lay by and forget
again. I confess that, in the beginning of languages, it was necessary
to have the idea before one gave it the name: and so it is still,
where, making a new complex idea, one also, by giving it a new name,
makes a new word. But this concerns not languages made, which have
generally pretty well provided for ideas which men have frequent
occasion to have and communicate; and in such, I ask whether it be not
the ordinary method, that children learn the names of mixed modes
before they have their ideas? What one of a thousand ever frames the
abstract ideas of glory and ambition, before he has heard the names of
them? In simple ideas and substances I grant it is otherwise, which,
being such ideas as have a real existence and union in nature, the
ideas and names are got one before the other, as it happens.
  16. Reason of my being so large on this subject. What has been
said here of mixed modes is, with very little difference, applicable
also to relations; which, since every man himself may observe, I may
spare myself the pains to enlarge on: especially, since what I have
here said concerning Words in this third Book, will possibly be
thought by some to be much more than what so slight a subject
required. I allow it might be brought into a narrower compass; but I
was willing to stay my reader on an argument that appears to me new
and a little out of the way, (I am sure it is one I thought not of
when I began to write,) that, by searching it to the bottom, and
turning it on every side, some part or other might meet with every
one's thoughts, and give occasion to the most averse or negligent to
reflect on a general miscarriage, which, though of great
consequence, is little taken notice of. When it is considered what a
pudder is made about essences, and how much all sorts of knowledge,
discourse, and conversation are pestered and disordered by the
careless and confused use and application of words, it will perhaps be
thought worth while thoroughly to lay it open. And I shall be pardoned
if I have dwelt long on an argument which I think, therefore, needs to
be inculcated, because the faults men are usually guilty of in this
kind, are not only the greatest hindrances of true knowledge, but
are so well thought of as to pass for it. Men would often see what a
small pittance of reason and truth, or possibly none at all, is
mixed with those huffing opinions they are swelled with; if they would
but look beyond fashionable sounds, and observe what ideas are or
are not comprehended under those words with which they are so armed at
all points, and with which they so confidently lay about them. I shall
imagine I have done some service to truth, peace, and learning, if, by
any enlargement on this subject, I can make men reflect on their own
use of language; and give them reason to suspect, that, since it is
frequent for others, it may also be possible for them, to have
sometimes very good and approved words in their mouths and writings,
with very uncertain, little, or no signification. And therefore it
is not unreasonable for them to be wary herein themselves, and not
to be unwilling to have them examined by others. With this design,
therefore, I shall go on with what I have further to say concerning
this matter.
                              Chapter VI
                      Of the Names of Substances

  1. The common names of substances stand for sorts. The common
names of substances, as well as other general terms, stand for
sorts: which is nothing else but the being made signs of such
complex ideas wherein several particular substances do or might agree,
by virtue of which they are capable of being comprehended in one
common conception, and signified by one name. I say do or might agree:
for though there be but one sun existing in the world, yet the idea of
it being abstracted, so that more substances (if there were several)
might each agree in it, it is as much a sort as if there were as
many suns as there are stars. They want not their reasons who think
there are, and that each fixed star would answer the idea the name sun
stands for, to one who was placed in a due distance: which, by the
way, may show us how much the sorts, or, if you please, genera and
species of things (for those Latin terms signify to me no more than
the English word sort) depend on such collections of ideas as men have
made, and not on the real nature of things; since it is not impossible
but that, in propriety of speech, that might be a sun to one which
is a star to another.
  2. The essence of each sort of substance is our abstract idea to
which the name is annexed. The measure and boundary of each sort or
species, whereby it is constituted that particular sort, and
distinguished from others, is that we call its essence, which is
nothing but that abstract idea to which the name is annexed; so that
everything contained in that idea is essential to that sort. This,
though it be all the essence of natural substances that we know, or by
which we distinguish them into sorts, yet I call it by a peculiar
name, the nominal essence, to distinguish it from the real
constitution of substances, upon which depends this nominal essence,
and all the properties of that sort; which, therefore, as has been
said, may be called the real essence: v.g. the nominal essence of gold
is that complex idea the word gold stands for, let it be, for
instance, a body yellow, of a certain weight, malleable, fusible,
and fixed. But the real essence is the constitution of the
insensible parts of that body, on which those qualities and all the
other properties of gold depend. How far these two are different,
though they are both called essence, is obvious at first sight to
discover.
  3. The nominal and real essence different. For, though perhaps
voluntary motion, with sense and reason, joined to a body of a certain
shape, be the complex idea to which I and others annex the name man,
and so be the nominal essence of the species so called: yet nobody
will say that complex idea is the real essence and source of all those
operations which are to be found in any individual of that sort. The
foundation of all those qualities which are the ingredients of our
complex idea, is something quite different: and had we such a
knowledge of that constitution of man, from which his faculties of
moving, sensation, and reasoning, and other powers flow, and on
which his so regular shape depends, as it is possible angels have, and
it is certain his Maker has, we should have a quite other idea of
his essence than what now is contained in our definition of that
species, be it what it will: and our idea of any individual man
would be as far different from what it is now, as is his who knows all
the springs and wheels and other contrivances within of the famous
clock at Strasburg, from that which a gazing countryman has of it, who
barely sees the motion of the hand, and hears the clock strike, and
observes only some of the outward appearances.
  4. Nothing essential to individuals. That essence, in the ordinary
use of the word, relates to sorts, and that it is considered in
particular beings no further than as they are ranked into sorts,
appears from hence: that, take but away the abstract ideas by which we
sort individuals, and rank them under common names, and then the
thought of anything essential to any of them instantly vanishes: we
have no notion of the one without the other, which plainly shows their
relation. It is necessary for me to be as I am; God and nature has
made me so: but there is nothing I have is essential to me. An
accident or disease may very much alter my colour or shape; a fever or
fall may take away my reason or memory, or both; and an apoplexy leave
neither sense, nor understanding, no, nor life. Other creatures of
my shape may be made with more and better, or fewer and worse
faculties than I have; and others may have reason and sense in a shape
and body very different from mine. None of these are essential to
the one or the other, or to any individual whatever, till the mind
refers it to some sort or species of things; and then presently,
according to the abstract idea of that sort, something is found
essential. Let any one examine his own thoughts, and he will find that
as soon as he supposes or speaks of essential, the consideration of
some species, or the complex idea signified by some general name,
comes into his mind; and it is in reference to that that this or
that quality is said to be essential. So that if it be asked,
whether it be essential to me or any other particular corporeal being,
to have reason? I say, no; no more than it is essential to this
white thing I write on to have words in it. But if that particular
being be to be counted of the sort man, and to have the name man given
it, then reason is essential to it; supposing reason to be a part of
the complex idea the name man stands for: as it is essential to this
thing I write on to contain words, if I will give it the name
treatise, and rank it under that species. So that essential and not
essential relate only to our abstract ideas, and the names annexed
to them; which amounts to no more than this, That whatever
particular thing has not in it those qualities which are contained
in the abstract idea which any general term stands for, cannot be
ranked under that species, nor be called by that name; since that
abstract idea is the very essence of that species.
  5. The only essences perceived by us in individual substances are
those qualities which entitle them to receive their names. Thus, if
the idea of body with some people be bare extension or space, then
solidity is not essential to body: if others make the idea to which
they give the name body to be solidity and extension, then solidity is
essential to body. That therefore, and that alone, is considered as
essential, which makes a part of the complex idea the name of a sort
stands for: without which no particular thing can be reckoned of
that sort, nor be entitled to that name. Should there be found a
parcel of matter that had all the other qualities that are in iron,
but wanted obedience to the loadstone, and would neither be drawn by
it nor receive direction from it, would any one question whether it
wanted anything essential? It would be absurd to ask, Whether a
thing really existing wanted anything essential to it. Or could it
be demanded, Whether this made an essential or specific difference
or no, since we have no other measure of essential or specific but our
abstract ideas? And to talk of specific differences in nature, without
reference to general ideas in names, is to talk unintelligibly. For
I would ask any one, What is sufficient to make an essential
difference in nature between any two particular beings, without any
regard had to some abstract idea, which is looked upon as the
essence and standard of a species? All such patterns and standards
being quite laid aside, particular beings, considered barely in
themselves, will be found to have all their qualities equally
essential; and everything in each individual will be essential to
it; or, which is more, nothing at all. For, though it may be
reasonable to ask, Whether obeying the magnet be essential to iron?
yet I think it is very improper and insignificant to ask, whether it
be essential to the particular parcel of matter I cut my pen with;
without considering it under the name, iron, or as being of a
certain species. And if, as has been said, our abstract ideas, which
have names annexed to them, are the boundaries of species, nothing can
be essential but what is contained in those ideas.
  6. Even the real essences of individual substances imply potential
sorts. It is true, I have often mentioned a real essence, distinct
in substances from those abstract ideas of them, which I call their
nominal essence. By this real essence I mean, that real constitution
of anything, which is the foundation of all those properties that
are combined in, and are constantly found to co-exist with the nominal
essence; that particular constitution which everything has within
itself, without any relation to anything without it. But essence, even
in this sense, relates to a sort, and supposes a species. For, being
that real constitution on which the properties depend, it
necessarily supposes a sort of things, properties belonging only to
species, and not to individuals: v.g. supposing the nominal essence of
gold to be a body of such a peculiar colour and weight, with
malleability and fusibility, the real essence is that constitution
of the parts of matter on which these qualities and their union
depend; and is also the foundation of its solubility in aqua regia and
other properties, accompanying that complex idea. Here are essences
and properties, but all upon supposition of a sort or general abstract
idea, which is considered as immutable; but there is no individual
parcel of matter to which any of these qualities are so annexed as
to be essential to it or inseparable from it. That which is
essential belongs to it as a condition whereby it is of this or that
sort: but take away the consideration of its being ranked under the
name of some abstract idea, and then there is nothing necessary to it,
nothing inseparable from it. Indeed, as to the real essences of
substances, we only suppose their being, without precisely knowing
what they are; but that which annexes them still to the species is the
nominal essence, of which they are the supposed foundation and cause.
  7. The nominal essence bounds the species for us. The next thing
to be considered is, by which of those essences it is that
substances are determined into sorts or species; and that, it is
evident, is by the nominal essence. For it is that alone that the
name, which is the mark of the sort, signifies. It is impossible,
therefore, that anything should determine the sorts of things, which
we rank under general names, but that idea which that name is designed
as a mark for; which is that, as has been shown, which we call nominal
essence. Why do we say this is a horse, and that a mule; this is an
animal, that an herb? How comes any particular thing to be of this
or that sort, but because it has that nominal essence; or, which is
all one, agrees to that abstract idea, that name is annexed to? And
I desire any one but to reflect on his own thoughts, when he hears
or speaks any of those or other names of substances, to know what sort
of essences they stand for.
  8. The nature of species, as formed by us. And that the species of
things to us are nothing but the ranking them under distinct names,
according to the complex ideas in us, and not according to precise,
distinct, real essences in them, is plain from hence:- That we find
many of the individuals that are ranked into one sort, called by one
common name, and so received as being of one species, have yet
qualities, depending on their real constitutions, as far different one
from another as from others from which they are accounted to differ
specifically. This, as it is easy to be observed by all who have to do
with natural bodies, so chemists especially are often, by sad
experience, convinced of it, when they, sometimes in vain, seek for
the same qualities in one parcel of sulphur, antimony, or vitriol,
which they have found in others. For, though they are bodies of the
same species, having the same nominal essence, under the same name,
yet do they often, upon severe ways of examination, betray qualities
so different one from another, as to frustrate the expectation and
labour of very wary chemists. But if things were distinguished into
species, according to their real essences, it would be as impossible
to find different properties in any two individual substances of the
same species, as it is to find different properties in two circles, or
two equilateral triangles. That is properly the essence to us, which
determines every particular to this or that classis; or, which is
the same thing, to this or that general name: and what can that be
else, but that abstract idea to which that name is annexed; and so
has, in truth, a reference, not so much to the being of particular
things, as to their general denominations?
  9. Not the real essence, or texture of parts, which we know not. Nor
indeed can we rank and sort things, and consequently (which is the end
of sorting) denominate them, by their real essences; because we know
them not. Our faculties carry us no further towards the knowledge
and distinction of substances, than a collection of those sensible
ideas which we observe in them; which, however made with the
greatest diligence and exactness we are capable of, yet is more remote
from the true internal constitution from which those qualities flow,
than, as I said, a countryman's idea is from the inward contrivance of
that famous clock at Strasburg, whereof he only sees the outward
figure and motions. There is not so contemptible a plant or animal,
that does not confound the most enlarged understanding. Though the
familiar use of things about us take off our wonder, yet it cures
not our ignorance. When we come to examine the stones we tread on,
or the iron we daily handle, we presently find we know not their make;
and can give no reason of the different qualities we find in them.
It is evident the internal constitution, whereon their properties
depend, is unknown to us: for to go no further than the grossest and
most obvious we can imagine amongst them, What is that texture of
parts, that real essence, that makes lead and antimony fusible, wood
and stones not? What makes lead and iron malleable, antimony and
stones not? And yet how infinitely these come short of the fine
contrivances and inconceivable real essences of plants or animals,
every one knows. The workmanship of the all-wise and powerful God in
the great fabric of the universe, and every part thereof, further
exceeds the capacity and comprehension of the most inquisitive and
intelligent man, than the best contrivance of the most ingenious man
doth the conceptions of the most ignorant of rational creatures.
Therefore we in vain pretend to range things into sorts, and dispose
them into certain classes under names, by their real essences, that
are so far from our discovery or comprehension. A blind man may as
soon sort things by their colours, and he that has lost his smell as
well distinguish a lily and a rose by their odours, as by those
internal constitutions which he knows not. He that thinks he can
distinguish sheep and goats by their real essences, that are unknown
to him, may be pleased to try his skill in those species called
cassiowary and querechinchio; and by their internal real essences
determine the boundaries of those species, without knowing the complex
idea of sensible qualities that each of those names stand for, in
the countries where those animals are to be found.
  10. Not the substantial form, which we know less. Those,
therefore, who have been taught that the several species of substances
had their distinct internal substantial forms, and that it was those
forms which made the distinction of substances into their true species
and genera, were led yet further out of the way by having their
minds set upon fruitless inquiries after "substantial forms"; wholly
unintelligible, and whereof we have scarce so much as any obscure or
confused conception in general.
  11. That the nominal essence is that only whereby we distinguish
species of substances, further evident, from our ideas of finite
spirits and of God. That our ranking and distinguishing natural
substances into species consists in the nominal essences the mind
makes, and not in the real essences to be found in the things
themselves, is further evident from our ideas of spirits. For the mind
getting, only by reflecting on its own operations, those simple
ideas which it attributes to spirits, it hath or can have no other
notion of spirit but by attributing all those operations it finds in
itself to a sort of beings; without consideration of matter. And
even the most advanced notion we have of GOD is but attributing the
same simple ideas which we have got from reflection on what we find in
ourselves, and which we conceive to have more perfection in them
than would be in their absence; attributing, I say, those simple ideas
to Him in an unlimited degree. Thus, having got from reflecting on
ourselves the idea of existence, knowledge, power and pleasure- each
of which we find it better to have than to want; and the more we
have of each the better- joining all these together, with infinity
to each of them, we have the complex idea of an eternal, omniscient,
omnipotent, infinitely wise and happy being. And though we are told
that there are different species of angels; yet we know not how to
frame distinct specific ideas of them: not out of any conceit that the
existence of more species than one of spirits is impossible; but
because having no more simple ideas (nor being able to frame more)
applicable to such beings, but only those few taken from ourselves,
and from the actions of our own minds in thinking, and being
delighted, and moving several parts of our bodies; we can no otherwise
distinguish in our conceptions the several species of spirits, one
from another, but by attributing those operations and powers we find
in ourselves to them in a higher or lower degree; and so have no
very distinct specific ideas of spirits, except only of GOD, to whom
we attribute both duration and all those other ideas with infinity; to
the other spirits, with limitation: nor, as I humbly conceive, do
we, between GOD and them in our ideas, put any difference, by any
number of simple ideas which we have of one and not of the other,
but only that of infinity. All the particular ideas of existence,
knowledge, will, power, and motion, &c., being ideas derived from
the operations of our minds, we attribute all of them to all sorts
of spirits, with the difference only of degrees; to the utmost we
can imagine, even infinity, when we would frame as well as we can an
idea of the First Being; who yet, it is certain, is infinitely more
remote, in the real excellency of his nature, from the highest and
perfectest of all created beings, than the greatest man, nay, purest
seraph, is from the most contemptible part of matter; and consequently
must infinitely exceed what our narrow understandings can conceive
of Him.
  12. Of finite spirits there are probably numberless species, in a
continuous series or gradation. It is not impossible to conceive,
nor repugnant to reason, that there may be many species of spirits, as
much separated and diversified one from another by distinct properties
whereof we have no ideas, as the species of sensible things are
distinguished one from another by qualities which we know and
observe in them. That there should be more species of intelligent
creatures above us, than there are of sensible and material below
us, is probable to me from hence: that in all the visible corporeal
world, we see no chasms or gaps. All quite down from us the descent is
by easy steps, and a continued series of things, that in each remove
differ very little one from the other. There are fishes that have
wings, and are not strangers to the airy region: and there are some
birds that are inhabitants of the water, whose blood is cold as
fishes, and their flesh so like in taste that the scrupulous are
allowed them on fish-days. There are animals so near of kin both to
birds and beasts that they are in the middle between both:
amphibious animals link the terrestrial and aquatic together; seals
live at land and sea, and porpoises have the warm blood and entrails
of a hog; not to mention what is confidently reported of mermaids,
or sea-men. There are some brutes that seem to have as much
knowledge and reason as some that are called men: and the animal and
vegetable kingdoms are so nearly joined, that, if you will take the
lowest of one and the highest of the other, there will scarce be
perceived any great difference between them: and so on, till we come
to the lowest and the most inorganical parts of matter, we shall
find everywhere that the several species are linked together, and
differ but in almost insensible degrees. And when we consider the
infinite power and wisdom of the Maker, we have reason to think that
it is suitable to the magnificent harmony of the universe, and the
great design and infinite goodness of the Architect, that the
species of creatures should also, by gentle degrees, ascend upward
from us toward his infinite perfection, as we see they gradually
descend from us downwards: which if it be probable, we have reason
then to be persuaded that there are far more species of creatures
above us than there are beneath; we being, in degrees of perfection,
much more remote from the infinite being of GOD than we are from the
lowest state of being, and that which approaches nearest to nothing.
And yet of all those distinct species, for the reasons above said,
we have no clear distinct ideas.
  13. The nominal essence that of the species, as conceived by us,
proved from water and ice. But to return to the species of corporeal
substances. If I should ask any one whether ice and water were two
distinct species of things, I doubt not but I should be answered in
the affirmative: and it cannot be denied but he that says they are two
distinct species is in the right. But if an Englishman bred in
Jamaica, who perhaps had never seen nor heard of ice, coming into
England in the winter, find the water he put in his basin at night
in a great part frozen in the morning, and, not knowing any peculiar
name it had, should call it hardened water; I ask whether this would
be a new species to him, different from water? And I think it would be
answered here, It would not be to him a new species, no more than
congealed jelly, when it is cold, is a distinct species from the
same jelly fluid and warm; or than liquid gold in the furnace is a
distinct species from hard gold in the hands of a workman. And if this
be so, it is plain that our distinct species are nothing but
distinct complex ideas, with distinct names annexed to them. It is
true every substance that exists has its peculiar constitution,
whereon depend those sensible qualities and powers we observe in it;
but the ranking of things into species (which is nothing but sorting
them under several titles) is done by us according to the ideas that
we have of them: which, though sufficient to distinguish them by
names, so that we may be able to discourse of them when we have them
not present before us; yet if we suppose it to be done by their real
internal constitutions, and that things existing are distinguished
by nature into species, by real essences, according as we
distinguish them into species by names, we shall be liable to great
mistakes.
  14. Difficulties in the supposition of a certain number of real
essences. To distinguish substantial beings into species, according to
the usual supposition, that there are certain precise essences or
forms of things, whereby all the individuals existing are, by nature
distinguished into species, these things are necessary:-
  15. A crude supposition. First, To be assured that nature, in the
production of things, always designs them to partake of certain
regulated established essences, which are to be the models of all
things to be produced. This, in that crude sense it is usually
proposed, would need some better explication, before it can fully be
assented to.
  16. Monstrous births. Secondly, It would be necessary to know
whether nature always attains that essence it designs in the
production of things. The irregular and monstrous births, that in
divers sorts of animals have been observed, will always give us reason
to doubt of one or both of these.
  17. Are monsters really a distinct species? Thirdly, It ought to
be determined whether those we call monsters be really a distinct
species, according to the scholastic notion of the word species; since
it is certain that everything that exists has its particular
constitution. And yet we find that some of these monstrous productions
have few or none of those qualities which are supposed to result from,
and accompany, the essence of that species from whence, they derive
their originals, and to which, by their descent, they seem to belong.
  18. Men can have no ideas of real essences. Fourthly, The real
essences of those things which we distinguish into species, and as
so distinguished we name, ought to be known; i.e. we ought to have
ideas of them. But since we are ignorant in these four points, the
supposed real essences of things stand us not in stead for the
distinguishing substances into species.
  19. Our nominal essences of substances not perfect collections of
the properties that flow from their real essences. Fifthly, The only
imaginable help in this case would be, that, having framed perfect
complex ideas of the properties of things flowing from their different
real essences, we should thereby distinguish them into species. But
neither can this be done. For, being ignorant of the real essence
itself, it is impossible to know all those properties that flow from
it, and are so annexed to it, that any one of them being away, we
may certainly conclude that that essence is not there, and so the
thing is not of that species. We can never know what is the precise
number of properties depending on the real essence of gold, any one of
which failing, the real essence of gold, and consequently gold,
would not be there, unless we knew the real essence of gold itself,
and by that determined that species. By the word gold here, I must
be understood to design a particular piece of matter; v.g. the last
guinea that was coined. For, if it should stand here, in its
ordinary signification, for that complex idea which I or any one
else calls gold, i.e. for the nominal essence of gold, it would be
jargon. So hard is it to show the various meaning and imperfection
of words, when we have nothing else but words to do it by.
  20. Hence names independent of real essences. By all which it is
clear, that our distinguishing substances into species by names, is
not at all founded on their real essences; nor can we pretend to range
and determine them exactly into species, according to internal
essential differences.
  21. But stand for such a collection of simple substances, as we have
made the name stand for. But since, as has been remarked, we have need
of general words, though we know not the real essences of things;
all we can do is, to collect such a number of simple ideas as, by
examination, we find to be united together in things existing, and
thereof to make one complex idea. Which, though it be not the real
essence of any substance that exists, is yet the specific essence to
which our name belongs, and is convertible with it; by which we may at
least try the truth of these nominal essences. For example: there be
that say that the essence of body is extension; if it be so, we can
never mistake in putting the essence of anything for the thing itself.
Let us then in discourse put extension for body, and when we would say
that body moves, let us say that extension moves, and see how ill it
will look. He that should say that one extension by impulse moves
another extension, would, by the bare expression, sufficiently show
the absurdity of such a notion. The essence of anything in respect
of us, is the whole complex idea comprehended and marked by that name;
and in substances, besides the several distinct simple ideas that make
them up, the confused one of substance, or of an unknown support and
cause of their union, is always a part: and therefore the essence of
body is not bare extension, but an extended solid thing; and so to
say, an extended solid thing moves, or impels another, is all one, and
as intelligible, as to say, body moves or impels. Likewise, to say
that a rational animal is capable of conversation, is all one as to
say a man; but no one will say that rationality is capable of
conversation, because it makes not the whole essence to which we
give the name man.
  22. Our abstract ideas are to us the measures of the species we
make: instance in that of man. There are creatures in the world that
have shapes like ours, but are hairy, and want language and reason.
There are naturals amongst us that have perfectly our shape, but
want reason, and some of them language too. There are creatures, as it
is said, (sit fides penes authorem, but there appears no contradiction
that there should be such), that, with language and reason and a shape
in other things agreeing with ours, have hairy tails; others where the
males have no beards, and others where the females have. If it be
asked whether these be all men or no, all of human species? it is
plain, the question refers only to the nominal essence: for those of
them to whom the definition of the word man, or the complex idea
signified by the name, agrees, are men, and the other not. But if
the inquiry be made concerning the supposed real essence; and
whether the internal constitution and frame of these several creatures
be specifically different, it is wholly impossible for us to answer,
no part of that going into our specific idea: only we have reason to
think, that where the faculties or outward frame so much differs,
the internal constitution is not exactly the same. But what difference
in the real internal constitution makes a specific difference it is in
vain to inquire; whilst our measures of species be, as they are,
only our abstract ideas, which we know; and not that internal
constitution, which makes no part of them. Shall the difference of
hair only on the skin be a mark of a different internal specific
constitution between a changeling and a drill, when they agree in
shape, and want of reason and speech? And shall not the want of reason
and speech be a sign to us of different real constitutions and species
between a changeling and a reasonable man? And so of the rest, if we
pretend that distinction of species or sorts is fixedly established by
the real frame and secret constitutions of things.
  23. Species in animals not distinguished by generation. Nor let
any one say, that the power of propagation in animals by the mixture
of male and female, and in plants by seeds, keeps the supposed real
species distinct and entire. For, granting this to be true, it would
help us in the distinction of the species of things no further than
the tribes of animals and vegetables. What must we do for the rest?
But in those too it is not sufficient: for if history lie not, women
have conceived by drills; and what real species, by that measure, such
a production will be in nature will be a new question: and we have
reason to think this is not impossible, since mules and jumarts, the
one from the mixture of an ass and a mare, the other from the
mixture of a bull and a mare, are so frequent in the world. I once saw
a creature that was the issue of a cat and a rat, and had the plain
marks of both about it; wherein nature appeared to have followed the
pattern of neither sort alone, but to have jumbled them both together.
To which he that shall add the monstrous productions that are so
frequently to be met with in nature, will find it hard, even in the
race of animals, to determine by the pedigree of what species every
animal's issue is; and be at a loss about the real essence, which he
thinks certainly conveyed by generation, and has alone a right to
the specific name. But further, if the species of animals and plants
are to be distinguished only by propagation, must I go to the Indies
to see the sire and dam of the one, and the plant from which the
seed was gathered that produced the other, to know whether this be a
tiger or that tea?
  24. Not by substantial forms. Upon the whole matter, it is evident
that it is their own collections of sensible qualities that men make
the essences of their several sorts of substances; and that their real
internal structures are not considered by the greatest part of men
in the sorting them. Much less were any substantial forms ever thought
on by any but those who have in this one part of the world learned the
language of the schools: and yet those ignorant men, who pretend not
any insight into the real essences, nor trouble themselves about
substantial forms, but are content with knowing things one from
another by their sensible qualities, are often better acquainted
with their differences; can more nicely distinguish them from their
uses; and better know what they expect from each, than those learned
quick-sighted men, who look so deep into them, and talk so confidently
of something more hidden and essential.
  25. The specific essences that are commonly made by men. But
supposing that the real essences of substances were discoverable by
those that would severely apply themselves to that inquiry, yet we
could not reasonably think that the ranking of things under general
names was regulated by those internal real constitutions, or
anything else but their obvious appearances; since languages, in all
countries, have been established long before sciences. So that they
have not been philosophers or logicians, or such who have troubled
themselves about forms and essences, that have made the general
names that are in use amongst the several nations of men: but those
more or less comprehensive terms have, for the most part, in all
languages, received their birth and signification from ignorant and
illiterate people, who sorted and denominated things by those sensible
qualities they found in them; thereby to signify them, when absent, to
others, whether they had an occasion to mention a sort or a particular
thing.
  26. Therefore very various and uncertain in the ideas of different
men. Since then it is evident that we sort and name substances by
their nominal and not by their real essences, the next thing to be
considered is how, and by whom these essences come to be made. As to
the latter, it is evident they are made by the mind, and not by
nature: for were they Nature's workmanship, they could not be so
various and different in several men as experience tells us they
are. For if we will examine it, we shall not find the nominal
essence of any one species of substances in all men the same: no,
not of that which of all others we are the most intimately
acquainted with. It could not possibly be that the abstract idea to
which the name man is given should be different in several men, if
it were of Nature's making; and that to one it should be animal
rationale, and to another, animal implume bipes latis unguibus. He
that annexes the name to a complex idea, made up of sense and
spontaneous motion, joined to a body of such a shape, has thereby
one essence of the species man; and he that, upon further examination,
adds rationality, has another essence of the species he calls man:
by which means the same individual will be a true man to the one which
is not so to the other. I think there is scarce any one will allow
this upright figure, so well known, to be the essential difference
of the species man; and yet how far men determine of the sorts of
animals rather by their shape than descent, is very visible; since
it has been more than once debated, whether several human foetuses
should be preserved or received to baptism or no, only because of
the difference of their outward configuration from the ordinary make
of children, without knowing whether they were not as capable of
reason as infants cast in another mould: some whereof, though of an
approved shape, are never capable of as much appearance of reason
all their lives as is to be found in an ape, or an elephant, and never
give any signs of being acted by a rational soul. Whereby it is
evident, that the outward figure, which only was found wanting, and
not the faculty of reason, which nobody could know would be wanting in
its due season, was made essential to the human species. The learned
divine and lawyer must, on such occasions, renounce his sacred
definition of animal rationale, and substitute some other essence of
the human species. Monsieur Menage furnishes us with an example
worth the taking notice of on this occasion: "When the abbot of
Saint Martin," says he, "was born, he had so little of the figure of a
man, that it bespake him rather a monster. It was for some time
under deliberation, whether he should be baptized or no. However, he
was baptized, and declared a man provisionally till time should show
what he would prove. Nature had moulded him so untowardly, that he was
called all his life the Abbot Malotru; i.e. ill-shaped. He was of
Caen." (Menagiana, 278, 430.) This child, we see, was very near
being excluded out of the species of man, barely by his shape. He
escaped very narrowly as he was; and it is certain, a figure a
little more oddly turned had cast him, and he had been executed, as
a thing not to be allowed to pass for a man. And yet there can be no
reason given why, if the lineaments of his face had been a little
altered, a rational soul could not have been lodged in him; why a
visage somewhat longer, or a nose flatter, or a wider mouth, could not
have consisted, as well as the rest of his ill figure, with such a
soul, such parts, as made him, disfigured as he was, capable to be a
dignitary in the church.
  27. Nominal essences of particular substances are undetermined by
nature, and therefore various as men vary. Wherein, then, would I
gladly know, consist the precise and unmovable boundaries of that
species? It is plain, if we examine, there is no such thing made by
Nature, and established by her amongst men. The real essence of that
or any other sort of substances, it is evident, we know not; and
therefore are so undetermined in our nominal essences, which we make
ourselves, that, if several men were to be asked concerning some oddly
shaped foetus, as soon as born, whether it were a man or no, it is
past doubt one should meet with different answers. Which could not
happen, if the nominal essences, whereby we limit and distinguish
the species of substances, were not made by man with some liberty; but
were exactly copied from precise boundaries set by nature, whereby
it distinguished all substances into certain species. Who would
undertake to resolve what species that monster was of which is
mentioned by Licetus (Bk. i. c. 3), with a man's head and hog's
body? Or those other which to the bodies of men had the heads of
beasts, as dogs, horses, &c. If any of these creatures had lived,
and could have spoke, it would have increased the difficulty. Had
the upper part to the middle been of human shape, and all below swine,
had it been murder to destroy it? Or must the bishop have been
consulted, whether it were man enough to be admitted to the font or
no? As I have been told it happened in France some years since, in
somewhat a like case. So uncertain are the boundaries of species of
animals to us, who have no other measures than the complex ideas of
our own collecting: and so far are we from certainly knowing what a
man is; though perhaps it will be judged great ignorance to make any
doubt about it. And yet I think I may say, that the certain boundaries
of that species are so far from being determined, and the precise
number of simple ideas which make the nominal essence so far from
being settled and perfectly known, that very material doubts may still
arise about it. And I imagine none of the definitions of the word
man which we yet have, nor descriptions of that sort of animal, are so
perfect and exact as to satisfy a considerate inquisitive person; much
less to obtain a general consent, and to be that which men would
everywhere stick by, in the decision of cases, and determining of life
and death, baptism or no baptism, in productions that might happen.
  28. But not so arbitrary as mixed modes. But though these nominal
essences of substances are made by the mind, they are not yet made
so arbitrarily as those of mixed modes. To the making of any nominal
essence, it is necessary, First, that the ideas whereof it consists
have such a union as to make but one idea, how compounded soever.
Secondly, that the particular ideas so united be exactly the same,
neither more nor less. For if two abstract complex ideas differ either
in number or sorts of their component parts, they make two
different, and not one and the same essence. In the first of these,
the mind, in making its complex ideas of substances, only follows
nature; and puts none together which are not supposed to have a
union in nature. Nobody joins the voice of a sheep with the shape of a
horse; nor the colour of lead with the weight and fixedness of gold,
to be the complex ideas of any real substances; unless he has a mind
to fill his head with chimeras, and his discourse with
unintelligible words. Men observing certain qualities always joined
and existing together, therein copied nature; and of ideas so united
made their complex ones of substances. For, though men may make what
complex ideas they please, and give what names to them they will; yet,
if they will be understood when they speak of things really
existing, they must in some degree conform their ideas to the things
they would speak of; or else men's language will be like that of
Babel; and every man's words, being intelligible only to himself,
would no longer serve to conversation and the ordinary affairs of
life, if the ideas they stand for be not some way answering the common
appearances and agreement of substances as they really exist.
  29. Our nominal essences of substances usually consist of a few
obvious qualities observed in things. Secondly, Though the mind of
man, in making its complex ideas of substances, never puts any
together that do not really, or are not supposed to, co-exist; and
so it truly borrows that union from nature: yet the number it combines
depends upon the various care, industry, or fancy of him that makes
it. Men generally content themselves with some few sensible obvious
qualities; and often, if not always, leave out others as material
and as firmly united as those that they take. Of sensible substances
there are two sorts: one of organized bodies, which are propagated
by seed; and in these the shape is that which to us is the leading
quality, and most characteristical part, that determines the
species. And therefore in vegetables and animals, an extended solid
substance of such a certain figure usually serves the turn. For
however some men seem to prize their definition of animal rationale,
yet should there a creature be found that had language and reason, but
partaked not of the usual shape of a man, I believe it would hardly
pass for a man, how much soever it were animal rationale. And if
Balaam's ass had all his life discoursed as rationally as he did
once with his master, I doubt yet whether any one would have thought
him worthy the name man, or allowed him to be of the same species with
himself. As in vegetables and animals it is the shape, so in most
other bodies, not propagated by seed, it is the colour we must fix on,
and are most led by. Thus where we find the colour of gold, we are apt
to imagine all the other qualities comprehended in our complex idea to
be there also: and we commonly take these two obvious qualities,
viz. shape and colour, for so presumptive ideas of several species,
that in a good picture, we readily say, this is a lion, and that a
rose; this is a gold, and that a silver goblet, only by the
different figures and colours represented to the eye by the pencil.
  30. Yet, imperfect as they thus are, they serve for common converse.
But though this serves well enough for gross and confused conceptions,
and inaccurate ways of talking and thinking; yet men are far enough
from having agreed on the precise number of simple ideas or
qualities belonging to any sort of things, signified by its name.
Nor is it a wonder; since it requires much time, pains, and skill,
strict inquiry, and long examination to find out what, and how many,
those simple ideas are, which are constantly and inseparably united in
nature, and are always to be found together in the same subject.
Most men, wanting either time, inclination, or industry enough for
this, even to some tolerable degree, content themselves with some
few obvious and outward appearances of things, thereby readily to
distinguish and sort them for the common affairs of life: and so,
without further examination, give them names, or take up the names
already in use. Which, though in common conversation they pass well
enough for the signs of some few obvious qualities co-existing, are
yet far enough from comprehending, in a settled signification, a
precise number of simple ideas, much less all those which are united
in nature. He that shall consider, after so much stir about genus
and species, and such a deal of talk of specific differences, how
few words we have yet settled definitions of, may with reason imagine,
that those forms which there hath been so much noise made about are
only chimeras, which give us no light into the specific natures of
things. And he that shall consider how far the names of substances are
from having significations wherein all who use them do agree, will
have reason to conclude that, though the nominal essences of
substances are all supposed to be copied from nature, yet they are
all, or most of them, very imperfect. Since the composition of those
complex ideas are, in several men, very different: and therefore
that these boundaries of species are as men, and not as Nature,
makes them, if at least there are in nature any such prefixed
bounds. It is true that many particular substances are so made by
Nature, that they have agreement and likeness one with another, and so
afford a foundation of being ranked into sorts. But the sorting of
things by us, or the making of determinate species, being in order
to naming and comprehending them under general terms, I cannot see how
it can be properly said, that Nature sets the boundaries of the
species of things: or, if it be so, our boundaries of species are
not exactly conformable to those in nature. For we, having need of
general names for present use, stay not for a perfect discovery of all
those qualities which would best show us their most material
differences and agreements; but we ourselves divide them, by certain
obvious appearances, into species, that we may the easier under
general names communicate our thoughts about them. For, having no
other knowledge of any substance but of the simple ideas that are
united in it; and observing several particular things to agree with
others in several of those simple ideas; we make that collection our
specific idea, and give it a general name; that in recording our
thoughts, and in our discourse with others, we may in one short word
designate all the individuals that agree in that complex idea, without
enumerating the simple ideas that make it up; and so not waste our
time and breath in tedious descriptions: which we see they are fain to
do who would discourse of any new sort of things they have not yet a
name for.
  31. Essences of species under the same name very different in
different minds. But however these species of substances pass well
enough in ordinary conversation, it is plain that this complex idea,
wherein they observe several individuals to agree, is by different men
made very differently; by some more, and others less accurately. In
some, this complex idea contains a greater, and in others a smaller
number of qualities; and so is apparently such as the mind makes it.
The yellow shining colour makes gold to children; others add weight,
malleableness, and fusibility; and others yet other qualities, which
they find joined with that yellow colour, as constantly as its
weight and fusibility. For in all these and the like qualities, one
has as good a right to be put into the complex idea of that
substance wherein they are all joined as another. And therefore
different men, leaving out or putting in several simple ideas which
others do not, according to their various examination, skill, or
observation of that subject, have different essences of gold, which
must therefore be of their own and not of nature's making.
  32. The more general our ideas of substances are, the more
incomplete and partial they are. If the number of simple ideas that
make the nominal essence of the lowest species, or first sorting, of
individuals, depends on the mind of man, variously collecting them, it
is much more evident that they do so in the more comprehensive
classes, which, by the masters of logic, are called genera. These
are complex ideas designedly imperfect: and it is visible at first
sight, that several of those qualities that are to be found in the
things themselves are purposely left out of generical ideas. For, as
the mind, to make general ideas comprehending several particulars,
leaves out those of time and place, and such other, that make them
incommunicable to more than one individual; so to make other yet
more general ideas, that may comprehend different sorts, it leaves out
those qualities that distinguish them, and puts into its new
collection only such ideas as are common to several sorts. The same
convenience that made men express several parcels of yellow matter
coming from Guinea and Peru under one name, sets them also upon making
of one name that may comprehend both gold and silver, and some other
bodies of different sorts. This is done by leaving out those
qualities, which are peculiar to each sort, and retaining a complex
idea made up of those that are common to them all. To which the name
metal being annexed, there is a genus constituted; the essence whereof
being that abstract idea, containing only malleableness and
fusibility, with certain degrees of weight and fixedness, wherein some
bodies of several kinds agree, leaves out the colour and other
qualities peculiar to gold and silver, and the other sorts
comprehended under the name metal. Whereby it is plain that men follow
not exactly the patterns set them by nature, when they make their
general ideas of substances; since there is no body to be found
which has barely malleableness and fusibility in it, without other
qualities as inseparable as those. But men, in making their general
ideas, seeking more the convenience of language, and quick dispatch by
short and comprehensive signs, than the true and precise nature of
things as they exist, have, in the framing their abstract ideas,
chiefly pursued that end; which was to be furnished with store of
general and variously comprehensive names. So that in this whole
business of genera and species, the genus, or more comprehensive, is
but a partial conception of what is in the species; and the species
but a partial idea of what is to be found in each individual. If
therefore any one will think that a man, and a horse, and an animal,
and a plant, &c., are distinguished by real essences made by nature,
he must think nature to be very liberal of these real essences, making
one for body, another for an animal, and another for a horse; and
all these essences liberally bestowed upon Bucephalus. But if we would
rightly consider what is done in all these genera and species, or
sorts, we should find that there is no new thing made; but only more
or less comprehensive signs, whereby we may be enabled to express in a
few syllables great numbers of particular things, as they agree in
more or less general conceptions, which we have framed to that
purpose. In all which we may observe, that the more general term is
always the name of a less complex idea; and that each genus is but a
partial conception of the species comprehended under it. So that if
these abstract general ideas be thought to be complete, it can only be
in respect of a certain established relation between them and
certain names which are made use of to signify them; and not in
respect of anything existing, as made by nature.
  33. This all accommodated to the end of speech. This is adjusted
to the true end of speech, which is to be the easiest and shortest way
of communicating our notions. For thus he that would discourse of
things, as they agreed in the complex idea of extension and
solidity, needed but use the word body to denote all such. He that
to these would join others, signified by the words life, sense, and
spontaneous motion, needed but use the word animal to signify all
which partaked of those ideas, and he that had made a complex idea
of a body, with life, sense, and motion, with the faculty of
reasoning, and a certain shape joined to it, needed but use the
short monosyllable man, to express all particulars that correspond
to that complex idea. This is the proper business of genus and
species: and this men do without any consideration of real essences,
or substantial forms; which come not within the reach of our knowledge
when we think of those things, nor within the signification of our
words when we discourse with others.
  34. Instance in Cassowaries. Were I to talk with any one of a sort
of birds I lately saw in St. James's Park, about three or four feet
high, with a covering of something between feathers and hair, of a
dark brown colour, without wings, but in the place thereof two or
three little branches coming down like sprigs of Spanish broom, long
great legs, with feet only of three claws, and without a tail; I
must make this description of it, and so may make others understand
me. But when I am told that the name of it is cassuaris, I may then
use that word to stand in discourse for all my complex idea
mentioned in that description; though by that word, which is now
become a specific name, I know no more of the real essence or
constitution of that sort of animals than I did before; and knew
probably as much of the nature of that species of birds before I
learned the name, as many Englishmen do of swans or herons, which
are specific names, very well known, of sorts of birds common in
England.
  35. Men determine the sorts of substances, which may be sorted
variously. From what has been said, it is evident that men make
sorts of things. For, it being different essences alone that make
different species, it is plain that they who make those abstract ideas
which are the nominal essences do thereby make the species, or sort.
Should there be a body found, having all the other qualities of gold
except malleableness, it would no doubt be made a question whether
it were gold or not, i.e. whether it were of that species. This
could be determined only by that abstract idea to which every one
annexed the name gold: so that it would be true gold to him, and
belong to that species, who included not malleableness in his
nominal essence, signified by the sound gold; and on the other side it
would not be true gold, or of that species, to him who included
malleableness in his specific idea. And who, I pray, is it that
makes these diverse species, even under one and the same name, but men
that make two different abstract ideas, consisting not exactly of
the same collection of qualities? Nor is it a mere supposition to
imagine that a body may exist wherein the other obvious qualities of
gold may be without malleableness; since it is certain that gold
itself will be sometimes so eager, (as artists call it), that it
will as little endure the hammer as glass itself. What we have said of
the putting in, or leaving out of malleableness, in the complex idea
the name gold is by any one annexed to, may be said of its peculiar
weight, fixedness, and several other the like qualities: for
whatever is left out, or put in, it is still the complex idea to which
that name is annexed that makes the species: and as any particular
parcel of matter answers that idea, so the name of the sort belongs
truly to it; and it is of that species. And thus anything is true
gold, perfect metal. All which determination of the species, it is
plain, depends on the understanding of man, making this or that
complex idea.
  36. Nature makes the similitudes of substances. This, then, in
short, is the case: Nature makes many particular things, which do
agree one with another in many sensible qualities, and probably too in
their internal frame and constitution: but it is not this real essence
that distinguishes them into species; it is men who, taking occasion
from the qualities they find united in them, and wherein they
observe often several individuals to agree, range them into sorts,
in order to their naming, for the convenience of comprehensive
signs; under which individuals, according to their conformity to
this or that abstract idea, come to be ranked as under ensigns: so
that this is of the blue, that the red regiment; this is a man, that a
drill: and in this, I think, consists the whole business of genus
and species.
  37. The manner of sorting particular beings the work of fallible
men, though nature makes things alike. I do not deny but nature, in
the constant production of particular beings, makes them not always
new and various, but very much alike and of kin one to another: but
I think it nevertheless true, that the boundaries of the species,
whereby men sort them, are made by men; since the essences of the
species, distinguished by different names, are, as has been proved, of
man's making, and seldom adequate to the internal nature of the things
they are taken from. So that we may truly say, such a manner of
sorting of things is the workmanship of men.
  38. Each abstract idea, with a name to it, makes a nominal
essence. One thing I doubt not but will seem very strange in this
doctrine, which is, that from what has been said it will follow,
that each abstract idea, with a name to it, makes a distinct
species. But who can help it, if truth will have it so? For so it must
remain till somebody can show us the species of things limited and
distinguished by something else; and let us see that general terms
signify not our abstract ideas, but something different from them. I
would fain know why a shock and a hound are not as distinct species as
a spaniel and an elephant. We have no other idea of the different
essence of an elephant and a spaniel, than we have of the different
essence of a shock and a hound; all the essential difference,
whereby we know and distinguish them one from another, consisting only
in the different collection of simple ideas, to which we have given
those different names.
  39. How genera and species are related to naming. How much the
making of species and genera is in order to general names; and how
much general names are necessary, if not to the being, yet at least to
the completing of a species, and making it pass for such, will appear,
besides what has been said above concerning ice and water, in a very
familiar example. A silent and a striking watch are but one species to
those who have but one name for them: but he that has the name watch
for one, and clock for the other, and distinct complex ideas to
which those names belong, to him they are different species. It will
be said perhaps, that the inward contrivance and constitution is
different between these two, which the watchmaker has a clear idea of.
And yet it is plain they are but one species to him, when he has but
one name for them. For what is sufficient in the inward contrivance to
make a new species? There are some watches that are made with four
wheels, others with five; is this a specific difference to the
workman? Some have strings and physies, and others none; some have the
balance loose, and others regulated by a spiral spring, and others
by hogs' bristles. Are any or all of these enough to make a specific
difference to the workman, that knows each of these and several
other different contrivances in the internal constitutions of watches?
It is certain each of these hath a real difference from the rest;
but whether it be an essential, a specific difference or no, relates
only to the complex idea to which the name watch is given: as long
as they all agree in the idea which that name stands for, and that
name does not as a generical name comprehend different species under
it, they are not essentially nor specifically different. But if any
one will make minuter divisions, from differences that he knows in the
internal frame of watches, and to such precise complex ideas give
names that shall prevail; they will then be new species, to them who
have those ideas with names to them, and can by those differences
distinguish watches into these several sorts; and then watch will be a
generical name. But yet they would be no distinct species to men
ignorant of clock-work, and the inward contrivances of watches, who
had no other idea but the outward shape and bulk, with the marking
of the hours by the hand. For to them all those other names would be
but synonymous terms for the same idea, and signify no more, nor no
other thing but a watch. Just thus I think it is in natural things.
Nobody will doubt that the wheels or springs (if I may so say) within,
are different in a rational man and a changeling; no more than that
there is a difference in the frame between a drill and a changeling.
But whether one or both these differences be essential or
specifical, is only to be known to us by their agreement or
disagreement with the complex idea that the name man stands for: for
by that alone can it be determined whether one, or both, or neither of
those be a man.
  40. Species of artificial things less confused than natural. From
what has been before said, we may see the reason why, in the species
of artificial things, there is generally less confusion and
uncertainty than in natural. Because an artificial thing being a
production of man, which the artificer designed, and therefore well
knows the idea of, the name of it is supposed to stand for no other
idea, nor to import any other essence, than what is certainly to be
known, and easy enough to be apprehended. For the idea or essence of
the several sorts of artificial things, consisting for the most part
in nothing but the determinate figure of sensible parts, and sometimes
motion depending thereon, which the artificer fashions in matter, such
as he finds for his turn; it is not beyond the reach of our
faculties to attain a certain idea thereof; and so settle the
signification of the names whereby the species of artificial things
are distinguished, with less doubt, obscurity, and equivocation than
we can in things natural, whose differences and operations depend upon
contrivances beyond the reach of our discoveries.
  41. Artificial things of distinct species. I must be excused here if
I think artificial things are of distinct species as well as
natural: since I find they are as plainly and orderly ranked into
sorts, by different abstract ideas, with general names annexed to
them, as distinct one from another as those of natural substances. For
why should we not think a watch and pistol as distinct species one
from another, as a horse and a dog; they being expressed in our
minds by distinct ideas, and to others by distinct appellations?
  42. Substances alone, of all our several sorts of ideas, have proper
names. This is further to be observed concerning substances, that they
alone of all our several sorts of ideas have particular or proper
names, whereby one only particular thing is signified. Because in
simple ideas, modes, and relations, it seldom happens that men have
occasion to mention often this or that particular when it is absent.
Besides, the greatest part of mixed modes, being actions which
perish in their birth, are not capable of a lasting duration, as
substances which are the actors; and wherein the simple ideas that
make up the complex ideas designed by the name have a lasting union.
  43. Difficult to lead another by words into the thoughts of things
stripped of those abstract ideas we give them. I must beg pardon of my
reader for having dwelt so long upon this subject, and perhaps with
some obscurity. But I desire it may be considered, how difficult it is
to lead another by words into the thoughts of things, stripped of
those specifical differences we give them: which things, if I name
not, I say nothing; and if I do name them, I thereby rank them into
some sort or other, and suggest to the mind the usual abstract idea of
that species; and so cross my purpose. For, to talk of a man, and to
lay by, at the same time, the ordinary signification of the name
man, which is our complex idea usually annexed to it; and bid the
reader consider man, as he is in himself, and as he is really
distinguished from others in his internal constitution, or real
essence, that is, by something he knows not what, looks like trifling:
and yet thus one must do who would speak of the supposed real essences
and species of things, as thought to be made by nature, if it be but
only to make it understood, that there is no such thing signified by
the general names which substances are called by. But because it is
difficult by known familiar names to do this, give me leave to
endeavour by an example to make the different consideration the mind
has of specific names and ideas a little more clear; and to show how
the complex ideas of modes are referred sometimes to archetypes in the
minds of other intelligent beings, or, which is the same, to the
signification annexed by others to their received names; and sometimes
to no archetypes at all. Give me leave also to show how the mind
always refers its ideas of substances, either to the substances
themselves, or to the signification of their names, as to the
archetypes; and also to make plain the nature of species or sorting of
things, as apprehended and made use of by us; and of the essences
belonging to those species: which is perhaps of more moment to
discover the extent and certainty of our knowledge than we at first
imagine.
  44. Instances of mixed modes named kinneah and niouph. Let us
suppose Adam, in the state of a grown man, with a good
understanding, but in a strange country, with all things new and
unknown about him; and no other faculties to attain the knowledge of
them but what one of this age has now. He observes Lamech more
melancholy than usual, and imagines it to be from a suspicion he has
of his wife Adah, (whom he most ardently loved) that she had too
much kindness for another man. Adam discourses these his thoughts to
Eve, and desires her to take care that Adah commit not folly: and in
these discourses with Eve he makes use of these two new words
kinneah and niouph. In time, Adam's mistake appears, for he finds
Lamech's trouble proceeded from having killed a man: but yet the two
names kinneah and niouph, (the one standing for suspicion in a husband
of his wife's disloyalty to him; and the other for the act of
committing disloyalty), lost not their distinct significations. It
is plain then, that here were two distinct complex ideas of mixed
modes, with names to them, two distinct species of actions essentially
different; I ask wherein consisted the essences of these two
distinct species of actions? And it is plain it consisted in a precise
combination of simple ideas, different in one from the other. I ask,
whether the complex idea in Adam's mind, which he called kinneah, were
adequate or not? And it is plain it was; for it being a combination of
simple ideas, which he, without any regard to any archetype, without
respect to anything as a pattern, voluntarily put together,
abstracted, and gave the name kinneah to, to express in short to
others, by that one sound, all the simple ideas contained and united
in that complex one; it must necessarily follow that it was an
adequate idea. His own choice having made that combination, it had all
in it he intended it should, and so could not but be perfect, could
not but be adequate; it being referred to no other archetype which
it was supposed to represent.
  45. These words, kinneah and niouph, by degrees grew into common
use, and then the case was somewhat altered. Adam's children had the
same faculties, and thereby the same power that he had, to make what
complex ideas of mixed modes they pleased in their own minds; to
abstract them, and make what sounds they pleased the signs of them:
but the use of names being to make our ideas within us known to
others, that cannot be done, but when the same sign stands for the
same idea in two who would communicate their thoughts and discourse
together. Those, therefore, of Adam's children, that found these two
words, kinneah and niouph, in familiar use, could not take them for
insignificant sounds, but must needs conclude they stood for
something; for certain ideas, abstract ideas. they being general
names; which abstract ideas were the essences of the species
distinguished by those names. If, therefore, they would use these
words as names of species already established and agreed on, they were
obliged to conform the ideas in their minds, signified by these names,
to the ideas that they stood for in other men's minds, as to their
patterns and archetypes; and then indeed their ideas of these
complex modes were liable to be inadequate, as being very apt
(especially those that consisted of combinations of many simple ideas)
not to be exactly conformable to the ideas in other men's minds, using
the same names; though for this there be usually a remedy at hand,
which is to ask the meaning of any word we understand not of him
that uses it: it being as impossible to know certainly what the
words jealousy and adultery stand for in another man's mind, with whom
I would discourse about them; as it was impossible, in the beginning
of language, to know what kinneah and niouph stood for in another
man's mind, without explication; they being voluntary signs in every
one.
  46. Instances of a species of substance named Zahab. Let us now also
consider, after the same manner, the names of substances in their
first application. One of Adam's children, roving in the mountains,
lights on a glittering substance which pleases his eye. Home he
carries it to Adam, who, upon consideration of it, finds it to be
hard, to have a bright yellow colour, and an exceeding great weight.
These perhaps, at first, are all the qualities he takes notice of in
it; and abstracting this complex idea, consisting of a substance
having that peculiar bright yellowness, and a weight very great in
proportion to its bulk, he gives the name zahab, to denominate and
mark all substances that have these sensible qualities in them. It
is evident now, that, in this case, Adam acts quite differently from
what he did before, in forming those ideas of mixed modes to which
he gave the names kinneah and niouph. For there he put ideas
together only by his own imagination, not taken from the existence
of anything; and to them he gave names to denominate all things that
should happen to agree to those his abstract ideas, without
considering whether any such thing did exist or not; the standard
there was of his own making. But in the forming his idea of this new
substance, he takes the quite contrary course; here he has a
standard made by nature; and therefore, being to represent that to
himself, by the idea he has of it, even when it is absent, he puts
in no simple idea into his complex one, but what he has the perception
of from the thing itself. He takes care that his idea be conformable
to this archetype, and intends the name should stand for an idea so
conformable.
  47. This piece of matter, thus denominated zahab by Adam, being
quite different from any he had seen before, nobody, I think, will
deny to be a distinct species, and to have its peculiar essence: and
that the name zahab is the mark of the species, and a name belonging
to all things partaking in that essence. But here it is plain the
essence Adam made the name zahab stand for was nothing but a body
hard, shining, yellow, and very heavy. But the inquisitive mind of
man, not content with the knowledge of these, as I may say,
superficial qualities, puts Adam upon further examination of this
matter. He therefore knocks, and beats it with flints, to see what was
discoverable in the inside: he finds it yield to blows, but not easily
separate into pieces: he finds it will bend without breaking. Is not
now ductility to be added to his former idea, and made part of the
essence of the species that name Zahab stands for? Further trials
discover fusibility and fixedness. Are not they also, by the same
reason that any of the others were, to be put into the complex idea
signified by the name zahab? If not, what reason will there be shown
more for the one than the other? If these must, then all the other
properties, which any further trials shall discover in this matter,
ought by the same reason to make a part of the ingredients of the
complex idea which the name zahab stands for, and so be the essence of
the species marked by that name. Which properties, because they are
endless, it is plain that the idea made after this fashion, by this
archetype, will be always inadequate.
  48. The abstract ideas of substances always imperfect, and therefore
various. But this is not all. It would also follow that the names of
substances would not only have, as in truth they have, but would
also be supposed to have different significations, as used by
different men, which would very much cumber the use of language. For
if every distinct quality that were discovered in any matter by any
one were supposed to make a necessary part of the complex idea
signified by the common name given to it, it must follow, that men
must suppose the same word to signify different things in different
men: since they cannot doubt but different men may have discovered
several qualities, in substances of the same denomination, which
others know nothing of.
  49. Therefore to fix their nominal species, a real essense is
supposed. To avoid this therefore, they have supposed a real essence
belonging to every species, from which these properties all flow,
and would have their name of the species stand for that. But they, not
having any idea of that real essence in substances, and their words
signifying nothing but the ideas they have, that which is done by this
attempt is only to put the name or sound in the place and stead of the
thing having that real essence, without knowing what the real
essence is, and this is that which men do when they speak of species
of things, as supposing them made by nature, and distinguished by real
essences.
  50. Which supposition is of no use. For, let us consider, when we
affirm that "all gold is fixed," either it means that fixedness is a
part of the definition, i.e., part of the nominal essence the word
gold stands for; and so this affirmation, "all gold is fixed,"
contains nothing but the signification of the term gold. Or else it
means, that fixedness, not being a part of the definition of the gold,
is a property of that substance itself: in which case it is plain that
the word gold stands in the place of a substance, having the real
essence of a species of things made by nature. In which way of
substitution it has so confused and uncertain a signification, that,
though this proposition- "gold is fixed"- be in that sense an
affirmation of something real; yet it is a truth will always fail us
in its particular application, and so is of no real use or
certainty. For let it be ever so true, that all gold, i.e. all that
has the real essence of gold, is fixed, what serves this for, whilst
we know not, in this sense, what is or is not gold? For if we know not
the real essence of gold, it is impossible we should know what
parcel of matter has that essence, and so whether it be true gold or
no.
  51. Conclusion. To conclude: what liberty Adam had at first to
make any complex ideas of mixed modes by no other pattern but by his
own thoughts, the same have all men ever since had. And the same
necessity of conforming his ideas of substances to things without him,
as to archetypes made by nature, that Adam was under, if he would
not wilfully impose upon himself, the same are all men ever since
under too. The same liberty also that Adam had of affixing any new
name to any idea, the same has any one still, (especially the
beginners of languages, if we can imagine any such); but only with
this difference, that, in places where men in society have already
established a language amongst them, the significations of words are
very warily and sparingly to be altered. Because men being furnished
already with names for their ideas, and common use having appropriated
known names to certain ideas, an affected misapplication of them
cannot but be very ridiculous. He that hath new notions will perhaps
venture sometimes on the coining of new terms to express them: but men
think it a boldness, and it is uncertain whether common use will
ever make them pass for current. But in communication with others,
it is necessary that we conform the ideas we make the vulgar words
of any language stand for to their known proper significations, (which
I have explained at large already), or else to make known that new
signification we apply them to.
                             Chapter VII
                             Of Particles

  1. Particles connect parts, or whole sentences together. Besides
words which are names of ideas in the mind, there are a great many
others that are made use of to signify the connexion that the mind
gives to ideas, or to propositions, one with another. The mind, in
communicating its thoughts to others, does not only need signs of
the ideas it has then before it, but others also, to show or
intimate some particular action of its own, at that time, relating
to those ideas. This it does several ways; as Is, and Is not, are
the general marks, of the mind, affirming or denying. But besides
affirmation or negation, without which there is in words no truth or
falsehood, the mind does, in declaring its sentiments to others,
connect not only the parts of propositions, but whole sentences one to
another, with their several relations and dependencies, to make a
coherent discourse.
  2. In right use of particles consists the art of well-speaking.
The words whereby it signifies what connexion it gives to the
several affirmations and negations, that it unites in one continued
reasoning or narration, are generally called particles: and it is in
the right use of these that more particularly consists the clearness
and beauty of a good style. To think well, it is not enough that a man
has ideas clear and distinct in his thoughts, nor that he observes the
agreement or disagreement of some of them; but he must think in train,
and observe the dependence of his thoughts and reasonings upon one
another. And to express well such methodical and rational thoughts, he
must have words to show what connexion, restriction, distinction,
opposition, emphasis &c., he gives to each respective part of his
discourse. To mistake in any of these, is to puzzle instead of
informing his hearer: and therefore it is, that those words which
are not truly by themselves the names of any ideas are of such
constant and indispensable use in language, and do much contribute
to men's well expressing themselves.
  3. They show what relation the mind gives to its own thoughts.
This part of grammar has been perhaps as much neglected as some others
over-diligently cultivated. It is easy for men to write, one after
another, of cases and genders, moods and tenses, gerunds and
supines: in these and the like there has been great diligence used;
and particles themselves, in some languages, have been, with great
show of exactness, ranked into their several orders. But though
prepositions and conjunctions, &c., are names well known in grammar,
and the particles contained under them carefully ranked into their
distinct subdivisions; yet he who would show the right use of
particles, and what significancy and force they have, must take a
little more pains, enter into his own thoughts, and observe nicely the
several postures of his mind in discoursing.
  4. They are all marks of some action or intimation of the mind.
Neither is it enough, for the explaining of these words, to render
them, as is usual in dictionaries, by words of another tongue which
come nearest to their signification: for what is meant by them is
commonly as hard to be understood in one as another language. They are
all marks of some action or intimation of the mind; and therefore to
understand them rightly, the several views, postures, stands, turns,
limitations, and exceptions, and several other thoughts of the mind,
for which we have either none or very deficient names, are
diligently to be studied. Of these there is a great variety, much
exceeding the number of particles that most languages have to
express them by: and therefore it is not to be wondered that most of
these particles have divers and sometimes almost opposite
significations. In the Hebrew tongue there is a particle consisting of
but one single letter, of which there are reckoned up, as I
remember, seventy, I am sure above fifty, several significations.
  5. Instance in "but." "But" is a particle, none more familiar in our
language: and he that says it is a discretive conjunction, and that it
answers to sed Latin, or mais in French, thinks he has sufficiently
explained it. But yet it seems to me to intimate several relations the
mind gives to the several propositions or parts of them which it joins
by this monosyllable.
  First, "But to say no more": here it intimates a stop of the mind in
the course it was going, before it came quite to the end of it.
  Secondly, "I saw but two plants"; here it shows that the mind limits
the sense to what is expressed, with a negation of all other.
  Thirdly, "You pray; but it is not that God would bring you to the
true religion."
  Fourthly, "But that he would confirm you in your own." The first
of these buts intimates a supposition in the mind of something
otherwise than it should be: the latter shows that the mind makes a
direct opposition between that and what goes before it.
  Fifthly, "All animals have sense, but a dog is an animal": here it
signifies little more but that the latter proposition is joined to the
former, as the minor of a syllogism.
  6. This matter of the use of particles but lightly touched here.
To these, I doubt not, might be added a great many other
significations of this particle, if it were my business to examine
it in its full latitude, and consider it in all the places it is to be
found: which if one should do, I doubt whether in all those manners it
is made use of, it would deserve the title of discretive, which
grammarians give to it. But I intend not here a full explication of
this sort of signs. The instances I have given in this one may give
occasion to reflect on their use and force in language, and lead us
into the contemplation of several actions of our minds in discoursing,
which it has found a way to intimate to others by these particles,
some whereof constantly, and others in certain constructions, have the
sense of a whole sentence contained in them.
                             Chapter VIII
                    Of Abstract and Concrete Terms

  1. Abstract terms not predictable one of another, and why. The
ordinary words of language, and our common use of them, would have
given us light into the nature of our ideas, if they had been but
considered with attention. The mind, as has been shown, has a power to
abstract its ideas, and so they become essences, general essences,
whereby the sorts of things are distinguished. Now each abstract
idea being distinct, so that of any two the one can never be the
other, the mind will, by its intuitive knowledge, perceive their
difference, and therefore in propositions no two whole ideas can
ever be affirmed one of another. This we see in the common use of
language, which permits not any two abstract words, or names of
abstract ideas, to be affirmed one of another. For how near of kin
soever they may seem to be, and how certain soever it is that man is
an animal, or rational, or white, yet every one at first hearing
perceives the falsehood of these propositions: humanity is
animality, or rationality, or whiteness: and this is as evident as any
of the most allowed maxims. All our affirmations then are only in
concrete, which is the affirming, not one abstract idea to be another,
but one abstract idea to be joined to another; which abstract ideas,
in substances, may be of any sort; in all the rest are little else but
of relations; and in substances the most frequent are of powers:
v.g. "a man is white," signifies that the thing that has the essence
of a man has also in it the essence of whiteness, which is nothing but
a power to produce the idea of whiteness in one whose eyes can
discover ordinary objects: or, "a man is rational," signifies that the
same thing that hath the essence of a man hath also in it the
essence of rationality, i.e. a power of reasoning.
  2. They show the difference of our ideas. This distinction of
names shows us also the difference of our ideas: for if we observe
them, we shall find that our simple ideas have all abstract as well as
concrete names: the one whereof is (to speak the language of
grammarians) a substantive, the other an adjective; as whiteness,
white; sweetness, sweet. The like also holds in our ideas of modes and
relations; as justice, just; equality, equal: only with this
difference, that some of the concrete names of relations amongst men
chiefly are substantives; as, paternitas, pater; whereof it were
easy to render a reason. But as to our ideas of substances, we have
very few or no abstract names at all. For though the Schools have
introduced animalitas, humanitas, corporietas, and some others; yet
they hold no proportion with that infinite number of names of
substances, to which they never were ridiculous enough to attempt
the coining of abstract ones: and those few that the schools forged,
and put into the mouths of their scholars, could never yet get
admittance into common use, or obtain the license of public
approbation. Which seems to me at least to intimate the confession
of all mankind, that they have no ideas of the real essences of
substances, since they have not names for such ideas: which no doubt
they would have had, had not their consciousness to themselves of
their ignorance of them kept them from so idle an attempt. And
therefore, though they had ideas enough to distinguish gold from a
stone, and metal from wood; yet they but timorously ventured on such
terms, as aurietas and saxietas, metallietas and lignietas, or the
like names, which should pretend to signify the real essences of those
substances whereof they knew they had no ideas. And indeed it was only
the doctrine of substantial forms, and the confidence of mistaken
pretenders to a knowledge that they had not, which first coined and
then introduced animalitas and humanitas, and the like; which yet went
very little further than their own Schools, and could never get to
be current amongst understanding men. Indeed, humanitas was a word
in familiar use amongst the Romans; but in a far different sense,
and stood not for the abstract essence of any substance; but was the
abstracted name of a mode, and its concrete humanus, not homo.
                              Chapter IX
                     Of the Imperfection of Words

  1. Words are used for recording and communicating our thoughts. From
what has been said in the foregoing chapters, it is easy to perceive
what imperfection there is in language, and how the very nature of
words makes it almost unavoidable for many of them to be doubtful
and uncertain in their significations. To examine the perfection or
imperfection of words, it is necessary first to consider their use and
end: for as they are more or less fitted to attain that, so they are
more or less perfect. We have, in the former part of this discourse
often, upon occasion, mentioned a double use of words.
  First, One for the recording of our own thoughts.
  Secondly, The other for the communicating of our thoughts to others.
  2. Any words will serve for recording. As to the first of these, for
the recording our own thoughts for the help of our own memories,
whereby, as it were, we talk to ourselves, any words will serve the
turn. For since sounds are voluntary and indifferent signs of any
ideas, a man may use what words he pleases to signify his own ideas to
himself: and there will be no imperfection in them, if he constantly
use the same sign for the same idea: for then he cannot fail of having
his meaning understood, wherein consists the right use and
perfection of language.
  3. Communication by words either for civil or philosophical
purposes. Secondly, As to communication by words, that too has a
double use.
   I. Civil.
  II. Philosophical.
  First, by their civil use, I mean such a communication of thoughts
and ideas by words, as may serve for the upholding common conversation
and commerce, about the ordinary affairs and conveniences of civil
life, in the societies of men, one amongst another.
  Secondly, By the philosophical use of words, I mean such a use of
them as may serve to convey the precise notions of things, and to
express in general propositions certain and undoubted truths, which
the mind may rest upon and be satisfied with in its search after
true knowledge. These two uses are very distinct; and a great deal
less exactness will serve in the one than in the other, as we shall
see in what follows.
  4. The imperfection of words is the doubtfulness or ambiguity of
their signification, which is caused by the sort of ideas they stand
for. The chief end of language in communication being to be
understood, words serve not well for that end, neither in civil nor
philosophical discourse, when any word does not excite in the hearer
the same idea which it stands for in the mind of the speaker. Now,
since sounds have no natural connexion with our ideas, but have all
their signification from the arbitrary imposition of men, the
doubtfulness and uncertainty of their signification, which is the
imperfection we here are speaking of, has its cause more in the
ideas they stand for than in any incapacity there is in one sound more
than in another to signify any idea: for in that regard they are all
equally perfect.
  That then which makes doubtfulness and uncertainty in the
signification of some more than other words, is the difference of
ideas they stand for.
  5. Natural causes of their imperfection, especially in those that
stand for mixed modes, and for our ideas of substances. Words having
naturally no signification, the idea which each stands for must be
learned and retained, by those who would exchange thoughts, and hold
intelligible discourse with others, in any language. But this is the
hardest to be done where,
  First, The ideas they stand for are very complex, and made up of a
great number of ideas put together.
  Secondly, Where the ideas they stand for have no certain connexion
in nature; and so no settled standard anywhere in nature existing,
to rectify and adjust them by.
  Thirdly, When the signification of the word is referred to a
standard, which standard is not easy to be known.
  Fourthly, Where the signification of the word and the real essence
of the thing are not exactly the same.
  These are difficulties that attend the signification of several
words that are intelligible. Those which are not intelligible at
all, such as names standing for any simple ideas which another has not
organs or faculties to attain; as the names of colours to a blind man,
or sounds to a deaf man, need not here be mentioned.
  In all these cases we shall find an imperfection in words; which I
shall more at large explain, in their particular application to our
several sorts of ideas: for if we examine them, we shall find that the
names of Mixed Modes are most liable to doubtfulness and imperfection,
for the two first of these reasons; and the names of Substances
chiefly for the two latter.
  6. The names of mixed modes doubtful. First, because the ideas
they stand for are so complex. First, The names of mixed modes are,
many of them, liable to great uncertainty and obscurity in their
signification
  I. Because of that great composition these complex ideas are often
made up of. To make words serviceable to the end of communication,
it is necessary, as has been said, that they excite in the hearer
exactly the same idea they stand for in the mind of the speaker.
Without this, men fill one another's heads with noise and sounds;
but convey not thereby their thoughts, and lay not before one
another their ideas, which is the end of discourse and language. But
when a word stands for a very complex idea that is compounded and
decompounded, it is not easy for men to form and retain that idea so
exactly, as to make the name in common use stand for the same
precise idea, without any the least variation. Hence it comes to
pass that men's names of very compound ideas, such as for the most
part are moral words, have seldom in two different men the same
precise signification; since one man's complex idea seldom agrees with
another's, and often differs from his own- from that which he had
yesterday, or will have to-morrow.
  7. Secondly, because they have no standards in nature. Because the
names of mixed modes for the most part want standards in nature,
whereby men may rectify and adjust their significations, therefore
they are very various and doubtful. They are assemblages of ideas
put together at the pleasure of the mind, pursuing its own ends of
discourse, and suited to its own notions, whereby it designs not to
copy anything really existing, but to denominate and rank things as
they come to agree with those archetypes or forms it has made. He that
first brought the word sham, or wheedle, or banter, in use, put
together as he thought fit those ideas he made it stand for; and as it
is with any new names of modes that are now brought into any language,
so it was with the old ones when they were first made use of. Names,
therefore, that stand for collections of ideas which the mind makes at
pleasure must needs be of doubtful signification, when such
collections are nowhere to be found constantly united in nature, nor
any patterns to be shown whereby men may adjust them. What the word
murder, or sacrilege, &c., signifies can never be known from things
themselves: there be many of the parts of those complex ideas which
are not visible in the action itself; the intention of the mind, or
the relation of holy things, which make a part of murder or sacrilege,
have no necessary connexion with the outward and visible action of him
that commits either: and the pulling the trigger of the gun with which
the murder is committed, and is all the action that perhaps is
visible, has no natural connexion with those other ideas that make
up the complex one named murder. They have their union and combination
only from the understanding which unites them under one name: but,
uniting them without any rule or pattern, it cannot be but that the
signification of the name that stands for such voluntary collections
should be often various in the minds of different men, who have scarce
any standing rule to regulate themselves and their notions by, in such
arbitrary ideas.
  8. Common use, or propriety not a sufficient remedy. It is true,
common use, that is, the rule of propriety may be supposed here to
afford some aid, to settle the signification of language; and it
cannot be denied but that in some measure it does. Common use
regulates the meaning of words pretty well for common conversation;
but nobody having an authority to establish the precise
signification of words, nor determine to what ideas any one shall
annex them, common use is not sufficient to adjust them to
Philosophical Discourses; there being scarce any name of any very
complex idea (to say nothing of others) which, in common use, has
not a great latitude, and which, keeping within the bounds of
propriety, may not be made the sign of far different ideas. Besides,
the rule and measure of propriety itself being nowhere established, it
is often matter of dispute, whether this or that way of using a word
be propriety of speech or no. From all which it is evident, that the
names of such kind of very complex ideas are naturally liable to
this imperfection, to be of doubtful and uncertain signification;
and even in men that have a mind to understand one another, do not
always stand for the same idea in speaker and hearer. Though the names
glory and gratitude be the same in every man's mouth through a whole
country, yet the complex collective idea which every one thinks on
or intends by that name, is apparently very different in men using the
same language.
  9. The way of learning these names contributes also to their
doubtfulness. The way also wherein the names of mixed modes are
ordinarily learned, does not a little contribute to the doubtfulness
of their signification. For if we will observe how children learn
languages, we shall find that, to make them understand what the
names of simple ideas or substances stand for, people ordinarily
show them the thing whereof they would have them have the idea; and
then repeat to them the name that stands for it; as white, sweet,
milk, sugar, cat, dog. But as for mixed modes, especially the most
material of them, moral words, the sounds are usually learned first;
and then, to know what complex ideas they stand for, they are either
beholden to the explication of others, or (which happens for the
most part) are left to their own observation and industry; which being
little laid out in the search of the true and precise meaning of
names, these moral words are in most men's mouths little more than
bare sounds; or when they have any, it is for the most part but a very
loose and undetermined, and, consequently, obscure and confused
signification. And even those themselves who have with more
attention settled their notions, do yet hardly avoid the inconvenience
to have them stand for complex ideas different from those which other,
even intelligent and studious men, make them the signs of. Where shall
one find any, either controversial debate, or familiar discourse,
concerning honour, faith, grace, religion, church, &c., wherein it
is not easy to observe the different notions men have of them? Which
is nothing but this, that they are not agreed in the signification
of those words, nor have in their minds the same complex ideas which
they make them stand for, and so all the contests that follow
thereupon are only about the meaning of a sound. And hence we see
that, in the interpretation of laws, whether divine or human, there is
no end; comments beget comments, and explications make new matter
for explications; and of limiting, distinguishing, varying the
signification of these moral words there is no end. These ideas of
men's making are, by men still having the same power, multiplied in
infinitum. Many a man who was pretty well satisfied of the meaning
of a text of Scripture, or clause in the code, at first reading,
has, by consulting commentators, quite lost the sense of it, and by
these elucidations given rise or increase to his doubts, and drawn
obscurity upon the place. I say not this that I think commentaries
needless; but to show how uncertain the names of mixed modes naturally
are, even in the mouths of those who had both the intention and the
faculty of speaking as clearly as language was capable to express
their thoughts.
  10. Hence unavoidable obscurity in ancient authors. What obscurity
this has unavoidably brought upon the writings of men who have lived
in remote ages, and different countries, it will be needless to take
notice. Since the numerous volumes of learned men, employing their
thoughts that way, are proofs more than enough, to show what
attention, study, sagacity, and reasoning are required to find out the
true meaning of ancient authors. But, there being no writings we
have any great concernment to be very solicitous about the meaning of,
but those that contain either truths we are required to believe, or
laws we are to obey, and draw inconveniences on us when we mistake
or transgress, we may be less anxious about the sense of other
authors; who, writing but their own opinions, we are under no
greater necessity to know them, than they to know ours. Our good or
evil depending not on their decrees, we may safely be ignorant of
their notions: and therefore in the reading of them, if they do not
use their words with a due clearness and perspicuity, we may lay
them aside, and without any injury done them, resolve thus with
ourselves,

           Si non vis intelligi, debes negligi.

  11. Names of substances of doubtful signification, because the ideas
they stand for relate to the reality of things. If the signification
of the names of mixed modes be uncertain, because there be no real
standards existing in nature to which those ideas are referred, and by
which they may be adjusted, the names of substances are of a
doubtful signification, for a contrary reason, viz. because the
ideas they stand for are supposed conformable to the reality of
things, and are referred to as standards made by Nature. In our
ideas of substances we have not the liberty, as in mixed modes, to
frame what combinations we think fit, to be the characteristical notes
to rank and denominate things by. In these we must follow Nature, suit
our complex ideas to real existences, and regulate the signification
of their names by the things themselves, if we will have our names
to be signs of them, and stand for them. Here, it is true, we have
patterns to follow; but patterns that will make the signification of
their names very uncertain: for names must be of a very unsteady and
various meaning, if the ideas they stand for be referred to
standards without us, that either cannot be known at all, or can be
known but imperfectly and uncertainly.
  12. Names of substances referred, to real essences that cannot be
known. The names of substances have, as has been shown, a double
reference in their ordinary use.
  First, Sometimes they are made to stand for, and so their
signification is supposed to agree to, the real constitution of
things, from which all their properties flow, and in which they all
centre. But this real constitution, or (as it is apt to be called)
essence, being utterly unknown to us, any sound that is put to stand
for it must be very uncertain in its application; and it will be
impossible to know what things are or ought to be called a horse, or
antimony, when those words are put for real essences that we have no
ideas of at all. And therefore in this supposition, the names of
substances being referred to standards that cannot be known, their
significations can never be adjusted and established by those
standards.
  13. To co-existing qualities, which are known but imperfectly.
Secondly, The simple ideas that are found to co-exist in substances
being that which their names immediately signify, these, as united
in the several sorts of things, are the proper standards to which
their names are referred, and by which their significations may be
best rectified. But neither will these archetypes so well serve to
this purpose as to leave these names without very various and
uncertain significations. Because these simple ideas that co-exist,
and are united in the same subject, being very numerous, and having
all an equal right to go into the complex specific idea which the
specific name is to stand for, men, though they propose to
themselves the very same subject to consider, yet frame very different
ideas about it; and so the name they use for it unavoidably comes to
have, in several men, very different significations. The simple
qualities which make up the complex ideas, being most of them
powers, in relation to changes which they are apt to make in, or
receive from other bodies, are almost infinite. He that shall but
observe what a great variety of alterations any one of the baser
metals is apt to receive, from the different application only of fire;
and how much a greater number of changes any of them will receive in
the hands of a chymist, by the application of other bodies, will not
think it strange that I count the properties of any sort of bodies not
easy to be collected, and completely known, by the ways of inquiry
which our faculties are capable of. They being therefore at least so
many, that no man can know the precise and definite number, they are
differently discovered by different men, according to their various
skill, attention, and ways of handling; who therefore cannot choose
but have different ideas of the same substance, and therefore make the
signification of its common name very various and uncertain. For the
complex ideas of substances, being made up of such simple ones as
are supposed to co-exist in nature, every one has a right to put
into his complex idea those qualities he has found to be united
together. For, though in the substance of gold one satisfies himself
with colour and weight, yet another thinks solubility in aqua regia as
necessary to be joined with that colour in his idea of gold, as any
one does its fusibility; solubility in aqua regia being a quality as
constantly joined with its colour and weight as fusibility or any
other; others put into it ductility or fixedness, &c., as they have
been taught by tradition or experience. Who of all these has
established the right signification of the word, gold? Or who shall be
the judge to determine? Each has his standard in nature, which he
appeals to, and with reason thinks he has the same right to put into
his complex idea signified by the word gold, those qualities, which,
upon trial, he has found united; as another who has not so well
examined has to leave them out; or a third, who has made other trials,
has to put in others. For the union in nature of these qualities being
the true ground of their union in one complex idea, who can say one of
them has more reason to be put in or left out than another? From hence
it will unavoidably follow, that the complex ideas of substances in
men using the same names for them, will be very various, and so the
significations of those names very uncertain.
  14. Thirdly, to co-existing qualities which are known but
imperfectly. Besides, there is scarce any particular thing existing,
which, in some of its simple ideas, does not communicate with a
greater, and in others a less number of particular beings: who shall
determine in this case which are those that are to make up the precise
collection that is to be signified by the specific name? or can with
any just authority prescribe, which obvious or common qualities are to
be left out; or which more secret, or more particular, are to be put
into the signification of the name of any substance? All which
together, seldom or never fall to produce that various and doubtful
signification in the names of substances, which causes such
uncertainty, disputes, or mistakes, when we come to a philosophical
use of them.
  15. With this imperfection, they may serve for civil, but not well
for philosophical use. It is true, as to civil and common
conversation, the general names of substances, regulated in their
ordinary signification by some obvious qualities, (as by the shape and
figure in things of known seminal propagation, and in other
substances, for the most part by colour, joined with some other
sensible qualities), do well enough to design the things men would
be understood to speak of: and so they usually conceive well enough
the substances meant by the word gold or apple, to distinguish the one
from the other. But in philosophical inquiries and debates, where
general truths are to be established, and consequences drawn from
positions laid down, there the precise signification of the names of
substances will be found not only not to be well established, but also
very hard to be so. For example: he that shall make malleability, or a
certain degree of fixedness, a part of his complex idea of gold, may
make propositions concerning gold, and draw consequences from them,
that will truly and clearly follow from gold, taken in such a
signification: but yet such as another man can never be forced to
admit, nor be convinced of their truth, who makes not malleableness,
or the same degree of fixedness, part of that complex idea that the
name gold, in his use of it, stands for.
  16. Instance, liquor. This is a natural and almost unavoidable
imperfection in almost all the names of substances, in all languages
whatsoever, which men will easily find when, once passing from
confused or loose notions, they come to more strict and close
inquiries. For then they will be convinced how doubtful and obscure
those words are in their signification, which in ordinary use appeared
very clear and determined. I was once in a meeting of very learned and
ingenious physicians, where by chance there arose a question,
whether any liquor passed through the filaments of the nerves. The
debate having been managed a good while, by variety of arguments on
both sides, I (who had been used to suspect, that the greatest part of
disputes were more about the signification of words than a real
difference in the conception of things) desired, that, before they
went any further on in this dispute, they would first examine and
establish amongst them, what the word liquor signified. They at
first were a little surprised at the proposal; and had they been
persons less ingenious, they might perhaps have taken it for a very
frivolous or extravagant one: since there was no one there that
thought not himself to understand very perfectly what the word
liquor stood for; which I think, too, none of the most perplexed names
of substances. However, they were pleased to comply with my motion;
and upon examination found that the signification of that word was not
so settled or certain as they had all imagined; but that each of
them made it a sign of a different complex idea. This made them
perceive that the main of their dispute was about the signification of
that term; and that they differed very little in their opinions
concerning some fluid and subtle matter, passing through the
conduits of the nerves; though it was not so easy to agree whether
it was to be called liquor or no, a thing, which, when considered,
they thought it not worth the contending about.
  17. Instance, gold. How much this is the case in the greatest part
of disputes that men are engaged so hotly in, I shall perhaps have
an occasion in another place to take notice. Let us only here consider
a little more exactly the forementioned instance of the word gold, and
we shall see how hard it is precisely to determine its
signification. I think all agree to make it stand for a body of a
certain yellow shining colour; which being the idea to which
children have annexed that name, the shining yellow part of a
peacock's tail is properly to them gold. Others finding fusibility
joined with that yellow colour in certain parcels of matter, make of
that combination a complex idea to which they give the name gold, to
denote a sort of substances; and so exclude from being gold all such
yellow shining bodies as by fire will be reduced to ashes; and admit
to be of that species, or to be comprehended under that name gold,
only such substances as, having that shining yellow colour, will by
fire be reduced to fusion, and not to ashes. Another, by the same
reason, adds the weight, which, being a quality as straightly joined
with that colour as its fusibility, he thinks has the same reason to
be joined in its idea, and to be signified by its name: and
therefore the other made up of body, of such a colour and
fusibility, to be imperfect; and so on of all the rest: wherein no one
can show a reason why some of the inseparable qualities, that are
always united in nature, should be put into the nominal essence, and
others left out: or why the word gold, signifying that sort of body
the ring on his finger is made of, should determine that sort rather
by its colour, weight, and fusibility, than by its colour, weight, and
solubility in aqua regia: since the dissolving it by that liquor is as
inseparable from it as the fusion by fire; and they are both of them
nothing but the relation which that substance has to two other bodies,
which have a power to operate differently upon it. For by what right
is it that fusibility comes to be a part of the essence signified by
the word gold, and solubility but a property of it? Or why is its
colour part of the essence, and its malleableness but a property? That
which I mean is this, That these being all but properties, depending
on its real constitution, and nothing but powers, either active or
passive, in reference to other bodies, no one has authority to
determine the signification of the word gold (as referred to such a
body existing in nature) more to one collection of ideas to be found
in that body than to another: whereby the signification of that name
must unavoidably be very uncertain. Since, as has been said, several
people observe several properties in the same substance; and I think I
may say nobody all. And therefore we have but very imperfect
descriptions of things, and words have very uncertain significations.
  18. The names of simple ideas the least doubtful. From what has been
said, it is easy to observe what has been before remarked, viz. that
the names of simple ideas are, of all others, the least liable to
mistakes, and that for these reasons. First, Because the ideas they
stand for, being each but one single perception, are much easier
got, and more clearly retained, than the more complex ones, and
therefore are not liable to the uncertainty which usually attends
those compounded ones of substances and mixed modes, in which the
precise number of simple ideas that make them up are not easily
agreed, so readily kept in mind. And, Secondly, Because they are never
referred to any other essence, but barely that perception they
immediately signify: which reference is that which renders the
signification of the names of substances naturally so perplexed, and
gives occasion to so many disputes. Men that do not perversely use
their words, or on purpose set themselves to cavil, seldom mistake, in
any language which they are acquainted with, the use and signification
of the name of simple ideas. White and sweet, yellow and bitter, carry
a very obvious meaning with them, which every one precisely
comprehends, or easily perceives he is ignorant of, and seeks to be
informed. But what precise collection of simple ideas modesty or
frugality stand for, in another's use, is not so certainly known.
And however we are apt to think we well enough know what is meant by
gold or iron; yet the precise complex idea others make them the
signs of is not so certain: and I believe it is very seldom that, in
speaker and hearer, they stand for exactly the same collection.
Which must needs produce mistakes and disputes, when they are made use
of in discourses, wherein men have to do with universal
propositions, and would settle in their minds universal truths, and
consider the consequences that follow from them.
  19. And next to them, simple modes. By the same rule, the names of
simple modes are, next to those of simple ideas, least liable to doubt
and uncertainty; especially those of figure and number, of which men
have so clear and distinct ideas. Who ever that had a mind to
understand them mistook the ordinary meaning of seven, or a
triangle? And in general the least compounded ideas in every kind have
the least dubious names.
  20. The most doubtful are the names of very compounded mixed modes
and substances. Mixed modes, therefore, that are made up but of a
few and obvious simple ideas, have usually names of no very
uncertain signification. But the names of mixed modes which comprehend
a great number of simple ideas, are commonly of a very doubtful and
undetermined meaning, as has been shown. The names of substances,
being annexed to ideas that are neither the real essences, nor exact
representations of the patterns they are referred to, are liable to
yet greater imperfection and uncertainty, especially when we come to a
philosophical use of them.
  21. Why this imperfection charged upon words. The great disorder
that happens in our names of substances, proceeding, for the most
part, from our want of knowledge, and inability to penetrate into
their real constitutions, it may probably be wondered why I charge
this as an imperfection rather upon our words than understandings.
This exception has so much appearance of justice, that I think
myself obliged to give a reason why I have followed this method. I
must confess, then, that, when I first began this Discourse of the
Understanding, and a good while after, I had not the least thought
that any consideration of words was at all necessary to it. But
when, having passed over the original and composition of our ideas,
I began to examine the extent and certainty of our knowledge, I
found it had so near a connexion with words, that, unless their
force and manner of signification were first well observed, there
could be very little said clearly and pertinently concerning
knowledge: which being conversant about truth, had constantly to do
with propositions. And though it terminated in things, yet it was
for the most part so much by the intervention of words, that they
seemed scarce separable from our general knowledge. At least they
interpose themselves so much between our understandings, and the truth
which it would contemplate and apprehend, that, like the medium
through which visible objects pass, the obscurity and disorder do
not seldom cast a mist before our eyes, and impose upon our
understandings. If we consider, in the fallacies men put upon
themselves, as well as others, and the mistakes in men's disputes
and notions, how great a part is owing to words, and their uncertain
or mistaken significations, we shall have reason to think this no
small obstacle in the way to knowledge; which I conclude we are the
more carefully to be warned of, because it has been so far from
being taken notice of as an inconvenience, that the arts of
improving it have been made the business of men's study, and
obtained the reputation of learning and subtilty, as we shall see in
the following chapter. But I am apt to imagine, that, were the
imperfections of language, as the instrument of knowledge, more
thoroughly weighed, a great many of the controversies that make such a
noise in the world, would of themselves cease; and the way to
knowledge, and perhaps peace too, lie a great deal opener than it
does.
  22. This should teach us moderation in imposing our own sense of old
authors. Sure I am that the signification of words in all languages,
depending very much on the thoughts, notions, and ideas of him that
uses them, must unavoidably be of great uncertainty to men of the same
language and country. This is so evident in the Greek authors, that he
that shall peruse their writings will find in almost every one of
them, a distinct language, though the same words. But when to this
natural difficulty in every country, there shall be added different
countries and remote ages, wherein the speakers and writers had very
different notions, tempers, customs, ornaments, and figures of speech,
&c., every one of which influenced the signification of their words
then, though to us now they are lost and unknown; it would become us
to be charitable one to another in our interpretations or
misunderstandings of those ancient writings; which, though of great
concernment to be understood, are liable to the unavoidable
difficulties of speech, which (if we except the names of simple ideas,
and some very obvious things) is not capable, without a constant
defining the terms, of conveying the sense and intention of the
speaker, without any manner of doubt and uncertainty to the hearer.
And in discourses of religion, law, and morality, as they are
matters of the highest concernment, so there will be the greatest
difficulty.
  23. Especially of the Old and New Testament Scriptures. The
volumes of interpreters and commentators on the Old and New
Testament are but too manifest proofs of this. Though everything
said in the text be infallibly true, yet the reader may be, nay,
cannot choose but be, very fallible in the understanding of it. Nor is
it to be wondered, that the will of God, when clothed in words, should
be liable to that doubt and uncertainty which unavoidably attends that
sort of conveyance, when even his Son, whilst clothed in flesh, was
subject to all the frailties and inconveniences of human nature, sin
excepted. And we ought to magnify his goodness, that he hath spread
before all the world such legible characters of his works and
providence, and given all mankind so sufficient a light of reason,
that they to whom this written word never came, could not (whenever
they set themselves to search) either doubt of the being of a God,
or of the obedience due to him. Since then the precepts of Natural
Religion are plain, and very intelligible to all mankind, and seldom
come to be controverted; and other revealed truths, which are conveyed
to us by books and languages, are liable to the common and natural
obscurities and difficulties incident to words; methinks it would
become us to be more careful and diligent in observing the former, and
less magisterial, positive, and imperious, in imposing our own sense
and interpretations of the latter.
                              Chapter X
                        Of the Abuse of Words

  1. Woeful abuse of words. Besides the imperfection that is naturally
in language, and the obscurity and confusion that is so hard to be
avoided in the use of words, there are several wilful faults and
neglects which men are guilty of in this way of communication, whereby
they render these signs less clear and distinct in their signification
than naturally they need to be.
  2. Words are often employed without any, or without clear ideas.
First, In this kind the first and most palpable abuse is, the using of
words without clear and distinct ideas; or, which is worse, signs
without anything signified. Of these there are two sorts:-
  I. Some words introduced without clear ideas annexed to them, even
in their first original. One may observe, in all languages, certain
words that, if they be examined, will be found in their first
original, and their appropriated use, not to stand for any clear and
distinct ideas. These, for the most part, the several sects of
philosophy and religion have introduced. For their authors or
promoters, either affecting something singular, and out of the way
of common apprehensions, or to support some strange opinions, or cover
some weakness of their hypothesis, seldom fail to coin new words,
and such as, when they come to be examined, may justly be called
insignificant terms. For, having either had no determinate
collection of ideas annexed to them when they were first invented;
or at least such as, if well examined, will be found inconsistent,
it is no wonder, if, afterwards, in the vulgar use of the same
party, they remain empty sounds, with little or no signification,
amongst those who think it enough to have them often in their
mouths, as the distinguishing characters of their Church or School,
without much troubling their heads to examine what are the precise
ideas they stand for. I shall not need here to heap up instances;
every man's reading and conversation will sufficiently furnish him. Or
if he wants to be better stored, the great mintmasters of this kind of
terms, I mean the Schoolmen and Metaphysicians (under which I think
the disputing natural and moral philosophers of these latter ages
may be comprehended) have wherewithal abundantly to content him.
  3. II. Other words, to which ideas were annexed at first, used
afterwards without distinct meanings. Others there be who extend
this abuse yet further, who take so little care to lay by words,
which, in their primary notation have scarce any clear and distinct
ideas which they are annexed to, that, by an unpardonable
negligence, they familiarly use words which the propriety of
language has affixed to very important ideas, without any distinct
meaning at all. Wisdom, glory, grace, &c., are words frequent enough
in every man's mouth; but if a great many of those who use them should
be asked what they mean by them, they would be at a stand, and not
know what to answer: a plain proof, that, though they have learned
those sounds, and have them ready at their tongues ends, yet there are
no determined ideas laid up in their minds, which are to be
expressed to others by them.
  4. This occasioned by men learning names before they have the
ideas the names belong to. Men having been accustomed from their
cradles to learn words which are easily got and retained, before
they knew or had framed the complex ideas to which they were
annexed, or which were to be found in the things they were thought
to stand for, they usually continue to do so all their lives; and
without taking the pains necessary to settle in their minds determined
ideas, they use their words for such unsteady and confused notions
as they have, contenting themselves with the same words other people
use; as if their very sound necessarily carried with it constantly the
same meaning. This, though men make a shift with in the ordinary
occurrences of life, where they find it necessary to be understood,
and therefore they make signs till they are so; yet this
insignificancy in their words, when they come to reason concerning
either their tenets or interest, manifestly fills their discourse with
abundance of empty unintelligible noise and jargon, especially in
moral matters, where the words for the most part standing for
arbitrary and numerous collections of ideas, not regularly and
permanently united in nature, their bare sounds are often only thought
on, or at least very obscure and uncertain notions annexed to them.
Men take the words they find in use amongst their neighbors; and
that they may not seem ignorant what they stand for, use them
confidently, without much troubling their heads about a certain
fixed meaning; whereby, besides the ease of it, they obtain this
advantage, That, as in such discourses they seldom are in the right,
so they are as seldom to be convinced that they are in the wrong; it
being all one to go about to draw those men out of their mistakes
who have no settled notions, as to dispossess a vagrant of his
habitation who has no settled abode. This I guess to be so; and
every one may observe in himself and others whether it be so or not.
  5. Unsteady application of them. Secondly, Another great abuse of
words is inconstancy in the use of them. It is hard to find a
discourse written on any subject, especially of controversy, wherein
one shall not observe, if he read with attention, the same words
(and those commonly the most material in the discourse, and upon which
the argument turns) used sometimes for one collection of simple ideas,
and sometimes for another; which is a perfect abuse of language. Words
being intended for signs of my ideas, to make them known to others,
not by any natural signification, but by a voluntary imposition, it is
plain cheat and abuse, when I make them stand sometimes for one
thing and sometimes for another; the wilful doing whereof can be
imputed to nothing but great folly, or greater dishonesty. And a
man, in his accounts with another may, with as much fairness make
the characters of numbers stand sometimes for one and sometimes for
another collection of units: v.g. this character 3, stand sometimes
for three, sometimes for four, and sometimes for eight, as in his
discourse or reasoning make the same words stand for different
collections of simple ideas. If men should do so in their
reckonings, I wonder who would have to do with them? One who would
speak thus in the affairs and business of the world, and call 8
sometimes seven, and sometimes nine, as best served his advantage,
would presently have clapped upon him, one of the two names men are
commonly disgusted with. And yet in arguings and learned contests, the
same sort of proceedings passes commonly for wit and learning; but
to me it appears a greater dishonesty than the misplacing of
counters in the casting up a debt; and the cheat the greater, by how
much truth is of greater concernment and value than money.
  6. III. Affected obscurity, as in the Peripatetick and other sects
of philosophy. Thirdly, Another abuse of language is an affected
obscurity; by either applying old words to new and unusual
significations; or introducing new and ambiguous terms, without
defining either; or else putting them so together, as may confound
their ordinary meaning. Though the Peripatetick philosophy has been
most eminent in this way, yet other sects have not been wholly clear
of it. There are scarce any of them that are not cumbered with some
difficulties (such is the imperfection of human knowledge,) which they
have been fain to cover with obscurity of terms, and to confound the
signification of words, which, like a mist before people's eyes, might
hinder their weak parts from being discovered. That body and extension
in common use, stand for two distinct ideas, is plain to any one
that will but reflect a little. For were their signification precisely
the same, it would be as proper, and as intelligible to say, "the body
of an extension," as the "extension of a body"; and yet there are
those who find it necessary to confound their signification. To this
abuse, and the mischiefs of confounding the signification of words,
logic, and the liberal sciences as they have been handled in the
schools, have given reputation; and the admired Art of Disputing
hath added much to the natural imperfection of languages, whilst it
has been made use of and fitted to perplex the signification of words,
more than to discover the knowledge and truth of things: and he that
will look into that sort of learned writings, will find the words
there much more obscure, uncertain, and undetermined in their meaning,
than they are in ordinary conversation.
  7. Logic and dispute have much contributed to this. This is
unavoidably to be so, where men's parts and learning are estimated
by their skill in disputing. And if reputation and reward shall attend
these conquests, which depend mostly on the fineness and niceties of
words, it is no wonder if the wit of man so employed, should
perplex, involve, and subtilize the signification of sounds, so as
never to want something to say in opposing or defending any
question; the victory being adjudged not to him who had truth on his
side, but the last word in the dispute.
  8. Calling it "subtlety." This, though a very useless skin, and that
which I think the direct opposite to the ways of knowledge, hath yet
passed hitherto under the laudable and esteemed names of subtlety
and acuteness, and has had the applause of the schools, and
encouragement of one part of the learned men of the world. And no
wonder, since the philosophers of old, (the disputing and wrangling
philosophers I mean, such as Lucian wittily and with reason taxes),
and the Schoolmen since, aiming at glory and esteem, for their great
and universal knowledge, easier a great deal to be pretended to than
really acquired, found this a good expedient to cover their ignorance,
with a curious and inexplicable web of perplexed words, and procure to
themselves the admiration of others, by unintelligible terms, the
apter to produce wonder because they could not be understood: whilst
it appears in all history, that these profound doctors were no wiser
nor more useful than their neighbours, and brought but small advantage
to human life or the societies wherein they lived: unless the
coining of new words, where they produced no new things to apply
them to, or the perplexing or obscuring the signification of old ones,
and so bringing all things into question and dispute, were a thing
profitable to the life of man, or worthy commendation and reward.
  9. This learning very little benefits society. For,
notwithstanding these learned disputants, these all-knowing doctors,
it was to the unscholastic statesman that the governments of the world
owed their peace, defence, and liberties; and from the illiterate
and contemned mechanic (a name of disgrace) that they received the
improvements of useful arts. Nevertheless, this artificial
ignorance, and learned gibberish, prevailed mightily in these last
ages, by the interest and artifice of those who found no easier way to
that pitch of authority and dominion they have attained, than by
amusing the men of business, and ignorant, with hard words, or
employing the ingenious and idle in intricate disputes about
unintelligible terms, and holding them perpetually entangled in that
endless labyrinth. Besides, there is no such way to gain admittance,
or give defence to strange and absurd doctrines, as to guard them
round about with legions of obscure, doubtful, and undefined words.
Which yet make these retreats more like the dens of robbers, or
holes of foxes, than the fortresses of fair warriors: which, if it
be hard to get them out of, it is not for the strength that is in
them, but the briars and thorns, and the obscurity of the thickets
they are beset with. For untruth being unacceptable to the mind of
man, there is no other defence left for absurdity but obscurity.
  10. But destroys the instruments of knowledge and communication.
Thus learned ignorance, and this art of keeping even inquisitive men
from true knowledge, hath been propagated in the world, and hath
much perplexed, whilst it pretended to inform the understanding. For
we see that other well-meaning and wise men, whose education and parts
had not acquired that acuteness, could intelligibly express themselves
to one another; and in its plain use make a benefit of language. But
though unlearned men well enough understood the words white and black,
&c., and had constant notions of the ideas signified by those words;
yet there were philosophers found who had learning and subtlety enough
to prove that snow was black; i.e. to prove that white was black.
Whereby they had the advantage to destroy the instruments and means of
discourse, conversation, instruction, and society; whilst, with
great art and subtlety, they did no more but perplex and confound
the signification of words, and thereby render language less useful
than the real defects of it had made it; a gift which the illiterate
had not attained to.
  11. As useful as to confound the sounds that the letters of the
alphabet stand for. These learned men did equally instruct men's
understandings, and profit their lives, as he who should alter the
signification of known characters, and, by a subtle device of
learning, far surpassing the capacity of the illiterate, dull, and
vulgar, should in his writing show that he could put A for B, and D
for E, &c., to the no small admiration and benefit of his reader. It
being as senseless to put black, which is a word agreed on to stand
for one sensible idea, to put it, I say, for another, or the
contrary idea; i.e. to call snow black, as to put this mark A, which
is a character agreed on to stand for one modification of sound,
made by a certain motion of the organs of speech, for B, which is
agreed on to stand for another modification of sound, made by
another certain mode of the organs of speech.
  12. This art has perplexed religion and justice. Nor hath this
mischief stopped in logical niceties, or curious empty speculations;
it hath invaded the great concernments of human life and society;
obscured and perplexed the material truths of law and divinity;
brought confusion, disorder, and uncertainty into the affairs of
mankind; and if not destroyed, yet in a great measure rendered
useless, these two great rules, religion and justice. What have the
greatest part of the comments and disputes upon the laws of God and
man served for, but to make the meaning more doubtful, and perplex the
sense? What have been the effect of those multiplied curious
distinctions, and acute niceties, but obscurity and uncertainty,
leaving the words more unintelligible, and the reader more at a
loss? How else comes it to pass that princes, speaking or writing to
their servants, in their ordinary commands are easily understood;
speaking to their people, in their laws, are not so? And, as I
remarked before, doth it not often happen that a man of an ordinary
capacity very well understands a text, or a law, that he reads, till
he consults an expositor, or goes to counsel; who, by that time he
hath done explaining them, makes the words signify either nothing at
all, or what he pleases.
  13 And ought not to pass for learning. Whether any by-interests of
these professions have occasioned this, I will not here examine; but I
leave it to be considered, whether it would not be well for mankind,
whose concernment it is to know things as they are, and to do what
they ought, and not to spend their lives in talking about them, or
tossing words to and fro;- whether it would not be well, I say, that
the use of words were made plain and direct; and that language,
which was given us for the improvement of knowledge and bond of
society, should not be employed to darken truth and unsettle
people's rights; to raise mists, and render unintelligible both
morality and religion? Or that at least, if this will happen, it
should not be thought learning or knowledge to do so?
  14. IV. By taking words for things. Fourthly, Another great abuse of
words, is the taking them for things. This, though it in some degree
concerns all names in general, yet more particularly affects those
of substances. To this abuse those men are most subject who most
confine their thoughts to anyone system, and give themselves up into a
firm belief of the perfection of any received hypothesis: whereby they
come to be persuaded that the terms of that sect are so suited to
the nature of things, that they perfectly correspond with their real
existence. Who is there that has been bred up in the Peripatetick
philosophy, who does not think the Ten Names, under which are ranked
the Ten Predicaments, to be exactly conformable to the nature of
things? Who is there of that school that is not persuaded that
substantial forms, vegetative souls, abhorrence of a vacuum,
intentional species, &c., are something real? These words men have
learned from their very entrance upon knowledge, and have found
their masters and systems lay great stress upon them: and therefore
they cannot quit the opinion, that they are conformable to nature, and
are the representations of something that really exists. The
Platonists have their soul of the world, and the Epicureans their
endeavour towards motion in their atoms when at rest. There is
scarce any sect in philosophy has not a distinct set of terms that
others understand not. But yet this gibberish, which, in the
weakness of human understanding, serves so well to palliate men's
ignorance, and cover their errors, comes, by familiar use amongst
those of the same tribe, to seem the most important part of
language, and of all other the terms the most significant: and
should aerial and aetherial vehicles come once, by the prevalency of
that doctrine, to be generally received anywhere, no doubt those terms
would make impressions on men's minds, so as to establish them in
the persuasion of the reality of such things, as much as
Peripatetick forms and intentional species have heretofore done.
  15. Instance, in matter. How much names taken for things are apt
to mislead the understanding, the attentive reading of philosophical
writers would abundantly discover; and that perhaps in words little
suspected of any such misuse. I shall instance in one only, and that a
very familiar one. How many intricate disputes have there been about
matter, as if there were some such thing really in nature, distinct
from body; as it is evident the word matter stands for an idea
distinct from the idea of body? For if the ideas these two terms stood
for were precisely the same, they might indifferently in all places be
put for one another. But we see that though it be proper to say, There
is one matter of all bodies, one cannot say, There is one body of
all matters: we familiarly say one body is bigger than another; but it
sounds harsh (and I think is never used) to say one matter is bigger
than another. Whence comes this, then? Viz. from hence: that, though
matter and body be not really distinct, but wherever there is the
one there is the other; yet matter and body stand for two different
conceptions, whereof the one is incomplete, and but a part of the
other. For body stands for a solid extended figured substance, whereof
matter is but a partial and more confused conception; it seeming to me
to be used for the substance and solidity of body, without taking in
its extension and figure: and therefore it is that, speaking of
matter, we speak of it always as one, because in truth it expressly
contains nothing but the idea of a solid substance, which is
everywhere the same, everywhere uniform. This being our idea of
matter, we no more conceive or speak of different matters in the world
than we do of different solidities; though we both conceive and
speak of different bodies, because extension and figure are capable of
variation. But, since solidity cannot exist without extension and
figure, the taking matter to be the name of something really
existing under that precision, has no doubt produced those obscure and
unintelligible discourses and disputes, which have filled the heads
and books of philosophers concerning materia prima; which imperfection
or abuse, how far it may concern a great many other general terms I
leave to be considered. This, I think, I may at least say, that we
should have a great many fewer disputes in the world, if words were
taken for what they are, the signs of our ideas only; and not for
things themselves. For, when we argue about matter, or any the like
term, we truly argue only about the idea we express by that sound,
whether that precise idea agree to anything really existing in
nature or no. And if men would tell what ideas they make their words
stand for, there could not be half that obscurity or wrangling in
the search or support of truth that there is.
  16. This makes errors lasting. But whatever inconvenience follows
from this mistake of words, this I am sure, that, by constant and
familiar use, they charm men into notions far remote from the truth of
things. It would be a hard matter to persuade any one that the words
which his father, or schoolmaster, the parson of the parish, or such a
reverend doctor used, signified nothing that really existed in nature:
which perhaps is none of the least causes that men are so hardly drawn
to quit their mistakes, even in opinions purely philosophical, and
where they have no other interest but truth. For the words they have a
long time been used to, remaining firm in their minds, it is no wonder
that the wrong notions annexed to them should not be removed.
  17. V. By setting them in the place of what they cannot signify.
Fifthly Another abuse of words is the setting them in the place of
things which they do or can by no means signify. We may observe that
in the general names of substances whereof the nominal essences are
only known to us when we put them into propositions, and affirm or
deny anything about them, we do most commonly tacitly suppose or
intend, they should stand for the real essence of a certain sort of
substances. For, when a man says gold is malleable, he means and would
insinuate something more than this. That what I call gold is
malleable, (though truly it amounts to no more,) but would have this
understood, viz. That gold, i.e. what has the real essence of gold, is
malleable; which amounts to thus much, that malleableness depends
on, and is inseparable from the real essence of gold. But a man, not
knowing wherein that real essence consists, the connexion in his
mind of malleableness is not truly with an essence he knows not, but
only with the sound gold he puts for it. Thus, when we say that animal
rationale is, and animal implume bipes latis unguibus is not a good
definition of a man; it is plain we suppose the name man in this
case to stand for the real essence of a species, and would signify
that "a rational animal" better described that real essence than "a
two-legged animal with broad nails, and without feathers." For else,
why might not Plato as properly make the word anthropos, or man, stand
for his complex idea, made up of the idea of a body, distinguished
from others by a certain shape and other outward appearances, as
Aristotle make the complex idea to which he gave the name anthropos,
or man, of body and the faculty of reasoning joined together; unless
the name anthropos, or man, were supposed to stand for something
else than what it signifies; and to be put in the place of some
other thing than the idea a man professes he would express by it?
  18. V.g. Putting them for the real essences of substances. It is
true the names of substances would be much more useful, and
propositions made in them much more certain, were the real essences of
substances the ideas in our minds which those words signified. And
it is for want of those real essences that our words convey so
little knowledge or certainty in our discourses about them; and
therefore the mind, to remove that imperfection as much as it can,
makes them, by a secret supposition, to stand for a thing having
that real essence, as if thereby it made some nearer approaches to it.
For, though the word man or gold signify nothing truly but a complex
idea of properties united together in one sort of substances; yet
there is scarce anybody, in the use of these words, but often supposes
each of those names to stand for a thing having the real essence on
which these properties depend. Which is so far from diminishing the
imperfection of our words, that by a plain abuse it adds to it, when
we would make them stand for something, which, not being in our
complex idea, the name we use can no ways be the sign of.
  19. Hence we think change of our complex ideas of substances not
to change their species. This shows us the reason why in mixed modes
any of the ideas that make the composition of the complex one being
left out or changed, it is allowed to be another thing, i.e. to be
of another species, as is plain in chance-medley, manslaughter,
murder, parricide, &c. The reason whereof is, because the complex idea
signified by that name is the real as well as nominal essence; and
there is no secret reference of that name to any other essence but
that. But in substances, it is not so. For though in that called gold,
one puts into his complex idea what another leaves out, and vice
versa: yet men do not usually think that therefore the species is
changed: because they secretly in their minds refer that name, and
suppose it annexed to a real immutable essence of a thing existing, on
which those properties depend. He that adds to his complex idea of
gold that of fixedness and solubility in aqua regia, which he put
not in it before, is not thought to have changed the species; but only
to have a more perfect idea, by adding another simple idea, which is
always in fact joined with those other, of which his former complex
idea consisted. But this reference of the name to a thing, whereof
we have not the idea, is so far from helping at all, that it only
serves the more to involve us in difficulties. For by this tacit
reference to the real essence of that species of bodies, the word gold
(which, by standing for a more or less perfect collection of simple
ideas, serves to design that sort of body well enough in civil
discourse) comes to have no signification at all, being put for
somewhat whereof we have no idea at all, and so can signify nothing at
all, when the body itself is away. For however it may be thought all
one, yet, if well considered, it will be found a quite different
thing, to argue about gold in name, and about a parcel in the body
itself, v.g. a piece of leaf-gold laid before us; though in
discourse we are fain to substitute the name for the thing.
  20. The cause of this abuse, a supposition of nature's working
always regularly, in setting boundaries to species. That which I think
very much disposes men to substitute their names for the real essences
of species, is the supposition before mentioned, that nature works
regularly in the production of things, and sets the boundaries to each
of those species, by giving exactly the same real internal
constitution to each individual which we rank under one general
name. Whereas anyone who observes their different qualities can hardly
doubt, that many of the individuals, called by the same name, are,
in their internal constitution, as different one from another as
several of those which are ranked under different specific names. This
supposition, however, that the same precise and internal
constitution goes always with the same specific name, makes men
forward to take those names for the representatives of those real
essences; though indeed they signify nothing but the complex ideas
they have in their minds when they use them. So that, if I may so say,
signifying one thing, and being supposed for, or put in the place of
another, they cannot but, in such a kind of use, cause a great deal of
uncertainty in men's discourses; especially in those who have
thoroughly imbibed the doctrine of substantial forms, whereby they
firmly imagine the several species of things to be determined and
distinguished.
  21. This abuse contains two false suppositions. But however
preposterous and absurd it be to make our names stand for ideas we
have not, or (which is all one) essences that we know not, it being in
effect to make our words the signs of nothing; yet it is evident to
any one who ever so little reflects on the use men make of their
words, that there is nothing more familiar. When a man asks whether
this or that thing he sees, let it be a drill, or a monstrous
foetus, be a man or no; it is evident the question is not, Whether
that particular thing agree to his complex idea expressed by the
name man: but whether it has in it the real essence of a species of
things which he supposes his name man to stand for. In which way of
using the names of substances, there are these false suppositions
contained:-
  First, that there are certain precise essences according to which
nature makes all particular things, and by which they are
distinguished into species. That everything has a real constitution,
whereby it is what it is, and on which its sensible qualities
depend, is past doubt: but I think it has been proved that this
makes not the distinction of species as we rank them, nor the
boundaries of their names.
  Secondly, this tacitly also insinuates, as if we had ideas of
these proposed essences. For to what purpose else is it, to inquire
whether this or that thing have the real essence of the species man,
if we did not suppose that there were such a specific essence known?
Which yet is utterly false. And therefore such application of names as
would make them stand for ideas which we have not, must needs cause
great disorder in discourses and reasonings about them, and be a great
inconvenience in our communication by words.
  22. VI. By proceeding upon the supposition that the words we use
have a certain and evident signification which other men cannot but
understand. Sixthly, there remains yet another more general, though
perhaps less observed, abuse of words; and that is, that men having by
a long and familiar use annexed to them certain ideas, they are apt to
imagine so near and necessary a connexion between the names and the
signification they use them in, that they forwardly suppose one cannot
but understand what their meaning is; and therefore one ought to
acquiesce in the words delivered, as if it were past doubt that, in
the use of those common received sounds, the speaker and hearer had
necessarily the same precise ideas. Whence presuming, that when they
have in discourse used any term, they have thereby, as it were, set
before others the very thing they talked of. And so likewise taking
the words of others as naturally standing for just what they
themselves have been accustomed to apply them to, they never trouble
themselves to explain their own, or understand clearly others'
meaning. From whence commonly proceeds noise, and wrangling, without
improvement or information; whilst men take words to be the constant
regular marks of agreed notions, which in truth are no more but the
voluntary and unsteady signs of their own ideas. And yet men think
it strange, if in discourse, or (where it is often absolutely
necessary) in dispute, one sometimes asks the meaning of their
terms: though the arguings one may every day observe in conversation
make it evident, that there are few names of complex ideas which any
two men use for the same just precise collection. It is hard to name a
word which is hard to name a word which will not be a clear instance
of this. Life is a term, none more familiar. Any one almost would take
it for an affront to be asked what he meant by it. And yet if it comes
in question, whether a plant that lies ready formed in the seed have
life; whether the embryo in an egg before incubation, or a man in a
swoon without sense or motion, be alive or no; it is easy to
perceive that a clear, distinct, settled idea does not always
accompany the use of so known a word as that of life is. Some gross
and confused conceptions men indeed ordinarily have, to which they
apply the common words of their language; and such a loose use of
their words serves them well enough in their ordinary discourses or
affairs. But this is not sufficient for philosophical inquiries.
Knowledge and reasoning require precise determinate ideas. And
though men will not be so importunately dull as not to understand what
others say, without demanding an explication of their terms; nor so
troublesomely critical as to correct others in the use of the words
they receive from them: yet, where truth and knowledge are concerned
in the case, I know not what fault it can be, to desire the
explication of words whose sense seems dubious; or why a man should be
ashamed to own his ignorance in what sense another man uses his words;
since he has no other way of certainly knowing it but by being
informed. This abuse of taking words upon trust has nowhere spread
so far, nor with so ill effects, as amongst men of letters. The
multiplication and obstinacy of disputes, which have so laid waste the
intellectual world, is owing to nothing more than to this ill use of
words. For though it be generally believed that there is great
diversity of opinions in the volumes and variety of controversies
the world is distracted with; yet the most I can find that the
contending learned men of different parties do, in their arguings
one with another, is, that they speak different languages. For I am
apt to imagine, that when any of them, quitting terms, think upon
things, and know what they think, they think all the same: though
perhaps what they would have be different.
  23. The ends of language: First, to convey our ideas. To conclude
this consideration of the imperfection and abuse of language. The ends
of language in our discourse with others being chiefly these three:
First, to make known one man's thoughts or ideas to another; Secondly,
to do it with as much ease and quickness as possible; and, Thirdly,
thereby to convey the knowledge of things: language is either abused
of deficient, when it fails of any of these three.
  First, Words fail in the first of these ends, and lay not open one
man's ideas to another's view: 1. When men have names in their
mouths without any determinate ideas in their minds, whereof they
are the signs: or, 2. When they apply the common received names of any
language to ideas, to which the common use of that language does not
apply them: or, 3. When they apply them very unsteadily, making them
stand, now for one, and by and by for another idea.
  24. To do it with quickness. Secondly, Men fail of conveying their
thoughts with all the quickness and ease that may be, when they have
complex ideas without having any distinct names for them. This is
sometimes the fault of the language itself, which has not in it a
sound yet applied to such a signification; and sometimes the fault
of the man, who has not yet learned the name for that idea he would
show another.
  25. Therewith to convey the knowledge of things. Thirdly, There is
no knowledge of things conveyed by men's words, when their ideas agree
not to the reality of things. Though it be a defect that has its
original in our ideas, which are not so conformable to the nature of
things as attention, study, and application might make them, yet it
fails not to extend itself to our words too, when we use them as signs
of real beings, which yet never had any reality or existence.
  26. How men's words fail in all these: First, when used without
any ideas. First, He that hath words of any language, without distinct
ideas in his mind to which he applies them, does, so far as he uses
them in discourse, only make a noise without any sense or
signification; and how learned soever he may seem, by the use of
hard words or learned terms, is not much more advanced thereby in
knowledge, than he would be in learning, who had nothing in his
study but the bare titles of books, without possessing the contents of
them. For all such words, however put into discourse, according to the
right construction of grammatical rules, or the harmony of well-turned
periods, do yet amount to nothing but bare sounds, and nothing else.
  27. When complex ideas are without names annexed to them.
Secondly, He that has complex ideas, without particular names for
them, would be in no better case than a bookseller, who had in his
warehouse volumes that lay there unbound, and without titles, which he
could therefore make known to others only by showing the loose sheets,
and communicate them only by tale. This man is hindered in his
discourse, for want of words to communicate his complex ideas, which
he is therefore forced to make known by an enumeration of the simple
ones that compose them; and so is fain often to use twenty words, to
express what another man signifies in one.
  28. When the same sign is not put for the same idea. Thirdly, He
that puts not constantly the same sign for the same idea, but uses the
same words sometimes in one and sometimes in another signification,
ought to pass in the schools and conversation for as fair a man, as he
does in the market and exchange, who sells several things under the
same name.
  29. When words are diverted from their common use. Fourthly, He that
applies the words of any language to ideas different from those to
which the common use of that country applies them, however his own
understanding may be filled with truth and light, will not by such
words be able to convey much of it to others, without defining his
terms. For however the sounds are such as are familiarly known, and
easily enter the ears of those who are accustomed to them; yet
standing for other ideas than those they usually are annexed to, and
are wont to excite in the mind of the hearers, they cannot make
known the thoughts of him who thus uses them.
  30. When they are names of fantastical imaginations. Fifthly, He
that imagined to himself substances such as never have been, and
filled his head with ideas which have not any correspondence with
the real nature of things, to which yet he gives settled and defined
names, may fill his discourse, and perhaps another man's head with the
fantastical imaginations of his own brain, but will be very far from
advancing thereby one jot in real and true knowledge.
  31. Summary. He that hath names without ideas, wants meaning in
his words, and speaks only empty sounds. He that hath complex ideas
without names for them, wants liberty and dispatch in his expressions,
and is necessitated to use periphrases. He that uses his words loosely
and unsteadily will either be not minded or not understood. He that
applies his names to ideas different from their common use, wants
propriety in his language, and speaks gibberish. And he that hath
the ideas of substances disagreeing with the real existence of things,
so far wants the materials of true knowledge in his understanding, and
hath instead thereof chimeras.
  32. How men's words fail when they stand for substances. In our
notions concerning Substances, we are liable to all the former
inconveniences: v.g. he that uses the word tarantula, without having
any imagination or idea of what it stands for, pronounces a good word;
but so long means nothing at all by it. 2. He that, in a
newly-discovered country, shall see several sorts of animals and
vegetables, unknown to him before, may have as true ideas of them,
as of a horse or a stag; but can speak of them only by a
description, till he shall either take the names the natives call them
by, or give them names himself. 3. He that uses the word body
sometimes for pure extension, and sometimes for extension and solidity
together, will talk very fallaciously. 4. He that gives the name horse
to that idea which common usage calls mule, talks improperly, and will
not be understood. 5. He that thinks the name centaur stands for
some real being, imposes on himself, and mistakes words for things.
  33. How when they stand for modes and relations. In Modes and
Relations generally, we are liable only to the four first of these
inconveniences; viz. 1. I may have in my memory the names of modes, as
gratitude or charity, and yet not have any precise ideas annexed in my
thoughts to those names. 2. I may have ideas, and not know the names
that belong to them: v.g. I may have the idea of a man's drinking till
his colour and humour be altered, till his tongue trips, and his
eyes look red, and his feet fail him; and yet not know that it is to
be called drunkenness. 3. I may have the ideas of virtues or vices,
and names also, but apply them amiss: v.g. when I apply the name
frugality to that idea which others call and signify by this sound,
covetousness. 4. I may use any of those names with inconstancy. 5.
But, in modes and relations, I cannot have ideas disagreeing to the
existence of things: for modes being complex ideas, made by the mind
at pleasure, and relation being but by way of considering or comparing
two things together, and so also an idea of my own making, these ideas
can scarce be found to disagree with anything existing; since they are
not in the mind as the copies of things regularly made by nature,
nor as properties inseparably flowing from the internal constitution
or essence of any substance; but, as it were, patterns lodged in my
memory, with names annexed to them, to denominate actions and
relations by, as they come to exist. But the mistake is commonly in my
giving a wrong name to my conceptions; and so using words in a
different sense from other people: I am not understood, but am thought
to have wrong ideas of them, when I give wrong names to them. Only
if I put in my ideas of mixed modes or relations any inconsistent
ideas together, I fill my head also with chimeras; since such ideas,
if well examined, cannot so much as exist in the mind, much less any
real being ever be denominated from them.
  34. Seventhly, language is often abused by figurative speech.
Since wit and fancy find easier entertainment in the world than dry
truth and real knowledge, figurative speeches and allusion in language
will hardly be admitted as an imperfection or abuse of it. I
confess, in discourses where we seek rather pleasure and delight
than information and improvement, such ornaments as are borrowed
from them can scarce pass for faults. But yet if we would speak of
things as they are, we must allow that all the art of rhetoric,
besides order and clearness; all the artificial and figurative
application of words eloquence hath invented, are for nothing else but
to insinuate wrong ideas, move the passions, and thereby mislead the
judgment; and so indeed are perfect cheats: and therefore, however
laudable or allowable oratory may render them in harangues and popular
addresses, they are certainly, in all discourses that pretend to
inform or instruct, wholly to be avoided; and where truth and
knowledge are concerned, cannot but be thought a great fault, either
of the language or person that makes use of them. What and how various
they are, will be superfluous here to take notice; the books of
rhetoric which abound in the world, will instruct those who want to be
informed: only I cannot but observe how little the preservation and
improvement of truth and knowledge is the care and concern of mankind;
since the arts of fallacy are endowed and preferred. It is evident how
much men love to deceive and be deceived, since rhetoric, that
powerful instrument of error and deceit, has its established
professors, is publicly taught, and has always been had in great
reputation: and I doubt not but it will be thought great boldness,
if not brutality, in me to have said thus much against it.
Eloquence, like the fair sex, has too prevailing beauties in it to
suffer itself ever to be spoken against. And it is in vain to find
fault with those arts of deceiving, wherein men find pleasure to be
deceived.
                              Chapter XI
            Of the Remedies of the Foregoing Imperfections
                         and Abuses of Words

  1. Remedies are worth seeking The natural and improved imperfections
of languages we have seen above at large: and speech being the great
bond that holds society together, and the common conduit, whereby
the improvements of knowledge are conveyed from one man and one
generation to another, it would well deserve our most serious thoughts
to consider, what remedies are to be found for the inconveniences
above mentioned.
  2. Are not easy to find. I am not so vain as to think that any one
can pretend to attempt the perfect reforming the languages of the
world, no not so much as of his own country, without rendering himself
ridiculous. To require that men should use their words constantly in
the same sense, and for none but determined and uniform ideas, would
be to think that all men should have the same notions, and should talk
of nothing but what they have clear and distinct ideas of: which is
not to be expected by any one who hath not vanity enough to imagine he
can prevail with men to be very knowing or very silent And he must
be very little skilled in the world, who thinks that a voluble
tongue shall accompany only a good understanding; or that men's
talking much or little should hold proportion only to their knowledge.
  3. But yet necessary to those who search after truth. But though the
market and exchange must be left to their own ways of talking, and
gossipings not be robbed of their ancient privilege: though the
schools, and men of argument would perhaps take it amiss to have
anything offered, to abate the length or lessen the number of their
disputes; yet methinks those who pretend seriously to search after
or maintain truth, should think themselves obliged to study how they
might deliver themselves without obscurity, doubtfulness, or
equivocation, to which men's words are naturally liable, if care be
not taken.
  4. Misuse of words the great cause of errors. For he that shall well
consider the errors and obscurity, the mistakes and confusion, that
are spread in the world by an ill use of words, will find some
reason to doubt whether language, as it has been employed, has
contributed more to the improvement or hindrance of knowledge
amongst mankind. How many are there, that, when they would think on
things, fix their thoughts only on words, especially when they would
apply their minds to moral matters? And who then can wonder if the
result of such contemplations and reasonings, about little more than
sounds, whilst the ideas they annex to them are very confused and very
unsteady, or perhaps none at all; who can wonder, I say, that such
thoughts and reasonings end in nothing but obscurity and mistake,
without any clear judgment or knowledge?
  5. Has made men more conceited and obstinate. This inconvenience, in
an ill use of words, men suffer in their own private meditations:
but much more manifest are the disorders which follow from it, in
conversation, discourse, and arguings with others. For language
being the great conduit, whereby men convey their discoveries,
reasonings, and knowledge, from one to another, he that makes an ill
use of it, though he does not corrupt the fountains of knowledge,
which are in things themselves, yet he does, as much as in him lies,
break or stop the pipes whereby it is distributed to the public use
and advantage of mankind. He that uses words without any clear and
steady meaning, what does he but lead himself and others into
errors? And he that designedly does it, ought to be looked on as an
enemy to truth and knowledge. And yet who can wonder that all the
sciences and parts of knowledge have been so overcharged with
obscure and equivocal terms, and insignificant and doubtful
expressions, capable to make the most attentive or quick-sighted
very little, or not at all, the more knowing or orthodox: since
subtlety, in those who make profession to teach or defend truth,
hath passed so much for a virtue: a virtue, indeed, which,
consisting for the most part in nothing but the fallacious and
illusory use of obscure or deceitful terms, is only fit to make men
more conceited in their ignorance, and more obstinate in their errors.
  6. Addicted to wrangling about sounds. Let us look into the books of
controversy of any kind, there we shall see that the effect of
obscure, unsteady, or equivocal terms is nothing but noise and
wrangling about sounds, without convincing or bettering a man's
understanding. For if the idea be not agreed on, betwixt the speaker
and hearer, for which the words stand, the argument is not about
things, but names. As often as such a word whose signification is
not ascertained betwixt them, comes in use, their understandings
have no other object wherein they agree, but barely the sound; the
things that they think on at that time, as expressed by that word,
being quite different.
  7. Instance, bat and bird. Whether a bat be a bird or no, is not a
question, Whether a bat be another thing than indeed it is, or have
other qualities than indeed it has; for that would be extremely absurd
to doubt of. But the question is, (1) Either between those that
acknowledged themselves to have but imperfect ideas of one or both
of this sort of things, for which these names are supposed to stand.
And then it is a real inquiry concerning the nature of a bird or a
bat, to make their yet imperfect ideas of it more complete; by
examining whether all the simple ideas to which, combined together,
they both give the name bird, be all to be found in a bat: but this is
a question only of inquirers (not disputers) who neither affirm nor
deny, but examine: Or, (2) It is a question between disputants;
whereof the one affirms, and the other denies that a bat is a bird.
And then the question is barely about the signification of one or both
these words; in that they not having both the same complex ideas to
which they give these two names, one holds and the other denies,
that these two names may be affirmed one of another. Were they
agreed in the signification of these two names, it were impossible
they should dispute about them. For they would presently and clearly
see (were that adjusted between them), whether all the simple ideas of
the more general name bird were found in the complex idea of a bat
or no; and so there could be no doubt whether a bat were a bird or no.
And here I desire it may be considered, and carefully examined,
whether the greatest part of the disputes in the world are not
merely verbal, and about the signification of words; and whether, if
the terms they are made in were defined, and reduced in their
signification (as they must be where they signify anything) to
determined collections of the simple ideas they do or should stand
for, those disputes would not end of themselves, and immediately
vanish. I leave it then to be considered, what the learning of
disputation is, and how well they are employed for the advantage of
themselves or others, whose business is only the vain ostentation of
sounds; i.e. those who spend their lives in disputes and
controversies. When I shall see any of those combatants strip all
his terms of ambiguity and obscurity, (which every one may do in the
words he uses himself), I shall think him a champion for knowledge,
truth, and peace, and not the slave of vain-glory, ambition, or a
party.
  8. Remedies. To remedy the defects of speech before mentioned to
some degree, and to prevent the inconveniences that follow from
them, I imagine the observation of these following rules may be of
use, till somebody better able shall judge it worth his while to think
more maturely on this matter, and oblige the world with his thoughts
on it.
  First remedy: To use no word without an idea annexed to it. First, A
man shall take care to use no word without a signification, no name
without an idea for which he makes it stand. This rule will not seem
altogether needless to any one who shall take the pains to recollect
how often he has met with such words as instinct, sympathy, and
antipathy, &c., in the discourse of others, so made use of as he might
easily conclude that those that used them had no ideas in their
minds to which they applied them, but spoke them only as sounds, which
usually served instead of reasons on the like occasions. Not but
that these words, and the like, have very proper significations in
which they may be used; but there being no natural connexion between
any words and any ideas, these, and any other, may be learned by rote,
and pronounced or writ by men who have no ideas in their minds to
which they have annexed them, and for which they make them stand;
which is necessary they should, if men would speak intelligibly even
to themselves alone.
  9. Second remedy: To have distinct, determinate ideas annexed to
words, especially in mixed modes. Secondly, It is not enough a man
uses his words as signs of some ideas: those he annexes them to, if
they be simple, must be clear and distinct; if complex, must be
determinate, i.e. the precise collection of simple ideas settled in
the mind, with that sound annexed to it, as the sign of that precise
determined collection, and no other. This is very necessary in names
of modes, and especially moral words; which, having no settled objects
in nature, from whence their ideas are taken, as from their
original, are apt to be very confused. Justice is a word in every
man's mouth, but most commonly with a very undertermined, loose
signification; which will always be so, unless a man has in his mind a
distinct comprehension of the component parts that complex idea
consists of: and if it be decompounded, must be able to resolve it
still on, till he at last comes to the simple ideas that make it up:
and unless this be done, a man makes an ill use of the word, let it be
justice, for example, or any other. I do not say, a man needs stand to
recollect, and make this analysis at large, every time the word
justice comes in his way: but this at least is necessary, that he have
so examined the signification of that name, and settled the idea of
all its parts in his mind, that he can do it when he pleases. If any
one who makes his complex idea of justice to be, such a treatment of
the person or goods of another as is according to law, hath not a
clear and distinct idea what law is, which makes a part of his complex
idea of justice, it is plain his idea of justice itself will be
confused and imperfect. This exactness will, perhaps, be judged very
troublesome; and therefore most men will think they may be excused
from settling the complex ideas of mixed modes so precisely in their
minds. But yet I must say, till this be done, it must not be wondered,
that they have a great deal of obscurity and confusion in their own
minds, and a great deal of wrangling in their discourse with others.
  10. And distinct and conformable ideas in words that stand for
substances. In the names of substances, for a right use of them,
something more is required than barely determined ideas. In these
the names must also be conformable to things as they exist; but of
this I shall have occasion to speak more at large by and by. This
exactness is absolutely necessary in inquiries after philosophical
knowledge, and in controversies about truth. And though it would be
well, too, if it extended itself to common conversation and the
ordinary affairs of life; yet I think that is scarce to be expected.
Vulgar notions suit vulgar discourses: and both, though confused
enough, yet serve pretty well the market and the wake. Merchants and
lovers, cooks and tailors, have words wherewithal to dispatch their
ordinary affairs: and so, I think, might philosophers and disputants
too, if they had a mind to understand, and to be clearly understood.
  11. Third remedy: To apply words to such ideas as common use has
annexed them to. Thirdly, it is not enough that men have ideas,
determined ideas, for which they make these signs stand; but they must
also take care to apply their words as near as may be to such ideas as
common use has annexed them to. For words, especially of languages
already framed, being no man's private possession, but the common
measure of commerce and communication, it is not for any one at
pleasure to change the stamp they are current in, nor alter the
ideas they are affixed to; or at least, when there is a necessity to
do so, he is bound to give notice of it. Men's intentions in
speaking are, or at least should be, to be understood; which cannot be
without frequent explanations, demands, and other the like
incommodious interruptions, where men do not follow common use.
Propriety of speech is that which gives our thoughts entrance into
other men's minds with the greatest ease and advantage: and
therefore deserves some part of our care and study, especially in
the names of moral words. The proper signification and use of terms is
best to be learned from those who in their writings and discourses
appear to have had the clearest notions, and applied to them their
terms with the exactest choice and fitness. This way of using a
man's words, according to the propriety of the language, though it
have not always the good fortune to be understood; yet most commonly
leaves the blame of it on him who is so unskilful in the language he
speaks, as not to understand it when made use of as it ought to be.
  12. Fourth remedy: To declare the meaning in which we use them.
Fourthly, But, because common use has not so visibly annexed any
signification to words, as to make men know always certainly what they
precisely stand for: and because men in the improvement of their
knowledge, come to have ideas different from the vulgar and ordinary
received ones, for which they must either make new words, (which men
seldom venture to do, for fear of being though guilty of affectation
or novelty), or else must use old ones in a new signification:
therefore, after the observation of the foregoing rules, it is
sometimes necessary, for the ascertaining the signification of
words, to declare their meaning; where either common use has left it
uncertain and loose, (as it has in most names of very complex
ideas); or where the term, being very material in the discourse, and
that upon which it chiefly turns, is liable to any doubtfulness or
mistake.
  13. And that in three ways. As the ideas men's words stand for are
of different sorts, so the way of making known the ideas they stand
for, when there is occasion, is also different. For though defining be
thought the proper way to make known the proper signification of
words; yet there are some words that will not be defined, as there are
others whose precise meaning cannot be made known but by definition:
and perhaps a third, which partake somewhat of both the other, as we
shall see in the names of simple ideas, modes, and substances.
  14. I. In simple ideas, either by synonymous terms, or by showing
examples. First, when a man makes use of the name of any simple
idea, which he perceives is not understood, or is in danger to be
mistaken, he is obliged, by the laws of ingenuity and the end of
speech, to declare his meaning, and make known what idea he makes it
stand for. This, as has been shown, cannot be done by definition:
and therefore, when a synonymous word fails to do it, there is but one
of these ways left. First, Sometimes the naming the subject wherein
that simple idea is to be found, will make its name to be understood
by those who are acquainted with that subject, and know it by that
name. So to make a countryman understand what feuillemorte colour
signifies, it may suffice to tell him, it is the colour of withered
leaves falling in autumn. Secondly, but the only sure way of making
known the signification of the name of any simple idea, is by
presenting to his senses that subject which may produce it in his
mind, and make him actually have the idea that word stands for.
  15. II. In mixed modes, by definition. Secondly, Mixed modes,
especially those belonging to morality, being most of them such
combinations of ideas as the mind puts together of its own choice, and
whereof there are not always standing patterns to be found existing,
the signification of their names cannot be made known, as those of
simple ideas, by any showing: but, in recompense thereof, may be
perfectly and exactly defined. For they being combinations of
several ideas that the mind of man has arbitrarily put together,
without reference to any archetypes, men may, if they please,
exactly know the ideas that go to each composition, and so both use
these words in a certain and undoubted signification, and perfectly
declare, when there is occasion, what they stand for. This, if well
considered, would lay great blame on those who make not their
discourses about moral things very clear and distinct. For since the
precise signification of the names of mixed modes, or, which is all
one, the real essence of each species is to be known, they being not
of nature's, but man's making, it is a great negligence and
perverseness to discourse of moral things with uncertainty and
obscurity; which is more pardonable in treating of natural substances,
where doubtful terms are hardly to be avoided, for a quite contrary
reason, as we shall see by and by.
  16. Morality capable of demonstration. Upon this ground it is that I
am bold to think that morality is capable of demonstration, as well as
mathematics: since the precise real essence of the things moral
words stand for may be perfectly known, and so the congruity and
incongruity of the things themselves be certainly discovered; in which
consists perfect knowledge. Nor let any one object, that the names
of substances are often to be made use of in morality, as well as
those of modes, from which will arise obscurity. For, as to
substances, when concerned in moral discourses, their divers natures
are not so much inquired into as supposed: v.g. when we say that man
is subject to law, we mean nothing by man but a corporeal rational
creature: what the real essence or other qualities of that creature
are in this case is no way considered. And, therefore, whether a child
or changeling be a man, in a physical sense, may amongst the
naturalists be as disputable as it will, it concerns not at all the
moral man, as I may call him, which is this immovable, unchangeable
idea, a corporeal rational being. For, were there a monkey, or any
other creature, to be found that had the use of reason to such a
degree, as to be able to understand general signs, and to deduce
consequences about general ideas, he would no doubt be subject to law,
and in that sense be a man, how much soever he differed in shape
from others of that name. The names of substances, if they be used
in them as they should, can no more disturb moral than they do
mathematical discourses; where, if the mathematician speaks of a
cube or globe of gold, or of any other body, he has his clear, settled
idea, which varies not, though it may by mistake be applied to a
particular body to which it belongs not.
  17. Definitions can make moral discourses clear. This I have here
mentioned, by the by, to show of what consequence it is for men, in
their names of mixed modes, and consequently in all their moral
discourses, to define their words when there is occasion: since
thereby moral knowledge may be brought to so great clearness and
certainty. And it must be great want of ingenuousness (to say no worse
of it) to refuse to do it: since a definition is the only way
whereby the precise meaning of moral words can be known; and yet a way
whereby their meaning may be known certainly, and without leaving
any room for any contest about it. And therefore the negligence or
perverseness of mankind cannot be excused, if their discourses in
morality be not much more clear than those in natural philosophy:
since they are about ideas in the mind, which are none of them false
or disproportionate; they having no external beings for the archetypes
which they are referred to and must correspond with. It is far
easier for men to frame in their minds an idea, which shall be the
standard to which they will give the name justice; with which
pattern so made, all actions that agree shall pass under that
denomination, than, having seen Aristides, to frame an idea that shall
in all things be exactly like him; who is as he is, let men make
what idea they please of him. For the one, they need but know the
combination of ideas that are put together in their own minds; for the
other, they must inquire into the whole nature, and abstruse hidden
constitution, and various qualities of a thing existing without them.
  18. And is the only way in which the meaning of mixed modes can be
made known. Another reason that makes the defining of mixed modes so
necessary, especially of moral words, is what I mentioned a little
before, viz. that it is the only way whereby the signification of
the most of them can be known with certainty. For the ideas they stand
for, being for the most part such whose component parts nowhere
exist together, but scattered and mingled with others, it is the
mind alone that collects them, and gives them the union of one idea:
and it is only by words enumerating the several simple ideas which the
mind has united, that we can make known to others what their names
stand for; the assistance of the senses in this case not helping us,
by the proposal of sensible objects, to show the ideas which our names
of this kind stand for, as it does often in the names of sensible
simple ideas, and also to some degree in those of substances.
  19. III. In substances, both by showing and by defining. Thirdly,
for the explaining the signification of the names of substances, as
they stand for the ideas we have of their distinct species, both the
forementioned ways, viz. of showing and defining, are requisite, in
many cases, to be made use of. For, there being ordinarily in each
sort some leading qualities, to which we suppose the other ideas which
make up our complex idea of that species annexed, we forwardly give
the specific name to that thing wherein that characteristical mark
is found, which we take to be the most distinguishing idea of that
species. These leading or characteristical (as I may call them) ideas,
in the sorts of animals and vegetables, are (as has been before
remarked, ch. vi. SS 29, and ch. ix. SS 15) mostly figure; and in
inanimate bodies, colour; and in some, both together. Now,
  20. Ideas of the leading qualities of substances are best got by
showing. These leading sensible qualities are those which make the
chief ingredients of our specific ideas, and consequently the most
observable and invariable part in the definitions of our specific
names, as attributed to sorts of substances coming under our
knowledge. For though the sound man, in its own nature, be as apt to
signify a complex idea made up of animality and rationality, united in
the same subject, as to signify any other combination; yet, used as
a mark to stand for a sort of creatures we count of our own kind,
perhaps the outward shape is as necessary to be taken into our complex
idea, signified by the word man, as any other we find in it: and
therefore, why Plato's animal implume bipes latis unguibus should
not be a good definition of the name man, standing for that sort of
creatures, will not be easy to show: for it is the shape, as the
leading quality, that seems more to determine that species, than a
faculty of reasoning, which appears not at first, and in some never.
And if this be not allowed to be so, I do not know how they can be
excused from murder who kill monstrous births, (as we call them),
because of an unordinary shape, without knowing whether they have a
rational soul or no; which can be no more discerned in a well-formed
than ill-shaped infant, as soon as born. And who is it has informed us
that a rational soul can inhabit no tenement, unless it has just
such a sort of frontispiece; or can join itself to, and inform no sort
of body, but one that is just of such an outward structure?
  21. And can hardly be made known otherwise. Now these leading
qualities are best made known by showing, and can hardly be made known
otherwise. For the shape of a horse or cassowary will be but rudely
and imperfectly imprinted on the mind by words; the sight of the
animals doth it a thousand times better. And the idea of the
particular colour of gold is not to be got by any description of it,
but only by the frequent exercise of the eyes about it; as is
evident in those who are used to this metal, who will frequently
distinguish true from counterfeit, pure from adulterate, by the sight,
where others (who have as good eyes, but yet by use have not got the
precise nice idea of that peculiar yellow) shall not perceive any
difference. The like may be said of those other simple ideas, peculiar
in their kind to any substance; for which precise ideas there are no
peculiar names. The particular ringing sound there is in gold,
distinct from the sound of other bodies, has no particular name
annexed to it, no more than the particular yellow that belongs to that
metal.
  22. The Ideas of the powers of substances are best known by
definition. But because many of the simple ideas that make up our
specific ideas of substances are powers which lie not obvious to our
senses in the things as they ordinarily appear; therefore, in the
signification of our names of substances, some part of the
signification will be better made known by enumerating those simple
ideas, than by showing the substance itself. For, he that to the
yellow shining colour of gold, got by sight, shall, from my
enumerating them, have the ideas of great ductility, fusibility,
fixedness, and solubility in aqua regia, will have a perfecter idea of
gold than he can have by seeing a piece of gold, and thereby
imprinting in his mind only its obvious qualities. But if the formal
constitution of this shining, heavy, ductile thing, (from whence all
these its properties flow), lay open to our senses, as the formal
constitution or essence of a triangle does, the signification of the
word gold might as easily be ascertained as that of triangle.
  23. A reflection on the knowledge of corporeal things possessed by
spirits separate from bodies. Hence we may take notice, how much the
foundation of all our knowledge of corporeal things lies in our
senses. For how spirits, separate from bodies, (whose knowledge and
ideas of these things are certainly much more perfect than ours), know
them, we have no notion, no idea at all. The whole extent of our
knowledge or imagination reaches not beyond our own ideas limited to
our ways of perception. Though yet it be not to be doubted that
spirits of a higher rank than those immersed in flesh may have as
clear ideas of the radical constitution of substances as we have of
a triangle, and so perceive how all their properties and operations
flow from thence: but the manner how they come by that knowledge
exceeds our conceptions.
  24. IV Ideas of substances must be conformable to things.
Fourthly, But, though definitions will serve to explain the names of
substances as they stand for our ideas, yet they leave them not
without great imperfection as they stand for things. For our names
of substances being not put barely for our ideas, but being made use
of ultimately to represent things, and so are put in their place,
their signification must agree with the truth of things as well as
with men's ideas. And therefore, in substances, we are not always to
rest in the ordinary complex idea commonly received as the
signification of that word, but must go a little further, and
inquire into the nature and properties of the things themselves, and
thereby perfect, as much as we can, our ideas of their distinct
species; or else learn them from such as are used to that sort of
things, and are experienced in them. For, since it is intended their
names should stand for such collections of simple ideas as do really
exist in things themselves, as well as for the complex idea in other
men's minds, which in their ordinary acceptation they stand for,
therefore, to define their names right, natural history is to be
inquired into, and their properties are, with care and examination, to
be found out. For it is not enough, for the avoiding inconveniences in
discourse and arguings about natural bodies and substantial things, to
have learned, from the propriety of the language, the common, but
confused, or very imperfect, idea to which each word is applied, and
to keep them to that idea in our use of them; but we must, by
acquainting ourselves with the history of that sort of things, rectify
and settle our complex idea belonging to each specific name; and in
discourse with others, (if we find them mistake us), we ought to
tell what the complex idea is that we make such a name stand for. This
is the more necessary to be done by all those who search after
knowledge and philosophical verity, in that children, being taught
words, whilst they have but imperfect notions of things, apply them at
random, and without much thinking, and seldom frame determined ideas
to be signified by them. Which custom (it being easy, and serving well
enough for the ordinary affairs of life and conversation) they are apt
to continue when they are men: and so begin at the wrong end, learning
words first and perfectly, but make the notions to which they apply
those words afterwards very overtly. By this means it comes to pass,
that men speaking the language of their country, i.e. according to
grammar rules of that language, do yet speak very improperly of things
themselves; and, by their arguing one with another, make but small
progress in the discoveries of useful truths, and the knowledge of
things, as they are to be found in themselves, and not in our
imaginations; and it matters not much for the improvement of our
knowledge how they are called.
  25. Not easy to be made so. It were therefore to be wished, That men
versed in physical inquiries, and acquainted with the several sorts of
natural bodies, would set down those simple ideas wherein they observe
the individuals of each sort constantly to agree. This would remedy
a great deal of that confusion which comes from several persons
applying the same name to a collection of a smaller or greater
number of sensible qualities, proportionably as they have been more or
less acquainted with, or accurate in examining, the qualities of any
sort of things which come under one denomination. But a dictionary
of this sort, containing, as it were, a natural history, requires
too many hands as well as too much time, cost, pains, and sagacity
ever to be hoped for; and till that be done, we must content ourselves
with such definitions of the names of substances as explain the
sense men use them in. And it would be well, where there is
occasion, if they would afford us so much. This yet is not usually
done; but men talk to one another, and dispute in words, whose meaning
is not agreed between them, out of a mistake that the significations
of common words are certainly established, and the precise ideas
they stand for perfectly known; and that it is a shame to be
ignorant of them. Both which suppositions are false; no names of
complex ideas having so settled determined significations, that they
are constantly used for the same precise ideas. Nor is it a shame
for a man not to have a certain knowledge of anything, but by the
necessary ways of attaining it; and so it is no discredit not to
know what precise idea any sound stands for in another man's mind,
without he declare it to me by some other way than barely using that
sound, there being no other way, without such a declaration, certainly
to know it. Indeed the necessity of communication by language brings
men to an agreement in the signification of common words, within
some tolerable latitude, that may serve for ordinary conversation: and
so a man cannot be supposed wholly ignorant of the ideas which are
annexed to words by common use, in a language familiar to him. But
common use being but a very uncertain rule, which reduces itself at
last to the ideas of particular men, proves often but a very
variable standard. But though such a Dictionary as I have above
mentioned will require too much time, cost, and pains to be hoped
for in this age; yet methinks it is not unreasonable to propose,
that words standing for things which are known and distinguished by
their outward shapes should be expressed by little draughts and prints
made of them. A vocabulary made after this fashion would perhaps
with more ease, and in less time, teach the true signification of many
terms, especially in languages of remote countries or ages, and settle
truer ideas in men's minds of several things, whereof we read the
names in ancient authors, than all the large and laborious comments of
learned critics. Naturalists, that treat of plants and animals, have
found the benefit of this way: and he that has had occasion to consult
them will have reason to confess that he has a clearer idea of apium
or ibex, from a little print of that herb or beast, than he could have
from a long definition of the names of either of them. And so no doubt
he would have of strigil and sistrum, if, instead of currycomb and
cymbal, (which are the English names dictionaries render them by,)
he could see stamped in the margin small pictures of these
instruments, as they were in use amongst the ancients. Toga, tunica,
pallium, are words easily translated by gown, coat, and cloak; but
we have thereby no more true ideas of the fashion of those habits
amongst the Romans, than we have of the faces of the tailors who
made them. Such things as these, which the eye distinguishes by
their shapes, would be best let into the mind by draughts made of
them, and more determine the signification of such words, than any
other words set for them, or made use of to define them. But this is
only by the bye.
  26. V. Fifth remedy: To use the same word constantly in the same
sense. Fifthly, If men will not be at the pains to declare the meaning
of their words, and definitions of their terms are not to be had,
yet this is the least that can be expected, that, in all discourses
wherein one man pretends to instruct or convince another, he should
use the same word constantly in the same sense. If this were done,
(which nobody can refuse without great disingenuity,) many of the
books extant might be spared; many of the controversies in dispute
would be at an end; several of those great volumes, swollen with
ambiguous words, now used in one sense, and by and by in another,
would shrink into a very narrow compass; and many of the philosophers,
(to mention no other) as well as poets works, might be contained in
a nutshell.
  27. When not so used, the variation is to he explained. But after
all, the provision of words is so scanty in respect to that infinite
variety of thoughts, that men, wanting terms to suit their precise
notions, will, notwithstanding their utmost caution, be forced often
to use the same word in somewhat different senses. And though in the
continuation of a discourse, or the pursuit of an argument, there
can be hardly room to digress into a particular definition, as often
as a man varies the signification of any term; yet the import of the
discourse will, for the most part, if there be no designed fallacy,
sufficiently lead candid and intelligent readers into the true meaning
of it; but where there is not sufficient to guide the reader, there it
concerns the writer to explain his meaning, and show in what sense
he there uses that term.

