




An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy







Book V







Of Taxes, and of the Proper Application of their Amount







Introduction







    The subject of taxes is so closely connected with every



branch of political oeconomy, that I have not been able to avoid



anticipating a subject, which, according to my plan, is left for



the conclusion of this work.



    What has been hitherto introduced concerning taxation, in



treating of industry, trade, money, credit, and debts, relates



principally to the effects of taxes upon circulation, prices, and



several other things relating to those subjects.



    What therefore remains, not as yet touched upon, chiefly



concerns the principles which determine the nature of every tax,



relatively to the interest it is intended to affect.



    To investigate the different consequences of taxes when



imposed upon possessions, and when upon consumption, are



questions which relate directly to the principles of taxation.



But in this book I shall also have occasion to trace out, farther



than as yet I have done, certain combinations concerning the



effects which taxes have in multiplying the fund of circulation:



and as the augmentation of taxes tends greatly to increase money,



I am thence led to examine, how far the advantage gained by the



suppression of taxes may not be more than compensated to a



nation, by the inconveniences proceeding from so great a



diminution of circulation.



    Taxes have all along been supposed to enhance the price of



living; we shall therefore have an opportunity of investigating



the proper extent to be allowed to that general proposition.







Chap. I







Of the different Kinds of Taxes







    Taxes have been established in all ages of the world, under



different names of tribute, tithe, tally, impost, duty, gabel,



custom, subsidy, excise; and many others needless to



recapitulate, and foreign to my subject to examine.



    Though in every species of this voluminous class, there are



certain characteristic differences; yet one principle prevails in



all, upon which the definition may be founded.



    I understand therefore by tax, in its most general



acceptation, a certain contribution of fruits, service, or money,



imposed upon the individuals of a state, by the act or consent of



the legislature, in order to defray the expences of government.



    This definition may, I think, include, in general, all kinds



of burdens which can possibly be imposed. By fruits are



understood either those of the earth, of animals, or of man



himself. By service, whatever man can either by labour or



ingenuity produce, while he himself remains free. And under money



is comprehended the equivalent given for what may be exacted in



the other two ways.



    I have no occasion to consider the nature of such taxes as



are not in use in our days. Tributes of slaves from conquered



nations are as little known in our times, as contributions of



subsistence from the subjects of the state.



    I divide, therefore, modern taxes into three classes.



1. Those upon alienation, which I call proportional: 2. Those



upon possessions, which I call cumulative or arbitrary: and 3.



Those exacted in service, which I call personal. These terms must



now be fully explained, that I may use them hereafter without



being misunderstood.



    A proportional tax presents a simple notion.



    It is paid by the buyer, who intends to consume, at the time



of the consumption, while the balance of wealth is turning



against him; and is consolidated with the price of the commodity.



    Examples of this tax are all excises, customs, stamp-duties,



postage, coinage, and the like.



    By this definition, two requisites are necessary for fixing



the tax upon any one: first, he must be a buyer; secondly, he



must be a consumer. Let this be retained.



    A cumulative or arbitrary tax, presents various ideas at



first sight, and cannot well be defined until the nature of it



has been illustrated by examples.



    It may be known, First, By the intention of it; which is to



affect the possessor in such a manner, as to make it difficult



for him to augment his income, in proportion to the tax he pays.



    Secondly, By the object; when instead of being laid upon any



determinate piece of labour or article of consumption, it is made



to affect past and not present gains.



    Thirdly, by the circumstances under which it is levied; which



imply no transition of property from hand to hand, nor any change



in the balance of wealth between individuals.



    Examples of cumulative taxes are land-taxes, poll-taxes,



window-taxes, duties upon coaches and servants, that upon



industrie, in France, and many others.



    A personal tax is known by its affecting the person, not the



purse of those who are laid under it.



    Examples of it are the corvée, in France; the six days labour



on the high roads, and the militia service before pay was allowed



in England.(1*)



    Having thus explained what I mean by proportional,



cumulative, and personal taxes, it is proper to observe, that



however different they may prove in their effects and



consequences, they all agree in this, that they ought to impair



the fruits and not the fund; the expences of the person taxed,



not the savings; the services, not the persons of those who do



them.



    This holds true in every denomination of taxes. In former



days, when annual tributes of slaves were made, and even at



present among the Turks, where it is customary to recruit the



seraglios of great men by such contributions, I consider the



young women who are sent, as part of the fruits of the people who



send them. This is a fundamental principle in taxation; and



therefore public contributions, which necessarily imply a



diminution of any capital, cannot properly be ranged under the



head of taxes. Thus when the Dutch contributed, not many years



ago, the hundredth part of their property towards the service of



the state, I cannot properly consider this in the light of a tax:



it was indeed a most public spirited contribution, and did more



honour to that people, from the fidelity with which it was made,



than any thing of the kind ever boasted of by a modern



society.(2*)







Chap. II







Of proportional Taxes, and their proper Object







    Whatever exists for the use of man, so far as it is



considered as a fund for taxation, may be classed under the



following heads: 1. The produce or fruits of the earth; 2. the



produce of the industry of man; or 3. his personal service.



Farther, Fruits cannot be obtained without the necessary labour



of man and cattle. As this labour presupposes all the necessary



consumption of maintenance, &c. the produce of the land must be



understood, relatively to taxes, to be that part only of the



fruits which remains after deducting an equivalent for all



necessary expences in making the earth produce them. The net



produce alone of the earth is to be considered as a fund liable



to taxation; and every contribution which bears not a just



proportion to this quantity, is wrong imposed, as shall be shewn



as we go along.



    Again, as to the produce of work: this cannot be brought into



existence without some expence, viz. the maintenance of the



workman; that is to say, his food, raiment, fire, lodging, and



the expence he is at for tools, and every other necessary. This



we shall, for the future, call his physical-necessary. The value



of the work, over and above an equivalent for these articles, is



the only fund to be taxed with regard to the workman.



    As to work itself, we have seen above (Book II. chap. 26.) in



the general distribution of things which may be purchased with



money, how it was ranged under the class of things incorporeal.



For this reason, the work performed cannot come under taxation;



and therefore the person working, who by work acquires a balance



in his favour, is brought to be affected by proportional taxes



upon the articles of his consumption; and when it is found that



these articles suffer no alienation before they are consumed by



him, and consequently escape taxation, then he may either be laid



under the cumulative taxes, which will affect his wealth, or



under the personal, which are paid in work itself, and in this



respect may be considered as the fruit of the man.



    Nothing would be so easy as a general rule for imposing



proportional taxes, did the labourers of the ground actually



consume a part of the fruits of the earth, and the other



industrious classes a part of their own work, in lieu of the



whole of this physical-necessary. In this case, nothing but what



remained of fruits and work, not already consumed by the



immediate producers, would come to market for the use of those



who do not work; but who have an equivalent to give for it, out



of the produce of past industry. Were this, I say, the case, then



at the time of alienation (or, as we expressed it in the 26th



chapter of the second book, at the time when the balance of



wealth is going to turn in favour of the industrious, against the



idle consumer) a tax proportional to the value of the alienation



might, with the greatest propriety, be imposed, as we shall



presently discover.



    This, I hope, will recall to mind the principles deduced in



the chapter above cited, where we made it appear, how the



industrious classes, who furnish consumable commodities for the



price of their overplus, must constantly have the balance of



wealth turning in their favour: and when once they arrive at a



certain degree of ease, proportional to their ambition, then they



give over working, and become incorporated into the class of



those who have enriched them.



    Thus matters go on in a perpetual circle. The industrious



become easy, and the public lays the consumers under a perpetual



contribution in proportion to their expence.



    The hypothesis we have made, is not entirely agreeable to



matter of fact; because the operation of taxes is far more



complex than we have described it to be; but by simplifying it,



as I have done, it serves to give an idea of the result, or



general consequence of proportional taxes, which, when properly



imposed, do affect the idle only, but never the industrious.



    Were, I say, the operation of taxation as simple as we have



represented it, nothing would be more easy than to deduce its



principles. Nothing would come to be refunded to the labourer or



workman, at the sale of his surplus. This surplus would be equal



to the whole produce of the earth, and whole industry of the



country, deducting the physical-necessary of all the industrious;



and this physical-necessary need not then be deducted; because it



is supposed to be consumed in the very production of the surplus,



as the aqueous part of sea water is consumed before you can have



the salt.



    This illustrates what has been said, viz. that the fruits of



the earth are only to be reckoned to exist, after deducting the



necessary expence of providing them. For though in fact a farmer



possesses all his crop after harvest, yet part of it, as to him,



is virtually consumed either out of his own stock, or that of



others, who have furnished him food and necessaries all the time



it was coming forward; this part consequently, can neither belong



to the ground, or to the farmer.



    If it be urged still, that the whole must be supposed to



exist with regard to the state, I agree to the proposition; but



according to our argument, it cannot be supposed to exist in



favour of the state, to the prejudice of the farmer; because the



total of the farmer's expence must be understood to have been



taken from the surplus of other people's industry, and therefore



if the crop be supposed to exist with respect to the state,



because it is in the farmer's yard, the surplus of other people's



industry which he has consumed must not be supposed to exist in



favour of the state, at the same time. But as the farmer is



supposed to have paid the tax upon what he has borrowed and



consumed, he must draw it back from those who, in their turn, are



to consume his crop: and if he draws it back, he cannot be said



to pay it, although the state profits of it as much as if he did.



    Does it not appear from this analysis, that a state can take



gratuitously and proportionally out of the surplus only of fruits



and industry? Now what is here called surplus, relatively to the



industrious, is the necessary fund of consumption for all the



rich and idle; consequently, were the state to diminish any part



of the quantity, the idle and the rich would be deprived of a



sufficiency: but in regard that those who do not work give money,



which is the price of all things, in exchange for what they



consume, the state steps in at the time of this exchange, and



says, we ask nothing of those who have nothing but their



physical-necessary, this they have been allowed to take; we take



none of their surplus from them, this we allow them to sell to



you: but as for you, who do not work, and have in your coffers



wherewithal to purchase the labours of your industrious brethren,



this labour you shall not profit of, unless you give the state a



certain value out of your wealth, in proportion to the work and



fruit you are going to consume, although you have contributed



nothing towards the production of it.



    Hence it appears evident, that without money there could be



no tax imposed: for were the state to take their proportion of



the real surplus, and dispose of it out of the country, a part of



the inhabitants would be starved. But by an equivalent's being



found, quite different from the surplus itself, of no use for



subsistence, the whole produce of industry is left for the use of



those who have it; the state takes what part of the equivalent



they please from the idle; and nobody starves, except such as



have neither money, nor industry, nor the talent of exciting the



compassion of the charitable.



    By this simple representation of a most complicated



operation, I have been able to deduce the capital principle of



proportional taxation. If the reasoning be found solid, it may be



retained: because we shall have occasion to recur to it, at



almost every new combination.







Chap. III







How proportional Taxes are drawn back by the Industrious and how



that drawing back is the only reason why Taxes raise the Prices



of Commodities







    What perplexes our notions in the theory of proportional



taxation, is, that the industrious man, instead of bringing his



surplus only, to market, is obliged to bring the whole of his



work.



    Let me therefore represent him as being creditor upon one



part of his work, and proprietor of the other. This will divide



it, as it were, into two parts, which I shall call (A) and (B).



    (A) represents that part upon which he is creditor, and



answers to all the expence he has already been at; that is, to



his physical-necessary, as we have called it. This we have said



ought to be considered as virtually consumed by the workman, and



if any tax be raised upon it, it must be done in such a manner as



not to affect him; that is, he must draw it totally back from the



person to whom he disposes of it. (B) on the other hand,



represents that part of which he is proprietor, to wit, his



profit; and therefore may either be taxed or not, as the state



shall think fit.



    If this be taxed in the hands of the industrious man, before



it suffer an alienation, the tax will be of a cumulative nature.



If it be left free to him, and taxed to the person who buys it,



it will be of the proportional kind, as we shall see afterwards.



Again, In the first case, it will check the growing wealth of the



industrious man; in the second, it will accelerate the



dissipation of the buyer.



    Taxes, therefore, of the first kind, are proper to be imposed



in countries where the state is jealous of growing wealth, as we



have observed in the 25th chapter of the second book. If the tax,



again, be laid upon the buyer, then the balance will turn in



favour of the industrious man, in proportion to the full amount



of (B), and will produce no other effect than to accelerate the



dissipation of the buyer.



    Let us now take in a new combination.



    If, when the whole work is brought to market and sold, the



price shall not exceed the value of the industrious man's (A),



then he is of the class of those we call physical-necessarians,



who accumulate no profits. If the price of it be less than (A),



he becomes a load upon the state, a bankrupt to those who have



fed him upon credit, and will die for want, unless he be



supported by charity.



    So far with regard to the seller: next as to the buyer.



    The buyer appears at market with his money. When he comes



there he must give, first, an equivalent for the prime cost of



the merchandize: that is, he must refund every expence



necessarily incurred in producing it; that is, he must refund the



value of (A). Next, the industrious man has a claim upon him for



his profits, viz. his (B). Then comes the state, who claims a



part of his wealth, in regard that he is going to purchase what



his own industry has not produced. This is the tax; I shall call



it (C). This tax will be found of the proportional kind. It will



not affect the growing wealth of the seller, but it will



accelerate the dissipation of the buyer; and will pull down the



scale against him, in favour of the industrious. This is a proper



tax, in countries where the state observes the maxim of sharing



the wealth of those who dissipate.



    Let us now take in another combination. Let us suppose this



buyer to be an industrious person, and the thing bought to be a



necessary material for the manufacture in which he is employed.



It is not plain, that when the second industrious man comes to



market to sell his work, which I also suppose to be composed of



his (A) and his (B), that his (A) becomes a still more compounded



body? It first includes his own physical-necessary, as above:



Secondly, the (A) and (B) of the man from whom he bought the



materials: and, Thirdly, the (C) which he paid to the state for



the libertY of acquiring what he himself had not produced.



    Whoever therefore buys from the second industrious man, must,



in like manner, refund to him his full (A); he must also pay him



his (B); and then he will find the state claiming their (C), as



in the former operation.



    This being done, let us examine the interests of all parties.



The first industrious man has no reason to complain of the tax;



because he was paid his necessary expence (A), and also his (B)



for his profit; and the state realised the tax at the expence of



the second industrious man, who paid it. Now we said that the



dissipation of his wealth was accelerated in proportion to the



value of what he paid for (C); but as he is none of the idle, and



as the thing he bought was a material necessary for his



manufacture, the second buyer finds himself obliged to refund the



whole amount of the first (A), (B), and (C); because the sum of



them makes a part of the second man's (A). Now it is the



refunding of this (C) to the industrious man which is the only



circumstance, from which proceeds the rise in the price of



commodities, in consequence of proportional taxes. Moreover, the



second buyer must pay the second industrious man's (B), in favour



of the balance which is going to turn against him; and last of



all, he must pay the second (C), which is the share the state



requires of him, in order to accelerate his dissipation.



    Now let us observe, that if the commodity bought by the



second industrious man, be not necessary for the existence of his



manufacture, it cannot enter into his (A), and therefore must be



diminished upon his (B); and if his (B) cannot pay it, then he



will owe it to some body, and for the future must either abstain



from such expences, or leave off working, in favour of those who



can live without them.



    Let me illustrate all this by an example.



    A tanner sells his leather to a shoemaker; the shoemaker in



paying the tanner for his leather, pays the tanner's subsistence



and profit, and the tax upon leather.



    The man who buys the shoes for his own consumption, refunds



all this to the shoemaker, together with his subsistence, profit,



and the tax upon shoes; consequently, the price of shoes are



raised, only by refunding the taxes paid by the industrious.



    But if the shoemaker's subsistence shall happen to include



either tavern expences, or his consumption on idle days, he will



not draw these back; because other shoemakers who do not frequent



the tavern, and who are not idle, will undersell him; he must



therefore take his extraordinary expence out of his profits; and



if his profit be not sufficient, he must run in debt to the



tavern-keeper.



    The extravagance and idleness, therefore, of particular



workmen does not check industry, nor raise prices; for these will



always be in proportion to demand, and there is no reason why



demand should either rise or fall, because a particular workman



is extravagant, or consumes a commodity not necessary for his



manufacture or subsistence.



    From this example there arises a new combination: that in



proportion as the industrious do not consume of the produce of



their own industry, but come to market with the whole, and then



purchase the work of others, they are considered, as to taxes, in



the light of idle consumers, who do not work, but who purchase



with money the fruits of the industry of others. By this



operation, the taxable fund is augmented beyond the extent of the



general surplus called (B). The reason is plain. Whatever is



brought to market is supposed to be surplus, as it may there be



bought by the idle, as well as the industrious. The only



difference is, that the first do not draw back the tax, and that



the second do, as we have already shewn.



    From this reasoning we may conclude, that the way to carry



proportional taxes to their utmost extent, is to draw all



commodities to market, to engage every one to carry thither the



whole produce of his industry, and there to buy whatever he



stands in need of.



    But which way will you engage either a farmer to sell his



crop, and buy subsistence from another; or a shoemaker to sell



his own, and buy his neighbour's shoes? The thing is



impracticable; and were it attempted, it would prove an arbitrary



proceeding, and a cumulative tax laid upon their industry: a tax



which, by the nature of it, they cannot draw back, as we shall



presently see, and from this circumstance alone proceeds the



whole oppression of it.



    Let me next analize the price paid by the last buyer, whom we



have called the rich and idle consumer of the manufacture, who



can draw nothing back from any body.



    Is it not composed of the whole value of the subsistence, of



the work, of the profits, of the tax? The whole reimbursement of



all former payments and repayments comes upon him. Those who have



been at all the expence, appear in the light of his servants and



agents, who have only advanced money upon his account.



    How absurd, therefore, is it either to say, that all taxes



fall ultimately upon land; or as others, for no better reason,



pretend, that they fall upon trade. I say, that this class of



taxes which I have now been describing, and which I shall still



more fully explain in a subsequent chapter, never can fall either



upon, or affect any person but the idle; that is to say, the not



industrious consumer. If there be found a possibility for any



consumer to draw back the tax he has paid, I say he is of the



class of the industrious, in one way or other: and farther I say,



that such a tax raises the price of the commodity. But by drawing



back, I understand, that the repayment is an inseparable



consequence of his having paid the tax. I do not, for example,



say that a place-man draws his taxes by the emoluments of his



office: but I say a brewer draws back his excise by the sale of



his beer.



    Let this principle also be retained, that with respect to the



consumption of superfluities by the manufacturing classes, they



also must be considered as being of the class of the rich and



idle, as much as the first Duke in England. When therefore the



extravagance of the manufacturing classes becomes general, and



when the rate of the market can afford them great wages,



relatively to the price of necessaries, such profits consolidate



into the price of the manufacture, according to the principles



laid down in the 10th chapter of the second book. The statesman



then must endeavour to create a competition among them, by



introducing fresh and untainted hands into such branches. This



will be a sure check upon the dissipation of the industrious,



and, if rightly applied, will prevent all frauds, all pretences



for the rise of the price of labour on account of taxes: and, if



carried to its full extent, will prevent any industrious person



from enjoying either a day's idleness, or the smallest



superfluity; except in consequence of his peculiar dexterity, or



extrinsic advantages.







Chap. IV







Of cumulative Taxes







    I shall not here repeat what I have already said concerning



the characteristics of this kind of imposition; but after citing



some examples, I shall examine it more closely, as to its nature



and consequences.



    The most familiar examples of it to an Englishman, are



tithes, land-tax, window-tax, and poors-rates.



    The most familiar examples to a Frenchman, are the Taille,



Fourage, and Ustencil, (which go commonly together); also the



Capitation, the Dixieme, the Vingtieme, and the Industrie.(3*)



    The nature of all these taxes, is, to affect the possessions,



income, and profits of every individual, without putting it in



their power to draw them back in any way whatever; consequently,



such taxes tend very little towards enhancing the price of



commodities.



    Those who come under such taxes, do not always consider that



their past industry, gains, or advantages of fortune, are here



intended to suffer a diminution, in favour of the state; for



which out-going they have, perhaps, made no provision.



    When people of the lower classes, instead of being subjected



to proportional taxes, are laid under such impositions, there



results a great inconvenience. They are allowed to receive the



whole profit of their industry, which in the former chapter we



called their (B), the state however reserving to itself a claim



for a part of it: this, instead of being paid gradually, as in a



proportional tax, is collected at the end of the year, when they



have made no provision for it, and consequently, they are put to



distress.



    Besides, how hard is it to deprive them of the power of



drawing back what they pay? And how ill judged to trust money



with those who are supposed to gain only an easy



physical-necessary? An equivalent for procuring the articles of



ease and luxury, should not be left in the hands of those who are



not permitted to enjoy them.



    From this we may conclude, First, That the more such taxes



are proportional to the subject taxed; Secondly, the more evident



this proportion appears; and Thirdly, the more frequently and



regularly such taxes are levied; the more they will resemble



proportional taxes, and the less burden will be found in paying



them. Let me illustrate this by some examples.



    The stoppage upon a soldier's pay, either for the invalids,



or Chelsea, is a cumulative tax; but the method of levying it



gives it all the advantages of one of the proportional kind.



First, It bears an exact and determinate proportion to the value



of his pay. Secondly, This proportion he knows perfectly. And



Thirdly, Instead of receiving the whole into his own possession,



and paying the hospital at the end of the year, it is regularly



and gradually retained from him at every payment.



    Tithes are a cumulative tax; but they are accompanied with



all the three requisites to make them light; although in other



respects they are excessively burdensome. First, They bear an



exact proportion to the crop. Secondly, This proportion is



perfectly known. Thirdly, Nature, and not the labourer, makes the



provision. But they fall upon an improper object: they affect the



whole produce of the land, and not the surplus; which last is the



only fund that ought to be taxed, as has been said.



    The land-tax in Scotland bears, First, a very determinate



proportion to the valuation of the land; and has, Secondly, the



advantage of being well known to every contributor., so that



provision may easily be made for it. But the third requisite is



wanting: the proprietor having the public money in his hands,



often applies it to private purposes; and when the demand is made



upon him, he is put to distress.



    The taille, in many provinces of France, bears, first, a very



exact proportion to the value of the land.(4*)



    But in the second place, the proportion is entirely unknown



to the man who pays it; being nowhere to be seen but in the



offices of the intendant and his deputies.



    And in the last place, the whole payment comes at once.



    What hides, and consequently destroys this proportion with



respect to the French taille tariffée, is, that if after the



first distribution is laid on, as in Scotland, at so many



shillings in the pound of valuation, the full sum intended to be



raised do not come in; either because the intendant has given



exemptions to certain parishes, on account of the accidents of



sterility, hail, mortality among the cattle, and the like; or



because the property of a part of the parish has fallen into the



hands of people exempted from the taille; or lastly that others,



who were really bound to pay a part of it, are become insolvent.



The intendant must then make a second, and perhaps a third



general distribution of the deficiency upon all the former



contributors, in the most exact proportion indeed to the



valuation of the lands, but yet by the nature of it impossible to



be foreseen. It is for these reasons chiefly that the taille in



that kingdom is so grievous.



    These second distributions of the tax, First, destroy the



proportion between the tax and the revenue taxed. Secondly, They



make it impossible to judge of the amount of them. And lastly,



the demand comes at once, when, perhaps, the money has been



otherwise applied.



    The French tax upon industry is more grievous still; because



none of the three requisites above-mentioned are allowed to



operate.



    This tax is supposed to be proportional to the profits made



upon trade, and other branches of industry, not having the land



for their object. All merchants and tradesmen, in cities, and in



the country, pay the tax called Industrie; and the reason given



for establishing this tax, as I have said in another place, is in



order to make every individual in the state contribute to the



expence of it, in proportion to the advantages he reaps. Nothing



would be more just, could it be put in execution, without doing



greater hurt to the state, than the revenue drawn from it can do



good.



    I shall now shew how, in this tax, all the three requisites



we have mentioned are wanting.



    First, by its nature, it can bear no exact proportion to the



profits of the industrious man; since nobody but the person taxed



can so much as guess at their extent.



    Secondly, It cannot possibly be provided for, as no check can



be put upon the imposer, unless as far as general rules are laid



down for each class of the industrious; and from these again



other inconveniences flow, as shall be observed.



    Thirdly, It comes at once upon poor people, who have been



frequently forced to beg for want of employment before the



tax-gatherer could make his demand; and those who remain,



frequently become beggars before they can comply with it.



    I say, that from the general rules laid down for regulating



this tax, as to every class, a workman who has a large family to



maintain, is no less taxed than one who has no charge but



himself: and it will be allowed, I believe, that the profits of



one industrious person of the lower classes, is in no country



sufficient to pay any considerable tax, and maintain a large



family, much less a sickly one. I therefore imagine, that



cumulative taxes never should be raised upon such classes of



inhabitants as have no income but their personal industry, which



is so frequently precarious.



    Merchants also ought not to be subjected to any tax upon



their industry. They ought to be allowed to accumulate riches as



fast as they, can: because they employ them for the advancement



of industry; and every deduction from their profits is a



diminution upon this so useful a fund.



    When cumulative taxes are laid upon any of the industrious



classes, they tend to check growing wealth; and are most commonly



imposed in monarchical states, where riches are apt to excite



jealousy, as has been observed.



    But as to the class of land proprietors, that is to say, the



more wealthy inhabitants, who live upon a revenue already made,



the impropriety of cumulative taxes is much less. They are



however burdensome, and disagreeable in all cases, and ought to



be dispensed with, when the necessary supplies can be made out by



proportional taxes, without raising the prices of labour too high



for the prosperity of foreign trade.



    From the examples I have given of this branch of taxation, I



hope the nature of it may be fully understood, and that for the



future no inconvenience will arise from my employing the term of



cumulative tax.



    I shall now subjoin its definition. A cumulative tax, is the



accumulation of that return which every individual, who enjoys



any superfluity, owes daily to the state, for the advantages he



receives by living in the society. As this definition would not



have been understood at setting out, I thought it proper, first,



to explain the nature of the thing to be defined.







Chap. V







Of the Inconveniences which proceed from proportional Taxes, and



of the Methods of removing them







    A proportional tax, as I have said, is that which is levied



upon the idle consumer, at the time he buys the commodity. and



while, by consuming it, the balance of wealth is turning against



him, in favour of the seller. This tax is consolidated as it were



with the price of the commodity, and must of necessity raise the



price of it.



    I say, it is levied at the time of buying, and affects the



buyer, in consequence of his consumption; because we have seen,



that when the commodity is not consumed by the purchaser, then



upon a subsequent alienation he is refunded all he paid. I



consider him therefore, in this case, not as paying, but as



advancing the amount of the tax for another; and while any part



of the commodity remains unconsumed, there still remains the



equivalent for a proportional part of the tax in the hands of him



who advanced it.



    I shall now proceed, as in the former chapter, by giving some



examples of such impositions; and in examining them, endeavour to



shew their nature and consequences.



    The most familiar to an Englishman are, excises, customs,



malt-tax, stamp-duties, and the like.



    To a Frenchman the gabelle, the traittes, the aides, tobacco,



etc.(5*)



    In all kinds of this imposition we find the tax regularly



reimbursed from hand to hand; it adheres so closely to the



commodity, that it becomes as essentially a part of the value, as



carriage, packing, and the like incident charges, enter into the



prices of goods. It never can affect the industrious person who



does not consume; and never can be avoided by him who does. Such



taxes therefore necessarily raise the price of the commodity



taxed.



    Having already pointed out the principal advantages of



proportional taxes, which is to throw the whole of the burden



upon the rich, whom we have called the idle consumers, the better



to distinguish them from the opulent class of the industrious; I



must now enumerate the principal inconveniences complained of,



from this mode of taxation, and trace out the principles from



which they may be ascertained and removed.



    The principal inconveniences alleged against proportional



taxes may be reduced to three:



    First, That they have the effect of raising the price of



labour, and the produce of industry, and thereby prove hurtful to



the prosperity of foreign trade.



    Secondly, That they discourage consumption, by carrying the



prices of many things too high for people of a middling rank in



life.



    Thirdly, That they are both expensive in the collection, and



oppressive, from the many restrictions put upon liberty, in order



to prevent frauds.



    In analyzing every one of these inconveniences, it will be



proper to inquire, how far the conclusions against those taxes



are drawn from, and so far as matter of fact; how far from



plausible appearances only; they are real, not imaginary, to



discover the methods of removing them.



    As the first inconvenience arises from the rising of the



price of all kinds of labour, and consequently of manufactures, I



must distinguish between the consequence of raising prices at



home, and of raising them upon articles of exportation; and I



must consider the one and the other relatively to the collective



body of a state, and not to some few individuals in it.



    High prices at home are no discouragement to the industrious,



most certainly, however disagreeable they may prove to consumers;



and while they stand high, it is a proof that the demand of the



consumers does not diminish.



    High prices upon goods to be exported, are to be judged of by



the proportion they bear to those in other countries.



    Now the price of a manufacturer's wages is not regulated by



the price of his subsistence, but by the price at which his



manufacture sells in the market. Could a weaver, for example,



live upon the air, he would still sell his day's work according



to the value of the manufacture produced by it, when brought to



market. As long as he can prevent the effects of the competition



of his neighbours, he will carry the price of his work as high as



is consistent with the profits of the merchant, who buys it from



him in order to bring it to market; and this he will continue to



do, until the rate of the market be brought down.



    It is therefore the rate of the market for labour and



manufactures, and not the price of subsistence, which determines



the standard of wages. Were proportional taxes to raise the price



of subsistence, and by that circumstance to discourage



manufactures we should see the generality of workmen living with



sobriety, depriving themselves of superfluity, confining



themselves to the plain but sufficient physical-necessary,



working with all the assiduity a man can support, and still not



be able to supply the market at the ordinary rates.



    When in any country the work of manufacturers, who live



luxuriously, and who can afford to be idle some days of the week,



finds a ready market; this circumstance alone proves beyond all



dispute, that subsistence in that country is not too dear, at



least in proportion to the market prices of goods at home; and if



taxes on consumption have, in fact raised the price of



necessaries, beyond the former standard, this rise, cannot, in



fact, discourage industry: it may discourage idleness; and



idleness will not be totally rooted out, until people be forced,



in one way or other, to give up both superfluity and days of



recreation.



    People are very apt to draw conclusions from what they think



ought to be, according to the particular combinations they form



to themselves; and for this reason it is generally thought,



because taxes are higher in England than in some other countries,



that foreign trade should therefore be hurt by them. But the



sloth and idleness of man, and the want of ambition in the lower



classes to improve their circumstances, tends more, I suspect, to



lessen the productions of industry, and thus to raise their



price, than any tax upon subsistence which has been hitherto



imposed in this kingdom.



    The whole of this doctrine is proved by experience, and is



confirmed by our natural feelings. Many have been amazed to see



how well the manufacturing classes live in years of scarcity,



which frequently have the effect of doubling the price of the



most necessary articles of subsistence. Are they not found, in



bad years, more assiduous in their labour? Do they then frequent



ale-houses, as in the years of plenty? Are they found idle one



half of the week? Why should a tax laid on by the hand of nature



prove such a spur to industry; and another, similar to it in its



effect, laid on by the hand of man, produce such hurtful



consequences? Were a course of bad years, I dare not say an



increase of taxes, to continue long enough to bring manufacturers



to a habit of sobriety and application, a return of plenty, and



low prices, would throw into their coffers, what many of them



dissipate in riot and prodigality.



    Even this conclusion will be too general, if every



circumstance be taken in. Manufacturers there are, who work hard,



and live soberly six days of the week, and who at the end find



little superfluity, notwithstanding the high price of labour.



Alas! they have many mouths to feed, and two hands only to supply



the necessaries. This is the fatal competition so much insisted



on in the first book, and by which a door is opened to great



distress. Either the unmarried gain what the married should do,



and become extravagant, or the married gain no more than the



unmarried can do, and become miserable.



    The average between the two ought to determine the rate of



wages in every modern society.



    The remedies for this unequal competition, flowing from the



happy liberty we enjoy, have been considered in another place.



    The inconvenience here under examination will not be removed



by an abolition of taxes; nor will it increase by the



augmentation of them, as long as manufacturers, upon an average,



enjoy superfluity and idle days.



    Under these circumstances I conclude, that if foreign trade



suffer by the high prices of commodities in our markets, the vice



does not proceed from our taxes, but from our domestic luxury,



which swells demand at home. Were we less luxurious, and more



frugal in our management in general, all classes of the



industrious, from the retailer down to the lowest manufacturer,



would be satisfied with more moderate profits. Let not,



therefore, a statesman regulate his conduct upon suppositions,



nor conclude any thing from theory, nor from arguments * priori,



drawn from the supposed effects of taxes; but let him have



recourse to information and experience concerning the real state



of the matter.



    Let him inquire what are the prices abroad; what are the



prices at home; how those who work in exportable commodities



live; what superfluities they enjoy. and what days of idleness



they indulge in.



    If he find that goods are not exported, because of high



prices, while manufacturers are enjoying superfluity, and



indulging themselves in idleness, let him multiply hands, and he



will reduce them all to their physical-necessary; and by thus



augmenting the supply, he will also reduce the prices in his



markets at home.



    If he want to reduce prices still lower, in favour of



exportation, but find that he has occasion for the amount of



certain taxes, which enhance the value of this physical-necessary



to which he has reduced his industrious classes, then let him



grant a bounty upon the quantity exported, more than equivalent



to compensate the rise of prices occasioned by the taxes paid by



those who provide it; and let the people at home continue to pay



dearer than strangers, in favour of the state. If by lowering



prices you wish to promote exportation only, there will be no



occasion to lower them universally, any more than there is



occasion to put a large plaister over the whole body, to cure a



small wound on a particular part of it.



    I have said, that while the rate of the market remains the



same, so will the prices of every part of labour and industry,



which enters into the composition of the thing brought to market.



This is consistent with reason, and experience proves the truth



of it; because we do not see wages fluctuate with the price of



living. If they do not fluctuate in that proportion, how can we



conclude that a rise in the price of subsistence, occasioned by



taxes, should raise wages more than when the price is raised by a



natural scarcity. It may be answered, that the imposition of a



tax gives a general alarm; the effect it must have upon prices is



immediately felt; and manufacturers then insist upon an



augmentation of their wages: whereas, when nature either produces



the same, or even a greater effect, people submit to what they



think comes from the hand of God, and content themselves with the



hopes of better times. I shall allow to this argument all its



force.



    But I must observe, that when manufacturers can thus



capitulate with their employers, and can insist upon an



augmentation of their wages, the demand of the market must be



greater than the supply from their work. This is the circumstance



which raises the price of labour. Let the demand of the market



fall, the prices of labour will fall, in spite of all the reasons



which ought naturally to make them rise. The workmen will then



enter into a hurtful competition, and starve one another, as has



been often observed. Let the demand of the market rise,



manufacturers may raise their wages in proportion to the rise of



the market; they may, in the cheapest years, enjoy the highest



wages; drink one half of the week, and laugh at their employer,



when he expects they should work for less, in order to swell his



profits in the rising market.



    I have endeavoured to throw this question into different



shapes, the better to apply different principles to it; and upon



the whole, I must determine that proportional taxes will,



    First, Undoubtedly raise the price of every commodity upon



which they are properly and immediately imposed; and if they be



laid upon bread, and other articles of nourishment, they will



directly raise the price of these articles in proportion; but the



price of labour will be raised consequently only, and according



to circumstances.



    That if taxes be laid upon the day's labour of a man, they



will raise the price of that day's labour. What I mean by this,



is, that if every one who employs a man for a day, were obliged



to pay a penny to the state, for a permission to employ him, the



employer would charge a penny more at least upon the day's work



performed by the labourer. Were a tax equivalent to it laid on



the labourer by the year, it would be of a cumulative and



arbitrary nature, and would not raise the price of his wages in



proportion; but were it laid upon the workman at a penny a day,



and levied daily, in this case, he might raise his wages in



proportion. But this is not the practice any where.



    Secondly, The price of subsistence, whether it be influenced



or not by the imposition of taxes, does not determine the price



of labour. This is regulated by the demand for the work, and the



competition among the workmen to be employed in producing it.



    Thirdly, If wages rise beyond the physical-necessary of the



workman, they may be brought down by multiplying hands, but never



by lowering the price of necessaries; because every man will make



a profit of the low price, but will regulate his gain by the rate



of demand for his labour.



    Fourthly, If, therefore, the price of his physical-necessary



be raised upon him by the effect of taxes, he must work the



harder to make it up.



    Fifthly, If hands increase, after he is reduced to his



physical-necessary, the whole class of the manufacturers will be



forced to starve.



    Sixthly, The increase of hands means no more than the



augmentation of the quantity of work produced. If, therefore, the



same hands work more than formerly, it is the same thing as if



their numbers were increased.



    From these positions it seems to result, that when ever it is



found that manufacturers enjoy wages more than in proportion to



their physical-necessary through the year, reckoned upon the



general average of married men and batchelors, the method for



reducing them to the proper standard, is either to multiply



hands, if you want to reduce prices in your own market, or to



augment the price of their physical-necessary, if you would have



them remain the same. When the hands employed are really



diligent, and prices still too high, then it may be expedient to



increase their numbers, provided they enjoy considerable profits.



This will cut off consolidated profits, and lower the price of



commodities; because it will augment the supply.



    When the hands employed are not diligent, the best expedient



is to raise the price of their subsistence, by taxing it. By this



you never will raise their wages, until the market can afford to



give a better price for their work. If, when they are brought to



be fully employed, you would have the price of labour to sink



universally, you must take off some of the impositions which



affect subsistence, and at the same time gradually throw in fresh



hands, in order to promote competition, which alone will force



them to lower their prices in proportion. The whole delicacy of



this operation is to prevent competition among the industrious



from taking place after they are reduced to moderate profits; and



to promote competition among them, or to raise the price of their



subsistence, until they be brought to the proper standard. Having



insisted so fully upon these principles in the xviiith chapter of



the second book, I here refer to it.



    I have said, that the price of work is not regulated by the



price of subsistence, but by the price of the market for the



work. Now I say, that the price of the market may in a great



measure be influenced by the price of subsistence. This is a new



combination.



    The first proposition is undeniable. The price of the market



at all times regulates the price of work; because it regularly



makes it fluctuate, in proportion to its own fluctuations. The



price, again, of subsistence influences it only; because two



circumstances may destroy its effect. A high demand for work will



raise the price of wages in years of plenty; a low demand will



sink the price of wages in years of scarcity. When therefore it



is said, that the price of subsistence influences the rate of



markets, we only mean, that the average price of subsistence,



when good and bad years are taken together, have a certain



influence in regulating prices. But this average price of



subsistence cannot every where regulate the value of work, as the



average price of a ship's cargo can regulate the price of every



part of it; because the variations in the price of subsistence



have not efficacy sufficient to overbalance the variations in the



state of demand.



    Could a plan be concerted, either to preserve the price of



grain at one uniform standard, or within the limits of 15 or



perhaps 20 per cent at all times; and were this to be executed by



the assistance of a tax at one time, and a bounty as it were at



another; it would certainly have an admirable effect in every



industrious nation. It would in a manner take away the difference



between good and bad years. The industrious finding themselves



subsisted at all times nearly at the same expence, would not feel



those alternate motives to be idle and extravagant at one time,



and diligent and sober at another.



    I have enlarged so much upon the nature of this first



inconvenience proceeding from proportional taxes, that I have



left myself very little to say as to the second, which is,



    Secondly, That they discourage consumption, by raising prices



too high for people of a middling rank in life.



    In answer to this, I must observe, that all the amount of



proportional taxes is refunded to the industrious consumer, so



far as they are raised on articles necessary for his subsistence;



and when he is either idle, or consumes a superfluity, he is



classed along with the idle and rich. Now if the rate of market



prices be high, relatively to the income of certain individuals,



it can only be because the supply of the things they want to



consume is not above the proportion of the demand of those who



are richer.



    If, therefore, the rate of the market afford such profits to



manufacturers as to render them idle and luxurious, how can the



augmentation of these profits, by the abolition of taxes, and



consequent diminution of the price of subsistence, ever diminish



the competition of the rich, unless the supply be augmented?



    But if the high prices of our own markets cut off the demand



of strangers, then every principle laid down in the 1oth and 18th



chapters of the second book, must be applied to bring them down:



and as far as taxes, which are imposed either to supply the



exigencies of the state, or to cut off consolidated profits,



enjoyed by manufacturers in consequence of our own extravagance,



have contributed either to raise them, or to support them when



raised, above the foreign standard, a full equivalent, in the way



of bounty, must be given for them, in order to bring the



exportation price of goods below the level of foreign



competition.



    I come now to the last inconvenience alleged against



proportional taxes, to wit, the expence of collecting them, and



the oppression which is a consequence of the many restrictions



laid upon liberty, in order to prevent frauds.



    As to the expence of collection, it is entirely in proportion



to the disposition of the people to defraud the public.



    In France, the collecting of the branches of cumulative



taxes, such as the general receipts, comprehending the taille,



poll-tax, &c. costs the state no less than 10 per cent or two



sols in the livre, which is superadded to those impositions, in



order to defray that expence. Whereas in England the expence of



collecting the excise administered by commissioners, who act for



the public, not by farmers who act for themselves, does not cost



above 5 l. 12s. 6d. in the 100 l.



    This matter of fact is sufficient to prove, that excises,



when under a proper administration, are not so very expensive in



the collection as is generally imagined; and they would still be



attended with less expence, were some proper alterations made in



the present method of imposing them. This will appear as we go



along.



    The oppression of levying excises does not, in any



proportion, so much affect those who really pay them, as those



who advance them only for the consumers.



    This distinction which we have already made, will appear well



founded, upon examining the complaints which are commonly made



against the collectors of this duty.



    We have seen how in the taxes upon salt and tobacco in



France, there are no duties collected upon the people; the



farmers of the salt have all the salt marshes and salt pits



assigned to them by the King; no person, not privileged, is



allowed to make salt for the consumption of those provinces which



are subjected to the Gabelle.



    In like manner the distribution and sale of tobacco is



exclusively vested in the hands of the farmers: they buy it



either from Great Britain, or from the Dutch at second hand; they



manufacture it themselves, and sell it over all France, at the



price set upon it by the King; and we saw, that during the last



war, they paid thirty millions down, for a permission to raise



the price of it 10 per cent during ten years. This price fixed



upon the sale of tobacco, answers exactly to what we know under



the name of assize, which ought constantly to attend all



excises:(6*) for want of observing exactly this regulation, the



publicans and victuallers in England raised the price of their



strong beer one half-penny per quart, in consequence of an



additional duty of three shillings per barrel imposed anno 1761,



which is at the rate only of one farthing per quart.(7*)



    When the sale of an exciseable commodity is vested in a



company who manufacture it, by exclusive privilege, the whole



oppression of collection is avoided; because the company itself



then pays the duty, and they draw their reimbursement from



proportional profits on the sale of the goods.



    This is the greatest advantage of the farm above the public



management of a tax.



    When excises are levied upon those who manufacture the



commodity excised, the oppression of the laws falls upon the



manufacturers, although they advance the tax only, and draw it



back from the consumers upon the sale of the commodity.



    Were people to reflect a little, they would soon discover how



greatly it is for the advantage of every consumer in the kingdom,



that no fraud in the collections should pass unobserved; because



all the profits arising from frauds belong to the manufacturer,



who in reality is the tax-gatherer, as much as the farmers in



France are tax-gatherers, when they sell their salt and tobacco.



But as the farmers appear in the light of King's officers when



they prosecute offenders, and our collectors seem to bear hard on



those with whom we live, people foolishly imagine, that were



brewers, for example, more gently dealt with, beer would come the



cheaper to themselves. This is a mere delusion; because no brewer



whatever will sell his beer cheaper than either an assize, or the



ordinary rate obliges him to do, let his profit, from frauds, be



ever so great, and his address in committing them ever so



successful; and the less productive the tax turns out to be in



the end, the more the other impositions upon the people must be



augmented, in order to make up the deficiency.



    If we compare therefore the oppression of excise-laws felt by



those who advance these impositions only, with the ease which the



consumers find who really pay them, we may judge of the



advantages which the proportional taxes have over the cumulative.



    The excise, as paid by the brewer, is really of the



cumulative kind. The exciseman demands money of him, at a time



when no alienation takes place, and perhaps when he is not



prepared to make the advance for his customers, who must refund



it to him with profit: besides the hopes of being able to defraud



are disappointed, and it is always disagreeable to be



disappointed in what we either wish or hope for.



    Were all mankind honest, the inconveniences of levying such



taxes would be less; but as this is not the case, methods must be



fallen upon to disappoint the intention of committing fraud. The



only way to accomplish this, is, to render if difficult and



dangerous: but while every individual has a liberty to



manufacture an exciseable commodity in whatever place he thinks



fit to enter, (that is to declare to be set apart) for that



purpose; when every one has a liberty to sell liquors, which,



upon retail only, are subjected to excise (as is the case in



France) must not collectors be multiplied in proportion to the



occupation which such policy implies? And will not these



collectors oppose frauds to frauds, in order to profit by them,



at the expence of the merchant or manufacturer? This will sow



discord and hatred between two classes of the same society, and



thereby the state is hurt. All discord hurts a state, as it does



a private family.



    It is out of my way to lay down plans for preventing such



inconveniences. It would require an intimate knowledge of every



circumstance relating to the country for which the remedy is



intended.



    I shall therefore endeavour only to throw out some useful



hints, by mentioning the impositions where the inconveniences in



levying are the least; and by comparing these with other



impositions, where the oppression in levying appears to be



greater, the contrast of circumstances will suggest the



principles upon which a plan may be formed.



    There are many more frauds and difficulties in collecting



excises in the country than in cities, from the number of



manufacturers employed in them. It is just so with the aides in



France, from the number of retailers. There are very few frauds



and little difficulty in gathering the malt-tax; because the



object is unwieldy, and the places of manufacture are fewer.



    The frauds upon tobacco and salt in France, do not proceed



from those who manufacture them, but from those who introduce



foreign goods to supply the place of those manufactured by the



company. This shews that excises should be made as general as



possible over a country; because local exemptions introduce, as



it were, a foreign country into the center of a state.



    Stamp-duties are seldom defrauded by forging the stamp; but



in France, where they extend to almost every deed of alienation,



the public is defrauded by private bargains.



    Customs are defrauded by the liberty given to trade in every



port; and from the want of convenient public magazines, to serve



as a proper repository for all goods brought by sea.



    It may further be said, in general, that frauds are most



frequent upon the new establishment of taxes; that those who



complain most of the oppression of them, are precisely those who



have the least reason for it; and that the cause of their



complaint proceeds rather from the inconvenience in paying their



taxes when they are not prepared, and the disappointment in



defrauding, than from any real oppression arising from the laws



of excise: the hardships of these laws are owing to the necessity



of general rules for preventing frauds; and such rules would be



unnecessary, could the liberty of committing frauds be



circumscribed.



    One very good method of raising proportional taxes, without



great expence or oppression, when the situation of a country will



admit of it, is to levy no such duties, but at the gates of towns



and villages, which in this light appear to be political



inclosures. At these gates every produce of the lands, and every



manufacture not made in the town, might pay a tax upon coming in;



every manufacture made in the town, might pay a tax on going out:



all fruits consumed in the country might be free; all



manufactures made and consumed in the towns might be free also.



If we consider the quantity of exchange between the inhabitants



of towns and those of the country, and between town and town;



this regulation, I believe, will be found sufficient to raise



more money by proportional taxes than what is raised in any



country in Europe.



    A second method of diminishing the expence, and also the



burden of proportional taxes, is to exact nothing of the



manufacturers of exciseable goods, but to prohibit the delivery



of them to any one who does not present a permit from the excise



office, signifying that the tax has been paid. This is the method



observed in the Austrian low countries, where excises are carried



to a very great height. There the transporters or carriers of



exciseable goods, are formed into a corporation, and none else



dare to transport them.



    Whoever has seen the execution of these regulations will not



be very fond of them; but the inconveniences which occur proceed



from the political situation of all these towns, the public debts



of which are so enormous, that to pay the interest of them



excises have been carried so high as to banish manufacturers into



the country, where few excises are levied. It is from the country



and many considerable villages, which have not the privilege of



running in debt, that the manufactures of that country are



carried on. No industrious man can afford to live in the towns of



the Austrian Netherlands, except he who supplies their



consumption; and in no place, I know of, is work so dear as



there.



    Were great excises levied there upon the furnishers of the



exciseable goods, as is the case in Great Britain, and were as



little restraint laid upon their frauds, those duties would not



produce what they do; and the oppression would be intolerable;



whereas by the policy established, nothing but the high price of



goods is complained of. A third method of avoiding both expence



and oppression in levying proportional taxes, would be to confine



the fabrication of all articles charged with them to certain



places properly enclosed. Were those undertakings few and large,



were spacious magazines of all sorts prepared, at the public



expence, in all sea-port towns, and surrounded with walls, an



entire liberty might be allowed within the inclosures, and no



questions would be asked, but on going in and coming out. Under



such regulations a state would reap great benefit. First, There



would be considerable savings in collecting. Secondly, There



would be great savings on the number of hands employed in



manufacturing: forty men, in a large brew-house, make more beer



than an hundred disposed as they are in country villages. This



resembles the introduction of machines into manufactures.



    The objection from the infringement of liberty is more a



pretext, in order to facilitate fraud, than any thing else. Are



not those who manufacture exciseable commodities, the servants of



the state? Are they not even the collectors of the public



revenue? With what face then can they pretend to be indulged in



the means of defrauding their customers of those taxes which they



wish to put into their own pockets, by withholding them from the



public. Has liberty any other meaning, but an entire permission



to do whatever is not forbid by general and wholesome laws,



calculated for the universal good of the society; and shall this



class of men, who are enriching themselves as much by the profits



they have in advancing the taxes, as by their industry, be



considered in as favourable a light as another who is paying a



cumulative tax out of his income, one farthing of which he never



can draw back?



    If any one should misinterpret the doctrine of this chapter,



I must put them in mind of my original plan, which was to keep



constantly in view those virtuous statesmen who think of nothing



but the good of their subjects. Taxes and impositions in their



hands, are the wealth of the father of the family; who therewith



feeds, clothes, provides for, and defends every one within his



house. The increase of taxes on this supposition is national



oeconomy, as shall be afterwards shewn; frauds are the thefts of



servants impairing the public good, and particularly the means of



self-defence against the incroachments of ambitious neighbours.



    As it is the duty of every statesman to make his people happy



and flourishing, perhaps the speculations of one whose only



interest in throwing them upon paper is to fill up his leisure



agreeably, may some time or other tend to promote so glorious a



purpose.







Chap. VI







Cumulative and proportional Taxes compared with one another, and



farther examined







    After examining separately the nature and effects of



cumulative and proportional taxes, it remains, for the more full



understanding of this subject, to compare them together; the



better to find out wherein they really differ, and how far the



difference is apparent only.



    It has been observed, that as the payment of taxes is made in



money, this payment can diminish no part of the produce of either



land, or industry; the whole amount of these remains entire to



the subjects of the state.



    Taxes then are paid either out of the money which circulates



in the purchase of produce and manufactures; or out of the income



arising from solid property: from which we have concluded that



those of the proportional kind must constantly be confined within



a certain proportion to alienation. We have also observed, that



the imposition of taxes augments the mass of circulation, and



makes it requisite for a statesman to contrive some method for



increasing money in proportion to their increase. I hope these



propositions have acquired an additional confirmation, from what



has been already said in the preceding chapters.



    We have also seen how the amount of proportional taxes is



ultimately taken from the superfluity of the rich, whom we have



called the idle consumers: and how they are advanced by one set



of the industrious, and refunded by another, until at last they



fall upon those who cannot draw them back from any body. These



last have been said to pay the taxes, the others to advance them



only.



    Were we therefore to suppose all desire of defrauding out of



the way, we should find the whole burden of proportional taxes



confined to the inconvenience of advancing their amount by the



industrious, and to the payment of them by the rich, which



proportionally diminishes their income. Where credit therefore is



well established, where payments are regularly made by buyers to



sellers, and where people proportion their expence to their free



income, the weight of proportional taxes will be very small. I



appeal to experience for the truth of this.



    Let us next examine the nature of cumulative taxes, as we



have called them, in order to distinguish them from the others.



    In these, alienation is not necessary at the time they are



paid; from which it follows, that, in many cases, they cannot be



drawn back. When a man pays his land-tax out of his rent, what



remains to him will not buy more of any thing than if he had paid



nothing. Nay, were the state to indulge him and take his tax in



corn, the corn which remains to him would not bear an advanced



price, unless the state should export the quantity he had given;



and then indeed, by diminishing the supply, it might raise the



price of grain in general; but every one having grain to sell



would profit of the rise upon the price, as well as the landlord,



whose share does not commonly amount to one third of the crop.



    But were a cumulative tax so levied as to prevent the



proprietor from spending what the state intends to make him pay



out of his income, he who pays it would thereby acquire one great



alleviation of his burden.



    I have said that when a brewer pays the excise, the tax, as



to him, is of the cumulative nature. It is so in a certain



degree, no doubt, as may be seen without farther explanation; but



it still so far retains its own nature as to be easily drawn back



from the consumer. But how can a soldier draw back the tax he



pays to Chelsea?



    From this material distinction between the two impositions, I



conclude, that no objection can lie against proportional taxes,



so far as they affect the industrious; because they draw them



completely back: and that great objections lie against cumulative



taxes, when they affect the industrious, because they cannot draw



them back at all; and consequently, they may affect the



physical-necessary of the contributor, in case no profit should



remain to him upon his labour. On the other hand, I think little



objection can be made to cumulative taxes, when they are imposed



upon possessions, which produce a visible annual revenue, clear



to the proprietor. This is the nature of the dixiemes and



vingtiemes in France; where the whole amount of the person's



income is taken upon proper proof, and taxed in proportion to it,



without any subsidiary or second levy's taking place, to make up



a determinate sum.



    Cumulative taxes would also be far less burdensome to the



lower class, could they be levied, so as, first, to preserve the



proportion of them to the actual profits on industry: secondly,



to make that proportion sensible to the people: and in the last



place, to retain the tax, instead of allowing them first to



receive it, and afterwards obliging them to refund it.



    In proportion as these three requisites do not take place,



such taxes become grievous to all who have no fixed income.



    To put a tax upon a man's dwelling house, in proportion to



its windows, or hearths, when the house produces no fixed income



to him, and when he has none independent of it, may take away a



part of his physical-necessary. To put a tax upon his head, is



more grievous than to put a tax upon his hands, in proportion to



what they daily gain.



    If cumulative and proportional taxes be compared, with



respect to the influence which they severally have upon our



opinions as to taxes in general, we find that both of them



deceive the contributors, but in different ways.



    In the cumulative taxes, the person who pays does not always



perceive the reason of his paying. He imagines that he is taxed



merely because it is known that he is able to pay a certain sum.



    In the proportional, the deceit is of another nature. When a



person buys a consumable commodity, which has paid an excise, he



does not perceive that the price he pays for it comprehends a tax



upon his past gains, in favour of the public; but he concludes



the whole to be necessary, in order to procure what he has an



inclination to consume. An example will make this plain.



    Suppose a tax laid upon wheel carriages, and that every



person in the state were liable to pay a certain sum in



proportion to the number of carriages he has for his convenience.



The tax-gatherer comes at the end of the year and demands the



sum. The person complains that he is not at liberty to have a



coach or a chaise without paying duty for it; and that while he



has occasion for one carriage only, and has but one pair of



horses, he is obliged to pay for several sets of wheels.



    Now suppose this cumulative tax were turned into a



proportional one, and that wheels were to pay a stamp-duty, or



the like, in the hands of the wheelwright. The price of them



would immediately rise. but this rise would soon become familiar



to the man who has the carriage; and he would then be no more



hurt by this additional expence, than if it had proceeded from



some new and expensive fashion of wheels; in short, wheels would



generally begin to bear an advanced price, and very soon nobody



would enquire how it came about, nor once complain of the tax.



    To set this in another light, the difference between the two



impositions resembles that between long and short accounts, which



to poor people is very great. When the expence of living is



insensibly and universally augmented, by the effect of



proportional taxes, then the industrious man, who enjoys neither



superfluity or idleness, may and can augment the price of his



work in proportion. This augmentation forms then a part of what



has been called his (A), which he draws fully back when he comes



to market. But if the same, or even a less sum be raised upon him



by a cumulative tax, it comes upon him at the end of the year, or



at the end of the quarter, and let him be ever so provident, he



cannot draw it back, or raise the price of his work, because of



the unequal competition of other people of his own class, who



from a variety of circumstances, cannot all be so equally loaded



by the cumulative as by the proportional taxes. Besides, they may



not be so provident as himself and may work for subsistence,



without making any allowance for what they are to pay the state



at the end of the year. Thus a double inconvenience ensues. The



industrious poor are oppressed by the tax-gatherers, and the tax



is ill levied. In the other case, the first never see a



tax-gatherer, and the money is paid. Besides these advantages in



favour of proportional taxes, there is still another, that if



this tax be improperly laid on, the defect will manifest itself



by checking consumption only; whereas in the other case, it will



be known by the distress also of the individuals.



    If the liberty not to consume be taken away, as in the



gabelle in some provinces in France, then the imposition changes



its nature and becomes a cumulative tax, as may be easily



perceived.(8*)



    It has been said, that so far as the three inconveniences of



the cumulative taxes can be prevented, they cease to be



oppressive. From which we see the reason why excises are so



easily paid when those who manufacture the commodities charged



with them, are contented to compound for them. This changes the



tax into one of the cumulative kind; but gives it every requisite



to make it easy. Let me take an example.



    A brewer who pays excise for all he brews, is exposed to the



daily visit of the excise-man, to whom he pays the duty. Here the



brewer's imposition participates of several of the inconveniences



attending cumulative taxes. But let me suppose that after a



certain time he finds that 100 l. is the annual amount of his



excise. If he make a composition for it at this rate, he comes



under a regular cumulative composition, with every advantage. He



thinks no more of frauds; he no more grudges what he pays; and



becomes in a manner collector of that imperceptible duty advanced



by him, and paid by all his customers.



    The easy method of transforming those taxes into one another,



shews their resemblance sufficiently, and the differences which



we have pointed out, shew the principles which regulate the



proper manner of imposing them.







Chap. VII







Consequences of Taxes when the Amount of them is properly applied







    We have now seen the objects affected by taxes, and the



inconveniences which result to those who are obliged to pay them.



    It comes next to be examined, whether taxes of all kinds be



not a great load upon a people, a grievous infringement of their



liberty, the means of bringing many honest and industrious people



to great distress, and a great discouragement to marriage. I



answer without hesitation, that taxes may be, and most commonly



are accompanied with all these and many more inconveniences; but



I must add, that they proceed from the abuse, and not from the



nature of taxes.



    In my inquiries, I have constantly in my eye, how man may be



governed, and never how he is governed. How a righteous and



intelligent statesman may restrain the liberty of individuals, in



order to promote the common good; never how an ignorant and



unrighteous statesman may destroy public liberty, for the sake of



individuals.



    Raising money by taxes must always be burdensome, less or



more, to those who pay it; and the advantages resulting from



taxes can proceed only from the right application of the money



when it is raised.



    When individuals only draw a profit from the inconvenience of



taxes, the public loses, no doubt; because taxes are paid for the



advantage of the public, not for that of private people. If the



money raised be more beneficially employed by the state, than it



would have been by those who have contributed it, then I say the



public has gained, in consequence of the burden laid upon



individuals; consequently, the statesman has done his duty, both



in imposing the taxes, and in rightly expending them.



    Taxes, in this last view, may be considered as a saving out



of every private fortune, in order to procure a public fund to be



expended for the public benefit.



    I have frequently recourse to the familiar examples of



private oeconomy, in order to make applications from it to the



political; which, however different it may appear, will be found



easily deducible from the same principles.



    Let me suppose two persons, (A) and (B), living in the same



neighbourhood, of the same rank and fortune, enjoying great



superfluity, but spending yearly the whole of their income in



different ways.



    Let the income of both be supposed to be 2100 l. sterling;



and let the branches of their expence be ranged under six



different heads. Let (A) be supposed to spend upon the first 100



l. on the second 200 l. on the third 300 l. on the fourth 400 l.



on the fifth 500 l. on the sixth 600 l. in all 2100 l.



    Let us suppose (A) to enjoy in every one an ample



sufficiency.



    (B), on the other hand, spends upon his first article 1600 l.



and upon each of the other five, no more than 100 l. Here the



first article of (B's) expence is sixteen times greater than any



of the rest; and by the supposition, 100 l. is supposed to denote



an ample sufficiency upon each article.



    I come to (A), and I say to him, you disapprove of the



extravagance of your neighbour (B) upon his first article of



expence, where he spends sixteen parts of his income, and where



you spend but one; and yet you must allow that upon every other



article of his expence, he is a better oeconomist than you. Would



it not be for your interest to bring the other articles of your



expence down to his standard, without increasing any thing upon



your first article, which is already within the compass of what



may be called sufficient.



    To what purpose, says (A), would you advise me to so strict



an oeconomy? And what should I do with so great a saving on my



annual income? Be in no pain about that. I shall lay it out for



you in discharging your debts; in providing for your children,



and giving them a good education; in improving your estate;



repairing your house; making up your inclosures; all shall be



usefully spent; and out of 600 l. a year, you shall have every



thing necessary for your family.



    Here is the representation of a scheme between a good



statesman and a people whose interest he consults.



    After the imposition of taxes, the individuals of a state,



who have already a determinate income, begin to pay greatly more



than they used to do for every thing they consume. A great part



of this additional price goes to the public, and is thereby laid



out for national purposes. The whole of such expences is thrown



into circulation, as much as if the rich proprietors had laid it



out themselves upon articles entirely adapted to their own taste.



    Is it not evident, that in this way of appropriating the



income of a country, it must produce a more extensive



encouragement to industry of all kinds, than if the proprietors



only had spent it? They never would have thought of becoming



merchants, or of setting up manufactures for the supply of



foreign markets: their whole expence would have been calculated



to supply their own wants real or imaginary; and it would have



been indifferent to them whether these were supplied by natives



or by strangers.



    Let us apply this doctrine to common experience. Let us



compare the nature of circulation in a trading town, with that of



a country place, where many gentlemen of large fortunes reside.



How extensive the objects of the first! how contracted those of



the latter!



    Let us compare again the exigencies of government, with those



of a trading city, what a variety of new wants here occur to be



supplied, which the city never could have occasion for?



    I have shewn how the great amount of taxes comes to be taken



from the income of those individuals whose fortune is already



made, or whose daily profits are considerable: I have suggested



how circumscribed the expence of this class must be, when



considered with respect to the employment it procures to the body



of a people. Does not the experience of former ages show how apt



private opulence is to sink into treasures, when a taste for



industry does not animate the lower classes to create new objects



of desire in the wealthy? Wherein is a state benefited by the



luxurious gratifications of the rich, unless it be by the



employment they procure for those who provide the objects of



luxury? Those very gratifications are, in one sense, taxes upon



the rich in favour of the industrious: they increase expence, and



throw money into circulation. In Spain and Portugal, where



industry is not introduced among the lower classes, the strangers



are they who in effect levy such taxes upon them. Were the taxes



they pay, properly applied for the encouragement of the arts,



instead of being appropriated to private purposes, and to the



enriching of private men, whose taste for expence is always



circumscribed to the objects of their own wants, how soon should



we see them vying with us in every market of Europe, and



supplying themselves as far as their country is calculated for



it.



    The reciprocal wants of industrious nations, resemble the



reciprocal wants of tradesmen; all may be employed in supplying



one another, as well as themselves.



    When a due proportion of the amount of taxes is properly laid



out in premiums, for the encouragement of the industrious, the



prices of labour upon articles of exportation, may be brought so



low, that all nations who do not follow the like policy, must



languish and decay. Luxury at home will then cease to hurt the



foreign trade of the nation. In her treaties of commerce, she may



throw open her ports to many articles of foreign consumption,



without incurring any inconvenience from such allowances; while



on the other hand, she will reap the greatest advantages from a



reciprocal permission.



    The example by which I have illustrated the nature of public



contributions, must not be understood to tally with respect to



proportion. It would be both ridiculous and impossible to reduce



all the expences of rich men to the barely sufficient. All I



meant was, to shew how taxes, when properly applied, may be



considered as public oeconomy; and how the levying of them has no



direct tendency to hurt a nation in point of ease and prosperity.







Chap. VIII







Of the Extent of Taxation







    One good way to discover the nature of taxes, is, to examine



how far it may be possible to carry them. This is my intention in



this chapter.



    I have said that the object of taxes was income, and not



stock. I have shewn how those of the proportional kind affect the



income of stock already made, and enhance the expence of persons



who enjoy large profits upon their daily industry. I have pointed



out the impropriety of imposing cumulative taxes, upon such as



draw nothing more from their industry than an easy subsistence;



and I have given a general preference to those of the



proportional kind; because they constantly imply both alienation



and consumption: alienation in those who advance the taxes,



consumption in those who pay them.



    Could, therefore, taxes be levied upon every alienation,



where consumption is implied, and that in proportion to the whole



superfluity of those who are to consume, proportional taxes would



be carried to their utmost extent.



    I shall now analize this subject still farther, in order to



discover how far this extent may reach; and by this inquiry, the



principles of taxation will be the better understood.



    The object of alienation comprehends all that is in commerce



among men, moveable, and immoveable.



    What is moveable is generally consumable, what is immoveable,



is generally not so.



    As consumption is a requisite, together with alienation, in



order to form a proper object for proportional taxes, we see how



contrary to principles it would be, to tax the alienation of



lands, houses, etc. in the same proportion as consumable



commodities. These are funds, not income; and the money with



which they are purchased, must be considered in the light of a



fund, while it is in the hands of the buyer. When once it comes



into the hands of the seller of the immoveable subject, it



frequently, indeed, partakes of the nature of income; that is to



say, it is spent in the consumption of fruits, and of the labour



of man; and then it will be properly affected by proportional



taxes. This may suffice to recal to mind the principles we laid



down in the 26th chapter of the second book, concerning the



effects of the vibration of the balance of wealth between the



members of a modern state.



    The next thing we are to consider is the state of



circulation. As to this, we have frequently observed, how it must



be in proportion to alienation.



    This proportion is not determined by the value, or



denominations of the money circulating; but by this value



combined with the frequency of transitions from hand to hand; as



the force of a cannon ball is estimated by the weight of the



ball, and the swiftness of the motion at the time it strikes.



    Let us now lay aside the consideration of immoveable property



altogether; and examine the nature of consumption, alienation,



and sale, with respect to other things.



    Consumption comprehends every thing produced by the earth, or



by man; alienation is confined to that part of consumption which



is exchanged between men; and sale to that part of alienation



which is exchanged for an equivalent in money.



    Whatever part is consumed without alienation, ought, I think,



to be out of the reach of proportional taxes, unless, by some



circumstance or other, it can be made to fall under the eye of



the public, in a manner resembling its coming to market. Thus a



tax upon malt may with propriety be levied at the malt-house, as



if it were sold to the maltster, although it be made for the



consumption of the grower of the barley. In like manner a tax



upon corn for bread may be levied either at the mill where it is



ground, or at the oven where it is baked.(9*)



    The worst kind of proportional taxes are those which are



levied upon private manufacturing, and upon unmanufactured



consumption, where no alienation takes place. An example of the



first we have in the excise upon malt, cyder, candles, etc. made



in private houses for private use: the last is known in Holland,



where a man cannot kill his own pig, or his own calf, without



paying a tax. Were taxes of this nature extended to the making of



bread, cooking of victuals, &c. I apprehend they would become of



a nature more burdensome than any hitherto invented, unless



public cooks, &c. were established, as public ovens are in many



parts of France: in such cases, taxes might be levied upon every



part of consumption.



    Investigations of this nature are so disagreeable, that it is



with reluctance I mention them; but when in fact, such taxes are



found established in different countries, it is highly proper



that the nature of them should be inquired into.



    Taxes in Holland are so multiplied, as to descend to this



sort, in many places, as we have seen by the example just given;



but even these, however oppressive they may appear to those who



are not accustomed to them, are still less so than many of the



cumulative kind we have mentioned, particularly the tax upon



industry and the capitation in France. They approach nearer to



proportional taxes and derive every alleviation of their burden



from this circumstance. He who pays such taxes, sees that he can



avoid them, by retrenching his consumption; and when they fall



upon the necessaries of life, he may draw them back, provided he



be an industrious man, and that every one who enters into



competition with him for employment, be equally subjected to the



same burden. But they are more burdensome than those where sale



takes place; because, when a poor man, who wishes to consume, has



no money, he considers himself in the same light as if the thing



were not to be sold; but when he has what he has acquired by his



own labour, and cannot consume it for want of money to pay for a



permission, as it were, he must either starve for hunger in the



midst of plenty, or be reduced, perhaps, to beggary, for having



preserved his life by defrauding the tax.



    What has been said, is, I think, sufficient to shew the



hardships which occur, when taxes are imposed upon bare



consumption, where no alienation takes place: they must, in every



respect, be ranged under those of the proportional kind, although



some principal requisites be wanting to engage any one to approve



of their institution.



    It appears still more difficult to establish a proportional



tax upon barter, or the exchange of commodities one for another,



unless sale be understood. This would be the case were a private



person, not subject to the excise upon beer made in his own



house, to pay in that commodity. He would not there escape the



imputation of fraud; and might, with propriety, be considered as



a retailer. I do not, however, doubt but examples of taxes upon



barter might be found; some even occur to myself; but they are



too trifling to mention.(10*)



    The last and principal requisite, to render proportional



taxes easy and light, is sale. There the burden must be



proportional to the buyer's purse; and if it prevent the



consumption of the thing taxed, the defect will manifest itself.



    Of these taxes we may say, that they are in proportion to



circulation; and accordingly, we see how difficult it was to



raise them, as long as circulation remained confined to the small



quantity of coin in the country. As money increased, both by the



increase of trade and alienations, they became more productive;



and were the nature of them rightly understood, and were they



properly imposed, they would soon be more generally adopted.



    In treating of public credit, I have said that it is the duty



of a statesman to augment the quantity of money, in proportion as



he intends to multiply taxes on his people. I shall now, before I



conclude this chapter, explain the meaning of what was there



thrown out relatively to another subject.



    The money of a country, we have said, bears no determinate



proportion to circulation; it is the money circulating,



multiplied by the number of transitions from hand to hand. Again,



we have said that the prices of all things are determined by



demand and competition. The meaning of this, as it concerns the



present question, is, that in proportion to the competition of



those who appear with money, in order to acquire what comes to



market, a larger or a smaller sum is brought into circulation.



    Now, according to the principles laid down in the first



chapter of this book, we saw how the full value of the



industrious seller's expence and profit, were made up to him in



the sale of his work; and if he had advanced any tax upon any



part of his work or consumption, that even this was refunded to



him by the buyer, who, if he consumed in the light of an idle



man, paid for the whole.



    Farther, when a proportional tax is imposed, we said it was,



in a manner, as if the state interposed at the time of



alienation, and exacted of the purchaser a certain value in



money, in proportion to the commodity, as the price of the



permission to acquire what his own industry had not produced.



From this I draw the following consequence, that in proportion to



the tax, an additional sum of money is drawn into circulation,



which would otherwise have remained in the pocket of the



purchaser; consequently, on imposing proportional taxes, they



cannot, at first, exceed that proportion of money which is found



in the pockets of the consumers, over and above what they used to



pay for what they consumed.



    The truth of this proposition is established upon many facts.



First, in countries where people keep their money locked up,



proportional taxes are very well paid. Hence the great amount of



the alcavala and cientos in Spain, which amount together to 14



per cent upon every consecutive alienation of the commodities



which they affect, chiefly indeed for the consumption of the



rich.



    Secondly, When excises were augmented in England, in the



reign of king William, Davenant tells us, that the goods excised



fell in their price.



    Thirdly, When a war has lasted any time in France, taxes



cease to be so productive.



    Are not all these, and many other appearances, resolved upon



the same principle, viz. that taxes must come out of that money



which exceeds what was necessary for carrying on alienation



before they were imposed?



    In Spain such taxes draw money from the chests of the



hoarders, and increase circulation for a while.



    In England, during King William's wars, the quantity of money



being very small, and trade being very low, the tax upon malt



could come out of no other fund than the price usually given for



barley.



    In France people are better acquainted with taxes, and the



great bulk of excises are administered by the farmers, who never



lower their price; so that the diminution of the mass of coin



must diminish consumption.



    But when methods can be fallen upon to increase money



according to the uses found for it, taxes will continue to



produce, consumption will not diminish, and circulation will keep



pace with them.



    Could we suppose, that before the imposition of taxes, every



person in a state had laid it down as a rule, to spend the whole



of his income, but none of his treasure, in the consumption of



what is brought to market, it is plain, that in a luxuriouS



nation, taxes might be carried so high as to draw the last



farthing of the treasure into circulation, even though it were



supposed to exceed the value which demand had fixed for all that



was formerly brought to market. But without a luxurious turn this



would not be the case. There are countries abounding with coin,



which it is impossible to come at by proportional taxes. The



reason is plain: the value which demand fixes upon the total of



the articles of consumption exposed to sale in the country, bears



but a trifling proportion to the coin which remains locked up.



This was the case in ancient Greece. In this case, proportional



taxes never can exhaust the treasure; because were they to be



made high upon articles of the first necessity, all the poor



would starve; if upon articles of superfluity, demand would stop.



    Proportional taxes, therefore, can be raised in proportion



only to the desire of spending money; and as this desire depends



upon the spirit of the people, so must the extent of taxes.



    Let me now trace a little the progress of money brought into



circulation by proportional taxes in a luxurious nation. I shall



call the value, fixed by demand, for all that comes to market



(Y). The sum levied in consequence of the alienation of it, or in



other words, the sum of the proportional taxes (X). And the whole



money of the country (Z). This premised, it will follow, from



what has been said, that as soon as all the money of the country



is brought into circulation, then (Z) will be exactly equal to



the sum of (Y) and (X).



    Let us next suppose the whole alienation to be made at once.



Will not (Z) then immediately appear divided into (Y) and (X)?



What then will become of those two sums which we suppose to enter



into circulation at the same time? I answer, that (Y) will go



entirely free to the industrious seller: that it is, or should



be, nearly equal to the former value of what came to market



before taxes were imposed: and that (X) is an additional sum



drawn from the idle consumers, who live upon an income already



made. But suppose (X) to be augmented, until it exceeds the



quantity of money formerly superfluous for carrying on



alienation: then I say, that either taxes will become



proportionally less productive, or consumers must melt down the



capital of their funds into paper money, to the amount of the



deficiency of (X); and this will supply circulation with the



additional sum required in consequence of the imposition of



taxes.



    Now, I think, it is a lucky circumstance, that the additional



sum of taxes should be paid by those very people who are the best



able to borrow it upon their funds.



    Let us proceed to examine the progress of (Y) and (X) as they



continue in circulation. (Y) is no sooner come into the hands of



the industrious seller, but he has occasion to go to market: that



moment I consider him as one of the rich; and the money which, at



the time he sold, had acquired the denomination of (Y), now



resumes that of (Z). When he comes to buy a commodity with what



was formerly his (Y), there is immediately a part of it converted



into a new (X), and the remainder keeps the denomination of (Y)



in the hands of him from whom he buys. By this progress it is



plain, that after a certain number of alienations, or transitions



from hand to hand, the whole quantity (Y) will be converted into



(X).



    Experience shews this to be the fact; because the amount of



taxes in a short time, far exceeds the value of all the money of



a country.



    Let us next follow the progress of (X).



    Upon the first alienation of any part of what comes to market



for the consumption of the proprietors of (Z), a proportional



part of (Z) is transformed into (X), and is carried into the



public coffers. Were it there to be locked up, and not thrown



back into circulation, it is plain, that in a short time the



whole of (Z) would be converted into (X), and would be shut up in



the exchequer.



    When the amount of taxes, therefore, instead of being shut up



in the exchequer is sent out of the country, as in time of war,



must not this produce a similar effect? Has not the exportation



of this amount the same effect as locking it up, since the one



and the other equally take it out of circulation? Does it not



then follow, that if more money be not obtained, either by



borrowing it back from strangers, or by melting down more solid



property, that selling must stop, and (Y) disappear as well as



(X)? The rich, therefore, must give over buying, and the



proprietors of all that comes to market must deal by barter with



one another.



    How naturally do all these consequences follow one upon the



other! and how exactly do they correspond to the principles which



run through that part of the last book where we treated of banks



and public credit!



    Taxes are not raised, in our days to remain in treasures, but



to answer the exigencies of the state. The moment, therefore,



that the money arising from them comes out of the public coffers,



it loses the character of (X) and resumes that of (Z), in the



same manner as (Y) was transformed into (Z), by being brought to



market in order to buy a commodity. This new (Z), as we may call



it, no sooner returns into circulation, than it becomes again



converted into (Y) and (X), with this difference, however, that



what came from the exchequer, so far as it is converted into (X),



returns directly into it again.



    Hence it follows, that states commonly pay their servants the



full of their salaries, and make them refund a part in



consequence of cumulative taxes, instead of proportionally



diminishing what is due to them. And when the salaries themselves



are intended to be 1aid under poundage, which in fact is an



actual diminution of them, they choose that the tax should appear



to be a deduction out of what is supposed due; because it seems



less arbitrary to impose a tax, than to diminish a salary,



without assigning any reason for it; but indeed, besides this



reason, it commonly happens, that the particular appropriations



and administration of the revenue render this method easier.



    With respect to proportional taxes they affect the expences



of the state in the same manner as those of individuals; with



this difference, as we have said, that the part (X) returns into



the exchequer; but the part (Y) is fairly spent by the state, as



by the idle consumer.



    From what has been said, we may gather the principles which



lead to the most extensive establishment of proportional taxes,



viz. either to draw by particular regulations, the whole real and



gross produce of land and work to market; or at least to bring it



under the eye of the state, in consequence of some modification



or manufacture performed upon it, as was observed with respect to



malt-houses, mills, and public ovens. When, by such contrivances,



the whole gross produce falls under taxation, the proportional



taxes must be gently laid on, and gradually raised until they



begin to interrupt consumption; then they must be diminished for



a while, until dissipation increase; a case which will probably



happen, as it commonly keeps pace with industry.



    If we suppose the rich to set out on a plan of living upon



their capitals, instead of living upon their incomes, as we have



hitherto supposed them to do, then indeed taxes may augment to a



degree not to be estimated. This combination has already found a



place in the 26th chapter of the second book, where we examined



it with regard to the progress of industry. In that place it was



said, that in proportion to credit and industry, it might be



possible, in the compass of a year, to produce commodities to the



value of the whole property of the most extended kingdom. Were



this the case, to what a height might not taxes be carried?



    (Y) then would represent the whole value of the country, and



consequently (X) would swell in proportion, according to the



competition among the inhabitants, to purchase every particular



article. Subsistence and necessaries might be taxed low in



proportion to the abilities of those of the lower classes;



articles of luxury might be taxed in a higher proportion, in



order to draw the more into the exchequer.



    Were taxes thus carried to their utmost extent, still every



person in the state must be left at liberty to save, or to spend



the whole, or any part of his stock, or income; which is not the



case when cumulative taxes are imposed. Proportional taxes,



though carried to their utmost extent, will not deprive an



industrious man of his physical-necessary, nor of the reward of



his ingenuity, nor of that rank in wealth, to which his birth or



expence entitles him.(11*)



    When taxes have the effect of interrupting this harmony of



expence, of restraining the liberty of squandering, or of saving,



or of oppressing one set of men more than another, in all such



cases, they are improperly imposed; and instead of being too



high, as it is commonly supposed, I think it is a demonstration



that they are really lower than they need to be. The classes of



men in a modern state, resemble the horses in a team. When every



horse draws fairly and equally, the whole force is exerted; but



if any one happen to be strained by an over-charge thrown upon



him, the force of the team is greatly diminished.



    When proportional taxes are carried to their full extent, I



then presume every one will be obliged to pay as much as



possible; I do not mean that every one will be forced to pay to



the extent of his abilities, but I say, that the generality will;



and therefore, were cumulative, or personal taxes, to be



superadded on those who already pay all they can, they would, by



affecting them unequally, deprive many of their



physical-necessary, or small profits; and consequently destroy



the proper balance of their competition. The setting of the lower



classes free from cumulative taxes, will have the effect only of



putting the growing wealth of the penurious and saving part of



the industrious inhabitants out of the reach of taxation. This



ought in good policy to be done, as has been shewn in another



place. But, farther, we have observed, that taxes can be



increased in proportion only to the spirit of dissipation in the



people. To force money, therefore, out of the hands of those who



do not incline to spend it, is forcing the spirit of the people;



and if it be not tyranny, it is at least great severity. Besides,



we shall presently shew, how impossible it is these savings



should escape being taxed whenever they begin to produce an



income; and allowing that they may be greatly accumulated, and



thrown into trade, yet still they must in one way or other appear



in alienation, and become subject to the proportional taxes. The



only part, therefore, of the savings not affected by taxes, will



be confined to that which is locked up. This in a prodigal nation



should never be touched. The inconveniences resulting to the



state from so small an inequality of taxation, is too trifling to



be attended to, and too difficult to be prevented.



    I come next to examine the extent of cumulative taxes.



    If we suppose the proportional taxes to be carried to their



full extent, there will be little place found for the cumulative,



as has been said. The only objects left for them are the savings



locked up, and the pure profits upon trade.



    But let us suppose proportional taxes out of the question, as



they must be when contrary to the spirit of a particular nation;



and then inquire into the principles which regulate the



imposition of cumulative taxes, in order to discover to what



extent they may be carried, and what consequences may follow when



they are brought to a height.



    This branch has two objects; first, income, which is



determinate; secondly, profits from industry, which are and must



be very uncertain.



    Income, I divide into two sorts; that which proceeds from



every branch of solid property, capable of producing it: Land,



houses, even cattle, furniture, &c. all may, in some respects,



produce an income, more or less permanent according to



circumstances. This sort of income is established by lease. The



second sort is the interest of money, constituted by the contract



of loan.



    In imposing cumulative taxes upon income, it is very proper



to attend to the nature of every species of it, with respect to



its stability. Landed property is fixed, and cannot escape



taxation, were the tax to be carried even to the extent of the



full income, as has been observed. Were the same proportion to be



laid on houses, they would soon fall to ruin, because the nominal



proprietor would not keep them up. Like circumstances must be



attended to, in taxing every other article of revenue.



    The method of ascertaining the value of this kind of



property, is to oblige all leases to be recorded, under a



sufficient penalty. This is the method in France, for the sake of



the controle, which is exacted upon recording them; and this, no



doubt, facilitates the arising of the twentieth penny, which



operates upon all such income.



    The value once ascertained, the whole income is at the mercy



of the state, in proportion to the impossibility of avoiding the



tax, by any change on the nature of the fund. It is from this



circumstance that I have called all such taxes arbitrary



impositions. And I call them also cumulative; because the reason



given for imposing them, is, that it is just every one should pay



a general tax, for the support of the state, in proportion to his



abilities.



    As these taxes cannot be carried beyond the value of the



income which the proprietor cannot withdraw from under the



burden, we see the impossibility of establishing them upon that



income which proceeds from money. If a tax of so much per cent be



imposed upon money lent at interest, the lender may immediately



call in his capital from his debtor, and send it away beyond the



reach of the tax. If the calling it in be prohibited, then all



credit will be destroyed for the future, and no more money will



be lent. If the statesman should be disposed to profit of the



advantage found in securing money upon land-property; and if,



trusting to the desire monied-people have of settling their



capitals in that way, he should take one or more per cent. upon



capitals so secured; it will still have the effect of hurting the



credit of landed men, who have frequently no good security but



their land to give.



    It was formerly the practice to allow the landlords a



retention of a part of the interest, in consideration of the tax



they paid upon that part of their land, which was pledged for the



security of the money borrowed; but when credit is once



established, this regulation has no other effect, than to oblige



landlords to borrow so much dearer than other people, who have no



retention to claim. Where indeed credit is precarious, such a



regulation may be considered as a premium for good security.



    In general, I believe, we may safely determine, that all



attempts to lay a tax upon the income of so fluctuating a



property as money, where the capital is demandable, will prove



unsuccessful.



    The case is different, when the capital is not demandable, as



has been observed in the end of the 8th chapter upon public



credit; where we were suggesting a reason for taxing the interest



of national debts, when grown up to the full amount of all the



income of a country. But a material distinction was there made,



between those debts which were supposed to be consolidated into a



permanent property, and the new contracts which were to be



considered as debts constituted upon that property.



    We see, therefore, the extent of cumulative taxes upon



possessions which produce an income. Let us next examine how they



may be made to affect other articles.



    We have observed how improper, and how contrary to principles



it is, to impose proportional taxes upon those branches of sale,



which do not change the balance of wealth between the contracting



parties. Yet cumulative taxes may then take place; because there



is no reason to make them general, or proportional.



    When lands, for example, carry titles along with them, as is



the case in many countries; and when, as with us in Scotland,



they carry a right to vote for a member of parliament, a very



heavy tax might be imposed upon the alienation of them. The same



may be said of every other estate which requires a feudal



investiture to complete the right. Thus the Lods et Vente in



France, which is a proportion of the price of such lands due to



the superior or lord-paramount of the fee, amounting in many



cases to the sixth part of the price, is a hint for a cumulative



tax to be raised upon the alienation of this kind of property.



    Were cumulative taxes properly laid upon personal service, a



regularity in levying them at short intervals, and according to



some determinate proportion, would do a great deal towards



communicating to them all the advantages of those of the



proportional kind.



    Thus a tax laid upon those who work by the day, may be levied



in such a manner as to be tolerably easy. A penny a day (or more



if necessary) paid by every industrious man, regularly, once a



week, would soon enable him to raise his price in that



proportion. But then deductions must be allowed for all



accidental impediments; and were a plan to be concerted, many



other considerations would enter into it, which it would be



superfluous here to mention, and which, perhaps, may occur in



another place.



    The two articles which, in analizing the extent of



proportional taxes, we observed had escaped that imposition, to



wit, money locked up, and the pure profits on trade constantly



accumulated into the stock, are equally ill adapted to bear a



cumulative tax. I can see no way of taxing money locked up, any



more than money lent, without opening a door to the greatest



oppression. And as to the pure profits on trade, although they



appear to be income, I rather consider them as stock, which,



according to principles, ought not to be taxed. My reason for not



considering them as income, is because we have supposed them to



be accumulated by the merchant into his trading stock. They



resemble the annual shoots of a tree, which augment the mass of



it, but are very different from the seed or fruit which is



annually produced, and is annually separated from it. If they be



spent by the merchants, then they are undoubtedly income, and



will be affected by proportional taxes; but as they may also not



be spent, and become stock, the cumulative tax will affect them



in both cases.







Chap. X







Are Taxes a Spur to Industry, as some pretend?







    It is not easy to find out, a priori, how taxes should prove



a spur to industry. What makes several people adopt this opinion



is rather from their feelings, in consequence of many



circumstances arising from experience, than from what reason, or



the nature of the thing, has pointed out. But as nothing can be



produced without an adequate and natural cause, let us examine



this political problem, by an application of the principles we



have laid down in the former chapters. If these be just, we shall



discover by them, how it happens that in countries where taxes



are high, where living is dear, and where every circumstance



seems to render the means of subsistence difficult to obtain,



people live in the greatest plenty, are best and most easily



subsisted, and that industry there makes the greatest progress.



    For the solution of this question, let us call to mind the



principles which influence the multiplication of mankind, and the



increase of labour and industry, laid down in the first book. We



there explained how the wants of mankind promote their



multiplication.



    Money, the instrument of alienation, was represented as the



primum mobile in this operation; a desire in the rich of



acquiring every thing with money, that is demand, was shewn to be



the spur to industry in the poor. It was said, that if riches did



not inspire a taste for luxury, that is for the consumption of



the labour of man, these riches would not circulate; and that



they would then be adored rather as a god, than made subservient



to the uses of men.



    Connect herewith that the imposition of taxes is a method of



bringing money into circulation; that those of the proportional



kind have the effect of drawing from the rich an additional price



upon every thing they buy, which goes for the use of the state,



and which otherwise would not have entered into circulation at



that time.



    From these principles, I conclude, that taxes promote



industry; not in consequence of their being raised upon



individuals, but in consequence of their being expended by the



state; that is, by increasing demand and circulation.



    From the principles above laid down, I cannot discover the



shadow of a reason, to conclude that taking arbitrarily away from



some individuals, a part of their gains by cumulative taxes, or



proportionally from others, by augmenting the price of what they



buy and consume, must in any respect imply an incitement in the



consumers to demand more; and without this it never can excite



the industrious man to augment the supply.



    I readily allow that every one who has been obliged to pay a



tax, may have a desire to indemnify himself of the expence he has



been put to, by augmenting his industry; but if, on the other



hand, taxes have put every one to a considerable additional



expence, in proportion to his income, it would be absurd to



allege this diminution of his fortune, as the cause of a desire



to augment his consumption; and unless the rich do augment their



consumption, the poor cannot augment their industry.



    Examine, on the other hand, the use made by the state of the



money raised, and you will easily perceive the justness, I think,



of the above mentioned principles. This money belongs to the



public, and is admastered by private people. Public expence is



defrayed with a full hand; they who bestow the money, bestow it



for the public, not for themselves; and they who work for the



public, find, or ought to find, the greatest encouragement to be



diligent.



    Every application of public money implies a want in the



state; and every want supplied, implies an encouragement given to



industry. In proportion, therefore, as taxes draw money into



circulation, which otherwise would not have entered into it at



that time, they encourage industry; not by taking the money from



individuals, but by throwing it into the hands of the state,



which spends it; and which thereby throws it directly into the



hands of the industrious, or of the luxurious who employ them.



    It is no objection to this representation of the matter, that



the persons from whom the money is taken, would have spent it as



well as the state. The answer is, that it might be so, or not:



whereas when the state gets it, it will be spent undoubtedly.



Besides, had it been spent by individuals, it would have been



laid out for the supply of private wants, which are not near so



extensive as those of the public: and farther, when money is so



taken from rich individuals, it obliges them to find out a way of



procuring more, out of their solid property; and when this



facility is n1ot procured for them by their statesman, we see how



taxes become both oppressive and ill paid. On the contrary, when



it is provided, either by the returns of foreign trade, which



greatly augment the coin of a country; or by banks, which melt



down property into paper circulation; we see taxes augmenting



constantly, without creating any impediment to consumption, or



discouragement to industry. All these consequences hang in a



chain, and hence may be gathered the solidity of the principles



upon which they depend.



    After this solution of the question proposed, let those who



are versed in history lay circumstances together and examine



whether facts do not prove the truth of what I have been saying.







Chap. XI







Considerations upon Land-Taxes, with some Observations upon those



of England and France







    Of all the kinds of cumulative taxes, that which is properly



imposed upon lands seems to be the best: that is, to imply the



fewest inconveniences to the persons paying, and to the state in



raising it. That it is an unequal imposition is plain and



certain: this character is unavoidably attached to every species



of cumulative taxes, in one way or other. It has also the effect



of casting a general discredit upon the purchase and improvement



of land; because the proprietors are naturally exposed to



augmentations, which may, almost with the same ease, be carried



to the total amount of the income, as to any proportional part of



it. This has been mentioned in a former chapter, where the



interest of a nation's debts was supposed to increase so as to



equal the value of all the land-rents, and the whole revenue of



individuals.



    Land-taxes are imposed in various forms in different



countries, and all are supposed to bear a determinate proportion



to the rent. This, however, is never, nor indeed can it ever be



the case. The value of land is varying perpetually, from the



industry of the inhabitants. Besides this inequality, there are



other inconveniences proceeding from the unequal distribution of



property. In Scotland, for instance, land is divided into large



portions; very few small lots are to be found. The class of



farmers, for the most part, labour the lands of others, who have



large possessions. This is less the case, I believe, in England,



and still less in France and in Germany. A land-tax, therefore,



being supposed universal, would, in Scotland, do little harm: in



England, it would fall heavier upon the small proprietors;



because the sum exacted would bear a greater proportion to the



supposed superfluity of the proprietor. In France, it would still



be worse; for there the exemptions of the numerous class of



nobles, and many other circumstances mentioned above, would



entirely destroy even the shadow of proportion. It is out of my



way to enter into any long detail upon this head, with respect to



different countries.



    I shall therefore confine myself to a very few observations



upon the method of laying this tax in England; and upon a project



which has been long in agitation in France, to raise their



land-tax by way of tithe upon the fruits.



    This scheme was first proposed to the late King of France by



the Marechal de Vauban, in 1699, and the proposal was renewed



some years ago in a performance called the Reformateur. But as it



would prove hurtful and burdensome to France, in a great degree,



from a circumstance which has not been attended to by these



authors, the examination of this system of taxation will serve as



a good illustration of this part of our subject.



    The land-tax in England has, I think, two remarkable defects.



First, The sums imposed at certain rates, upon every district of



the kingdom, whether cities, towns, universities, or open



country, even upon the King's palaces, inns of court, &c. are not



distributed according to any rule of proportion upon the property



of individuals; but this operation is left to assessors.



    Secondly, All personal estates, except property in the public



funds, and stock upon land, supposed necessary for agriculture,



are charged in the same proportion as land-rents.







Chap. XII







Miscellaneous Questions relating to Taxes







    Quest. 3. What is meant by income, relatively to individuals,



or to a state, and what is the nature of the expence which must



diminish it, when it is considered as the object of taxation?



    The great intricacy of this question proceeds from hence,



that what is really an expence to one is the income of another:



so that without applying our reasoning to every particular fact,



no general explanation can be rendered intelligible. My reason



for proposing it in this place is, that in commenting upon some



passages of Davenant, in his discourses upon the revenues of



England, I may have an opportunity of illustrating some things



which have been already examined.



    Davenant was an admirable writer; he had a remarkable genius



for political theory, and his sentiments upon many things are



very generally adopted. My intention here is not to refute his



opinions, but to avail myself of his combinations, in order to



explain my own ideas.



    In his first discourse upon revenues, we find the following



passage.



    'The number of the people leads us to know what the yearly



income may be from land, and what from mines, houses, and



homesteads, rivers, lakes, meers, ponds, and what from trade,



labour, industry, arts and sciences: for where a nation contains



so many acres of arable land, so many of pasture and meadow, such



a quantity of wood and coppices, forests, parks and commons,



heaths, moors, mountains, roads, ways, and barren and waste land;



and where the different value of this is computed, by proper



mediums, it is rational to conclude, that such a part of the



people's expence is maintained from land, &c. and such a part



from mines, houses, &c. and that such a part is maintained from



trade, labour, &c. and the poor exceeding so much the rich in



numbers, the common people are the proper medium by which we may



judge of this expence.'



    'There is a certain sum requisite to every one for food,



raiment, and other necessaries; as for example, between 7 and 8



l. per annum; but some expending less, and some more, it may not



be improper to compute, that the mass of mankind, in England,



expend, one with another, near 8 l. per annum: from whence it may



be concluded, that an annual income of so many millions is



needful for the nourishment of such and such a number of people.'



    The reasoning here takes a wrong turn. It is of no



consequence to compute the value of things consumed without



alienation. It is of no use to know that the value of the



physical-necessary of an Englishman is 8 l. a year; because if



this sum be supposed to be an exact quantity of income, not one



farthing of tax can come out of it. So that imposing, for



example, 5 per cent upon this article would be raising only the



physical-necessary to 8 l. 8s. which 8s. must be paid, not by the



physical-necessarian, but by somebody having superfluity who



employs him: and if there were not superfluity enough in England



to answer to 8s. a head, such a tax could not be levied.



    He afterwards supposes that the income of this class may



amount to about twenty millions a year, which at 8 l. each,



answers two millions and a half of people. He states the income



of lands at fourteen millions, and the income of trade at ten



millions, in all at forty-four millions a year: and hence he



concludes, that taxes ought to be imposed in some proportion to



this total.



    Now if he suppose the first article of twenty millions,



arising from the income of those who are employed in arts and



manufactures, according to the former calculation of 8 l. a head,



to be as ready a fund for taxation as the land-rents, we must



examine, by the principles we have deduced, whether there be any



ground for such a supposition.



    Let me suppose one of this great class to work a whole day



for his victuals only. Here is an alienation of work for food. It



is impossible, however, to raise a tax in money upon this



alienation; because it may easily be supposed that neither party



has a farthing. The only method therefore, for imposing a tax in



such a case, would be, either to oblige the workman to set apart



a portion of his day's work for one who would pay the public for



the value of it; or to oblige the person who gives him his food,



to pay the public for the privilege of employing him in his



service. The one and the other are examples of proportional



taxes. But this method of taxation is absolutely unknown. In this



example there is an alienation, which, I have said, constantly



implies a superfluity of one kind or other. The labour of the



person working is, here, superfluous to himself; therefore a part



of it may be applied towards the public. But the bread he



receives is in no part superfluous, and therefore cannot be laid



under taxation as to him. But then the bread given for the labour



is superfluous to the person who gives it; and as this implies



that he has a superfluity of bread, the state may demand a share



of this superfluity.



    By this exposition of the matter it appears, that in order to



raise a tax, in whatever way it be done, some kind of superfluity



must be supposed. It also points out how it should be laid on:



for if by mistaking the proper object, a part of the bread should



be taken from the workman, instead of being taken from the man



who employs him, the tax would affect the physical-necessary of



the labourer, instead of affecting the superfluity of the



employer.



    Let us next suppose a workman able to do no more than what is



requisite to dig the ground for roots to eat, instead of digging



it to procure bread from a man who has bread to spare; still



there will be no alienation; consequently, no possibility of



establishing a tax: for if you either take a part of his labour,



or of his food, you deprive him equally of his



physical-necessary. Yet the work of this man, and his food, may



be valued at so much money; and thus may enter, in one sense,



into Davenant's general article of income or expence; but it does



not follow that any tax can be raised upon such an income.



    To estimate, therefore, the total value of what is the object



of taxation, we must go another way to work. The first article



must be the annual income of all funds. By funds, here, I



understand the capital wealth already made, in opposition to the



produce of industry, which may be considered as the materials of



which such funds are composed. The fund therefore is the



accumulation of savings, which, not having been spent by the



industrious, form a capital of a nature to produce an income,



either from land, or from any other valuable thing. Thus



land-rents, annuities, interest of money, emoluments of offices,



salaries, even wages of servants, in short, every fixed income, I



range in this first article, which I call annual income, produced



from a capital already formed, either real or supposed.



    This may be laid under taxation by a pound-rate or otherwise,



and forms that kind of tax which I call cumulative and arbitrary;



because a man who has any sort of visible revenue, comes under



this general rate, let him have ever so many necessary deductions



out of it, ever so many debts and incumbrances. From such



circumstances, cumulative taxes frequently turn out extremely



burdensome.



    The second object of taxation is upon alienations made for



money. Whenever we come to dispose of money in the purchase of



any thing, the state has an opportunity of exacting a part of it



as a tax; but while it remains hid, it can neither be come at, or



laid under contribution, without extortion or violence.



    All branches of expence may be laid under taxation by



excises, which I call proportional taxes; because a man is never



subjected to them, but in proportion to his expence; and his



expence ought naturally to proceed from his income.



    As for trade, I do not clearly see how the profits of it can



be regularly taxed. In France, indeed, they are taxed under the



first head, and are considered as an income. Such an imposition



is not well judged; because there the materials for making the



fund are taxed as if they were the income of a fund already made.



The savings only out of the profits upon trade, placed so as to



produce a permanent revenue are, what can properly be considered



as a fund: the income therefore of these savings and not the



savings themselves, should come under this branch of taxation.



    Customs are improperly called taxes upon trade. When ill



imposed they may stop trade, or render it less profitable by



diminishing the demand for the goods so taxed; but they can take



nothing from the profits already made.



    In a trading nation, the great branches of commerce produce a



certain determinate profit, subject, I allow, to augmentations



and diminutions, from accidents and circumstances impossible to



be foreseen: and the customs imposed upon exportation and



importation differ from excises more in the method of levying



them than in any thing else.



    Davenant, in my opinion, would have given a better idea of



the sum which taxes might have produced in England, had he



examined the amount of all the branches of revenue, and of all



the species of sale, than in the manner he has done. These two



points known, it would be expedient next to inquire, in what



manner the several articles could be made subject either to



cumulative, or proportional taxes.



    I must now take notice of another passage of Davenant, where



he explains himself upon the question before us: it is in his



fifth discourse upon revenues, where he says,



    'By annual income, we mean the whole that arises in any



country from land and its product, from foreign trade, and



domestic business, as arts, manufactures, &c. and by annual



expence we understand what is of necessity consumed to clothe and



feed the people, or what is necessary for their defence in time



of war, or for their ornament in time of peace: and where the



annual income exceeds the expence there is superlucration



arising, which may be called wealth or national stock. The



revenue of a government is part of this annual income, as



likewise a part of its expence, and where it bears too large a



proportion with the whole, as in France, the common people must



be miserable and burdened with heavy taxes.'



    I must comment a little upon this passage.



    I have no objection to this exposition of the matter; the



ideas are intelligible and clear: but I object against the



application of his doctrine to taxes; because it would lead to



error. Here are my reasons:



    First, Income is called the whole of the earth's productions:



this I may admit to be just, except when we consider income as an



object of taxation. But if we retain the same definition to



express the income of one, for example, who labours the soil for



his own subsistence, as well as of another who labours it as a



trade, the difference in paying their taxes out of it will be



very great. He who draws nothing from the ground but his



physical-necessary, can be laid under no taxation; because he has



no superfluity. And if he be obliged either to give a part of his



crop in tax, or to sell any part of it for money to be paid to



the public, this diminishes his physical-necessary, and forces



him to starve: whereas the other, who exercises agriculture as a



trade, may be obliged to pay a part of his surplus by way of tax



or rent; and still his physical necessary may remain untouched.



    It is for this reason, that in treating of these matters, I



am always at the greatest pains to point out, that nothing can be



the object of taxation, except what is over and above the



physical-necessary of every one.



    In all countries where a land-tax, steuer, taille, or by



whatever name it goes, is established, care must be taken to



prevent the husbandmen from confining their labour to such a



small spot of ground as is barely sufficient to produce their own



physical-necessary, unless when they have a trade to assist them



in paying what the public demands of them.



    From this circumstance, and this only, it happens, that the



land-tax in England is so little burdensome, comparatively to



what it is in many nations of Europe. Lands in England are let in



large portions: nobody will let a farm so small as to be



proportioned to the supplying of the mere physical wants of the



farmer. But in other countries, where the oeconomy is different;



where inheritances in land are constantly divided, as moveables,



among all the children; the lots become so small, that the



proprietor can draw no more from them than his own subsistence;



and then when a land-tax is imposed, this poor little portion



being valued in proportion to what it can produce, as well as the



greatest estate in land, the husbandman is starved, although the



tax demanded of him be laid on in the exact proportion to the



produce of his land, while he that has a surplus is quite easy.



    I would therefore recommend, in countries where this minute



subdivision of lands has taken place, that for the future no lot



under a certain extent or value should be suffered to be divided



among the children, but ordered to be sold, and the price divided



among them; and that the same regulation should be observed upon



the death of such proprietors whose lands are not sufficient to



produce three times the physical-necessary of the labourers. This



would engage a people to exercise agriculture as a trade, and to



give over that trifling husbandry which produces no surplus, and



which involves so many poor people in the oppression of



land-taxes. This regulation never can be recommended in a plan to



be executed all at once: it must be done by degrees, and in



proportion to the progress of industry. The principle is so



evident, that I never found any one who did not immediately agree



to the justness of my observation; although in imposing



land-taxes I have nowhere found it properly attended to.



    Here then is the use of theory; it directs us in practice to



avoid difficulties, which might otherwise be judged



unsurmountable.



    Secondly, I farther observe, that it is a more hurtful error



still to mistake the produce of industry for the taxable income



arising from it, than to mistake the gross produce of land for



the rent: because the profits upon industry bear frequently a



smaller proportion to its produce, than the rents of lands do to



their full fruits.



    The best method of raising money upon the lower classes of



the industrious is rightly to lay their consumption under



proportional taxes, which they may easily draw back; because they



will raise the price of their work proportionally.



    From this we may conclude, contrary to the common opinion,



that the test of well imposed taxes is to raise prices in



proportion. When they are rightly imposed, every one who sells a



commodity which has paid a tax, will draw it back, whether he be



industrious or not. If he consume it, he cannot draw it back, but



by raising the price of his work; which again he cannot do,



unless the tax be made so general as to affect all his



competitors; and unless the consumption he had made be



unavoidable to every one of them.



    When we reflect upon the large quantities of exciseable goods



which are consumed as superfluities, we must conclude that the



rise of prices, daily complained of, proceeds more from our



manners than from the taxes we pay.



    Thirdly, the expence of a people is not merely what is



sufficient to subsist them; but what they consume, either in



fruits or manufactures. Had indeed Davenant computed the value of



this necessary quantity, and deducted it from the income,



according to his acceptation of income, the remainder would have



been a tolerably good representation of what I mean by income, or



taxable fund; because whatever a people consume beyond the



necessary, I consider as a superfluity which may be laid under



taxation.



    Fourthly, I must also differ from him in his idea concerning



superlucration, wealth, or national stock.



    According to him, this is the quantity of income remaining



after the following deductions: First, What is necessary to



clothe and feed the people. Secondly, What is necessary for their



defence in time of war, and ornament in time of peace. But



according to my notions, I must also deduct all which is consumed



in superfluities; for what is consumed, whether necessarily or



superfluously, never can make an article of superlucration,



wealth, or national stock.



    The superlucration then of a nation consists in the



augmentations made upon her stock of every kind, capable of



producing a proportional income: it is the converting into



something durable the well employed time of the inhabitants. In



this sense the new pavement of London, the roads, buildings,



ships, etc. in England, are all articles of superlucration, as



well as the improvement of the lands, and consolidation of the



balance of her trade, which has created that part of the public



funds belonging to natives.



    Every one who has written concerning taxes has endeavoured to



contract the object of them as much as possible: more, I imagine



with a view to ease the public than the people. I have followed



another course. I have been for multiplying the objects of



taxation as much as possible, and for making them more in



proportion to expence than to property or income. But that I may



conform myself in some measure to the ideas of those who have



examined the same subject, I shall propose a tax, which would



fill up the place of every other; and could it be levied, would



be the best perhaps ever thought of.



    It is a tax, at so much per cent upon the sale of every



commodity.







NOTES:







1. The corvée in France is the personal service of all the



labouring classes, for carrying on public works. Were they paid



for in money, it is computed they would amount to no more than



1,200,000 livres a year. This tax was omitted in the account of



the French revenue.







2. The gentlemen of the Monthly Review for August 1767, p. 120,



have proposed an objection to the doctrine here laid down; I



shall therefore insert the passage, and endeavour a



reconciliation of opinions, which is a more laudable attempt,



than the most successful refutation.



    'In the discussion of so difficult and complex a subject as



this of taxes (say these gentlemen) great care should be taken



that the foundation be laid upon solid principles; and that



nothing be admitted upon the authority of the inquirers, because



the smallest error in first principles must lead to great



mistakes and confusion in the subsequent parts of the inquiry.



When our author says that taxes ought to impair the fruits and



not the fund; and represents this as a fundamental principle of



taxation - we should have wished to have seen the reason upon



which this principle is founded; as in our apprehension it wants



much of the clearness of an intuitive truth - And we own it



appears to us that every man whose goods are embarked in the



political vessel, risks the whole; and in equity, as in all other



cases of insurance, ought to pay, in the language of commercial



policies, as interest may appear: which will be in proportion to



the whole risk, and not in proportion to the profits, or fruits.



Those whose funds are the production of artificial society, or



protected by the laws of entail, even against the effect of their



own folly and extravagance, ought, in our opinion, to pay for



their extraordinary care and security, these being benefits which



the laborious man has no share in, and which he lies under no



obligation to support with the fruits of his industry. For this



purpose what our author calls cumulative taxes may with great



justice and propriety be applied.--'



    On these judicious remarks I must observe, that nothing is



more requisite, in the perusal of this work, than a strict



attention to the manner of establishing every principle. This was



my particular care in the composition of it, and every oversight



in this respect will be the object of a judicious criticism.



    I must now examine whether, in this place, I have failed in



exactness, as it is here insinuated; or whether my critics have



misunderstood the meaning of my words. As for the authority of my



opinion, I perfectly agree with them that it should go for



nothing.



    I have said that it is a fundamental principle in taxation



that the fruits not the funds are to be impaired by the tax. In



this I speak strictly in terms of my definition of a tax,



inserted in this very Review, p. 119. A tax it is there said is a



certain contribution of fruits service or money imposed on the



individuals of a state, &c.



    By the words fruits and service, the fund bearing the fruit,



and the person serving, are evidently supposed to be exempted;



and in the paragraph following, the money exacted is said to



comprehend the equivalent given for what may be exacted in the



other two ways. So according to this express definition all



impositions on funds must be classed under a different head from



taxes; and these I have called contributions.



    My reason for excluding in my definition of a tax, all



contributions from funds, such as that made by the Dutch, is that



they cannot, by their nature, be annual and perpetual, as taxes,



which affect growing fruits only, may easily be. Were such



contributions out of property, to be annually levied, over and



above the full extent of the value of the fruits or income; the



contributors would be reduced to beggary; and the taxable fund



itself would in time, become the property of the state. Is it



possible that the authors of the Monthly Review should wish, in



any case, to see taxes carried beyond the extent of any person's



income or profits on his trade and industry? Surely, not: and



therefore I must suppose that they have not rightly understood my



meaning; though I cannot discover where any ambiguity lies.



    When a man pays insurance, as interest may appear, upon a



cargo which runs a risk of being totally lost, this case seems to



be parallel to that of a person who runs the risk of losing his



whole landed estate by a foreign invasion. In this case, indeed,



as in the former, he would no doubt willingly give to the



conqueror one half of his lands to secure the other; but such a



case conveys, I think, no idea of a tax; nor does property, in



any country I know, stand on so precarious a footing as to make



it reasonable.



    Thus far I have said in explanation of my meaning, and in



justification of the principle, or rather of the definition by



which it is implied, that taxes should impair the fruits only,



and not the fund.



    I now willingly agree with the gentlemen of the Review, that



entailed property may very reasonably be taxed higher than any



other, on account of the additional security. But still this



augmentation must fall within the income of the entailed lands;



because, should it exceed it, it would destroy the entail itself,



which makes the fund unalienable. As to funds, which these



gentlemen call the production of Artificial Society, I can say



nothing; I do not understand this term, and I even take it to be



an error of the press.



    Upon the whole, I confess that my anxiety concerning the



opinion of the public, in relation to my inquiries into the



principles of taxation, was, lest they should be found to extend



too far: It gives me a particular satisfaction to find that, by



some, they are not thought to extend far enough.







3. The Taille is properly a land-tax, to which men called noble



are not subjected. The reason of which is, that it was originally



imposed in lieu of such personal military services as were



peculiar to the lower classes.



    The Fourage and Ustencil are laid upon all those who pay the



taille, and are in proportion to it. The first is appropriated



for the subsistence of the cavalry, when they are in quarters;



the last for kettles and small utensils for the infantry.



    The Capitation is the poll-tax. The Dixiemes and Vingtiemes



have been already explained, and tithes are well known to every



one.



    The Industrie is that imposition arbitrarily laid on by the



Intendants of provinces, upon all classes of industrious people,



in proportion to their supposed profits in every branch of



business.







4. This sort of taille is called tariffée; because it is imposed



according to a valuation of the land. It is a late improvement;



but still is exposed to numberless inconveniences, which are



mentioned in the text.







5. The gabelle is a branch of the general farms, and consists of



an excise upon salt. The manufacture of the commodity is in the



hands of the farmers; and they, for a liberty to sell salt at a



certain price, far above the expence of the manufacture, pay to



the King an annual revenue of 28 millions of livres.



    This I call a proportional tax, relatively to consumers;



although in reality no tax-gatherers be employed for the



collection of it, contrary to what is the case of all excises;



which are seldom farmed by government to the manufacturers of the



commodity taxed.



    The traittes, or, as they are otherwise called, the five



great farms, were established by Colbert, when he took away a



multitude of customs paid upon the transportation of goods from



one province to another. They, the traittes foraines at least,



resemble very much our customs, or the duties of tunnage and



poundage, and are let to the farmers general for the sum of 12



millions.



    The tobacco is of the same nature with the salt tax. The



farmers general have the exclusive privilege of selling it at a



price fixed by the King.



    For the farm of the tobacco are paid 15 millions.



    The aides resemble our excises more than those we have



mentioned. They consist in duties upon liquors, either brought



into towns, or sold by retail in public houses; and upon all



articles of food sold in corporations, except grain of every



kind, which is free. They comprehend also a multitude of other



duties superfluous to enumerate.



    They are collected by tax-gatherers at the gates of every



town, who also have access to all public houses, where retail is



laid under additional rates. The aides are farmed at 38,600,000



livres. These were the rates in the farms let in 1755. They have



been since augmented in 1762, as has been observed.







6. When excises are imposed upon any commodity, it is contrary to



all principles in fixing the assize, not to superadd the whole



duty imposed to the former selling price. This however is



sometimes omitted, with an intention to make part of the duty



fall upon the manufacturer, to the ease of the subject. The



consequences are,



    First, The manufacturers blow up the spirit of the people



against the tax, who never would think of making an outcry, were



they not excited to it by the interested motives of the



manufacturers. Were high profits allowed to manufacturers on



imposing the tax, they would be quiet: and if the profits were



afterwards found to be too high, it would then be a popular



measure to reduce the selling price, and also a means of setting



people on the side of government, against the manufacturers, who



are their real tax-gatherers.



    Secondly, It is impossible to compass the end proposed. A



proportional tax, rightly imposed, must be drawn back; and all



attempts to prevent it, occasion only a multiplication of frauds,



and a bad manufacture.



    In fixing assizes upon the manufacturing of goods, which in



different years vary in their price, regard should be had to such



variations; otherwise the manufacturer will be distressed, and



the public will be ill served: in either of which cases, the



people will be animated against such duties.



    The only expedient to share the profits of the manufacturers



of exciseable commodities, is to lay them under some cumulative



tax which they cannot draw back, such as making them pay for a



licence.







7. It must, however, be observed, that the price of beer was not



raised, either by the brewers, or by the victuallers, on account



of the additional malt-duty, 1760.







8. The gabelle, or salt-tax in France, is not levied in every



province; because of certain privileges of exemption, which some



have all along enjoyed.



    This opens a door to the greatest abuse, by smuggling salt



from places where it is free, into places where the tax is



imposed, at many 100 per cent above the value; and obliges the



King to use great severity upon those who are loaded with this



duty.



    The consumption of every family is fixed to a certain



quantity; and if it be found that they have not bought, from the



King's granaries, to the full extent of what is reckoned



necessary for them, it is supposed that the deficiency has been



made up from contraband salt, and the deficiency is exacted.







9. Examples of these kinds of taxes were familiar in former



times. Vassals were obliged to grind in their lord's mill, bake



in his oven, press their wine in the public press of the



territory, etc.



    This was found very useful, in ages when alienation and sale



were little known; but now they are considered as oppressive, and



so I think they are, when compared with proportional taxes, which



take place upon the sale only of the commodity: but still they



are far preferable to many taxes of the cumulative kind.







10. Two gentlemen in France exchange casks of their wine, they



are both obliged to pay a tax upon removing the wine from their



cellar. This duty is called Remuage.







11. A man's rank, in a modern society, seems to be determined



more according to his birth, or to his expence, than according to



his stock,or income.


