



                     THE FIRST DAY, THE FIRST NOVELL



     WHEREIN IS CONTAINED, HOW HARD A THING IT IS, TO DISTINGUISH

   GOODNESSE FROM HYPOCRISIE; AND HOW (UNDER THE SHADOW OF HOLINESSE)

            THE WICKEDNESSE OF ONE MAN, MAY DECEIVE MANY



  Messire Chappelet du Prat, by making a false confession, beguyled

an holy Religious man, and after dyed. And having (during his life

time) bene a very bad man, at his death, was reputed for a saint,

and called S. Chappelet.



  It is a matter most convenient (deare Ladies) that a man ought to

begin whatsoever he doth, in the great and glorious name of him, who

was the Creator of all things. Wherefore, seeing that I am the man

appointed, to begin this your invention of discoursing Novelties: I

intend to begin also with one of his wonderfull workes. To the end,

that this being heard, our hope may remaine on him, as the thing onely

permanent, and his name for ever to be praised by us. Now, as there is

nothing more certaine, but that even as temporall things are mortall

and transitory, so are they both in and out of themselves, full of

sorrow, paine, and anguish, and subjected to infinite dangers: So in

the same manner, we live mingled among them, seeming as part of

them, and cannot (without some error) continue or defend our selves,

if God by his especiall grace and favour, give us not strength and

good understanding. Which power we may not beleeve, that either it

descendeth to us, or liveth in us, by any merites of our owne; but

of his onely most gracious benignity. Mooved neverthelesse and

entreated by the intercessions of them, who were (as we are)

mortals; and having diligently observed his commandements, are now

with him in eternall blessednes. To whom (as to advocates and

procurators, informed by the experience of our frailty) wee are not to

present our prayers in the presence of so great a Judge; but onely

to himselfe, for the obtaining of all such things as his wisedome

knoweth to be most expedient for us. And well may we credit, that

his goodnesse is more fully enclined towards us, in his continuall

bounty and liberality; then the subtilty of mortall eye, can reach

into the secret of so divine a thought: and sometimes therefore we may

be beguiled in opinion, by electing such and such as our intercessors

before his high Majesty, who perhaps are farre off from him, or driven

into perpetuall exile, as unworthy to appeare in so glorious a

presence. For he, from whom nothing can be hidden, more regardeth

the sincerity of him that prayeth, then ignorant devotion, committed

to the trust of a heedlesse intercessor; and such prayers have alwaies

gracious acceptation in his sight. As manifestly will appeare, by

the Novell which I intend to relate; manifestly (I say) not as in

the judgement of God, but according to the apprehension of men.

  There was one named, Musciatto Francesi, who from beeing a most rich

and great Merchant in France, was become a Knight, and preparing to

goe into Tuscany, with Mounsieur Charles without Land, Brother to

the King of France (who was desired and incited to come thither by

Pope Boniface) found his affaires greatly intricated heere and there

(as oftentimes the matters of Merchants fall out to bee) and that very

hardly hee should sodainly unintangle them, without referring the

charge of them to divers persons. And for all he tooke indifferent

good order, onely he remained doubtfull, whom he might sufficiently

leave, to recover his debts among many Burgundians. And the rather was

his care the more heerein, because he knew the Burgundians to be

people of badde nature, rioters, brablers, full of calumny, and

without any faithfulnesse: so that he could not bethinke himselfe of

any man (how wicked soever he was) in whom he might repose trust to

meete with their lewdnesse. Having a long while examined his

thoughts upon this point, at last hee remembred one Master Chappelet

du Prat, who ofttimes had resorted to his house in Paris. And

because he was a man of little stature, yet handsome enough, the

French not knowing what this word Chappelet might meane, esteeming

he should be called rather (in their tongue) Chappell; imagined,

that in regard of his small stature, they termed him Chappelet, and

not Chappell, and so by the name of Chappelet he was every where

known, and by few or none acknowledged for Chappell.

  This Master Chappelet, was of so good and commendable life; that,

being a Notarie, he held it in high disdaine, that any of his

Contractes (although he made but few) should be found without

falshoode. And looke how many soever hee dealt withall, he would be

urged and required thereto, offering them his paines and travaile

for nothing, but to bee requited otherwise then by money; which

prooved to bee his much larger recompencing, and returned to him the

farre greater benefit. Hee tooke the onely pleasure of the world, to

beare false witnesse, if hee were thereto entreated, and

(oftentimes) when hee was not requested at all. Likewise because in

those times, great trust and beleefe was given to an oath, he making

no care or conscience to be perjured: greatly advantaged himselfe by

Law suites, in regard that many matters relyed upon his oath, and

delivering the truth according to his knowledge.

  He delighted (beyond measure) and addicted his best studies, to

cause enmities and scandals betweene kindred and friends, or any other

persons, agreeing well together; and the more mischiefe he could

procure in this kind, so much the more pleasure and delight tooke he

therein. If he were called to kill any one, or to do any other

villanous deede, he never would make deniall, but go to it very

willingly; and divers times it was well knowen, that many were cruelly

beaten, ye slaine by his hands. Hee was a most horrible blasphemer

of God and his Saints, upon the very least occasion, as being more

addicted to choller, then any other man could be. Never would he

frequent the Church, but basely contemned it, with the Sacraments

and religious rites therein administred, accounting them for vile

and unprofitable things: but very voluntarily would visit Tavernes,

and other places of dishonest accesse, which were continually pleasing

unto him, to satisfie his lust and inordinate lubricitie. Hee would

steale both in publike and private, even with such a conscience, as if

it were given to him by nature so to do. He was a great glutton and

a drunkarde, even he was not able to take any more: being also a

continuall gamester, and carrier of false Dice, to cheate with them

the very best Friends he had.

  But why do I waste time in such extent of words? When it may suffice

to say, that never was there a worse man borne; whose wickednesse

was for long time supported, by the favour, power, and Authoritie of

Monsieur Musciatto, for whose sake many wrongs and injuries were

patiently endured, as well by private persons (whom hee would abuse

notoriously) as others of the Court, betweene whom he made no

difference at all in his vile dealing. This Master Chappelet, being

thus remembred by Musciatto (who very well knew his life and

behaviour) he perfectly perswaded himselfe, that this was a man apt in

all respects, to meete with the treachery of the Burgundians:

whereupon, having sent for him, thus he beganne.

  Chappelet, thou knowest how I am wholly to retreate my selfe from

hence, and having some affaires among the Burgundians, men full of

wickednesse and deceite; I can bethinke my selfe of no meeter a man

then Chappelet, to recover such debts as are due to mee among them.

And because it falleth out so well, that thou art not now hindered

by any other businesse; if thou wilt undergoe this office for me, I

will procure thee favourable Letters from the Court, and give thee a

reasonable portion in all thou recoverest. Master Chappelet, seeing

himselfe idle, and greedy after worldly goods, considering that

Mounsieur Musciatto (who had beene alwayes his best buckler) was now

to depart from thence, without any dreaming on the matter, and

constrained thereto (as it were) by necessity, set downe his

resolution, and answered, that hee would gladly doe it.

  Having made their agreement together, and received from Musciatto

his expresse procuration, and also the Kings gracious Letters; after

that Musciatto was gone on his journey, Master Chappelet went to

Dijon, where he was unknowne (well-neere) of any. And there (quite

from his naturall disposition) he beganne benignely and graciously, in

recovering the debts due; which course he tooke the rather, because

they should have a further feeling of him in the end. Being lodged

in the house of two Florentine brethren, that living on their monies

usance; and (for Mounsieur Musciattoes sake) using him with honour and

respect: it fortuned that he fell sicke, and the two brethren sent for

Physitions to attend him, allowing their servants to be diligent about

him, making no spare of any thing, which gave the best likelyhood of

restoring his health. But all their paines proved to no purpose,

because he (honest man) being now growne aged, and having lived all

his life time very disorderly, fell day by day (according to the

Physicions judgement) from bad to worse, as no other way appeared

but death, whereat the brethren greatly grieved.

  Upon a day, neere to the Chamber where the sicke man lay, they

entred into this communication. What shall we doe (quoth the one to

the other) with this man? We are much hindered by him: for to send him

away (sicke as he is) we shall be greatly blamed thereby, and it

will be a manifest note of our weake wisedome; the people knowing that

first of all we gave him entertainement, and have allowed him honest

physicall attendance, and he not having any way injuried or offended

us, to let him be suddenly expulsed our house (sicke to death as he

is) it can be no way for our credit.

  On the other side, we are to consider also, that hee hath bin so

badde a man, as he will not now make any confession thereof, neither

receive the blessed Sacrament of the Church, and dying so without

confession; there is no Church that will accept his body, but it

must be buried in prophane ground, like to a Dogge. And yet if hee

would confesse himselfe, his sinnes are so many and monstrous, as

the like case also may happen, because there is not any Priest or

Religious person, that can or will absolve him. And being not

absolved, he must be cast into some ditch or pit, and then the

people of the Towne, as well in regard of the account we carry

heere, (which to them appeareth so little pleasing, as we are daily

pursued with their worst words) as also coveting our spoile and

overthrow, upon this accident will cry out and mutiny against us;

Behold these Lombard dogs, which are not to be received into the

Church, why should we suffer them to live heere among us? In furious

madnesse will they come upon us, and our house, where (peradventure)

not contended with robbing us of our goods, our lives will remaine

in their mercy and danger; so that, in what sort soever it happen,

this mans dying here, must needs be banefull to us.

  Master Chappelet, who (as we have formerly saide) was lodged neere

to the place where they thus conferred, having a subtle attention

(as oftentimes we see sicke persons to be possessed withall) heard all

these speeches spoken of him, and causing them to bee called unto him,

thus hee spake.

  I would not have you to be any way doubtfull of me; neither that you

should receive the least damage by me: I have heard what you have

said, and am certaine, that it will happen according to your words, if

matters should fall out as you conceite; but I am minded to deale

otherwise. I have committed so many offences against our Lord God,

in the whole current of my life; that now I intend one action at the

houre of my death, which I trust will make amends for all. Procure

therefore, I pray you, that the most holy and religious man that is to

be found (if there bee any one at all) may come unto me, and referre

the case then to me, for I will deale in such sort for you and my

selfe, that all shall be well, and you no way discontented.

  The two Brethren, although they had no great hope in his speeches,

went yet to a Monastery of Gray-Friars, and requested; that some one

holy and learned man, might come to heare the confession of a Lombard,

that lay very weake and sicke in their house. And one was granted unto

them, being an aged religious Frier, a great read master in the sacred

Scripture, a very venerable person, who being of good and sanctified

life, all the Citizens held him in great respect and esteeme, and on

hee went with them to their house. When he was come up into the

Chamber where Master Chappelet lay, and being there seated downe by

him; he beganne first to comfort him very lovingly, demanding also

of him, how many times he had bin at confession? Whereto Master

Chappelet (who never had bin shrived in all his life time) thus

replied.

  Holy Father, I alwayes used (as a common custome) to bee confessed

once (at the least) every weeke, albeit sometimes much more often; but

true it is, that being falne into this sicknesse, now eight daies

since I have not beene confest, so violent hath bene the extremity

of my weaknesse. My sonne (answered the good old man) thou hast done

well, and so keep thee still hereafter in that minde: but I plainly

perceive, seeing thou hast so often confessed thy selfe, that I

shall take the lesse labour in urging questions to thee.

  Master Chappelet replyed; Say not so good Father, for albeit I

have bene so oftentimes confessed, yet am I willing now to make a

generall confession, even of all sinnes comming to my remembrance,

from the very day of my birth, until this instant houre of my

shrift. And therefore I entreat you (holy Father) to make a particular

demand of everie thing, even as if I had never bene confessed at

all, and to make no respect of my sicknesse: for I had rather be

offensive to mine owne flesh, then by favoring or allowing it ease, to

hazard the perdition of my soule, which my Redeemer bought with so

precious a price.

  These words were highly pleasing to the holy Friar, and seemed to

him as an argument of a good conscience: Wherefore, after hee had much

commended this forwardnesse in him, he began to demand of him if he

had never offended with any Woman? Whereunto master Chappelet

(breathing forth a great sigh) answered.

  Holy Father, I am halfe ashamed to tell you the truth in this

case, as fearing least I should sinne in vaine-glory. Whereto the

Confessor replyed; Speake boldly sonne, and feare not, for in

telling the truth, bee it in confession or otherwise, a man can

never sinne. Then sayde Maister Chappelet, Father, seeing you give

me so good an assurance, I will resolve you faithfully heerein. I am

so true a Virgin-man in this matter, even as when I issued forth of my

mothers Wombe. O sonne (quoth the Friar) how happy and blessed of

God art thou? Well hast thou lived, and therein hast thou not meanly

merited, having had so much libertie to doe the contrary if thou

wouldest, wherein verie few of us can so answer for our selves.

  Afterward, he demanded of him, how much displeasing to God hee had

beene in the sinne of Gluttony? When (sighing againe greatly) hee

answered: Too much, and too often, good Father. For, over and beside

the Fasts of our Lent season, which everie yeare ought to bee duely

observed by devout people, I brought my selfe to such a customarie

use, that I could fast three dayes in every Weeke, with Bread and

Water. But indeede (holy Father) I confesse, that I have drunke

water with such a pleasing appetite and delight (especially in

praying, or walking on pilgrimages) even as greedy drunkards doe, in

drinking good Wine. And many times I have desired such Sallades of

small hearbes, as Women do gather abroad in the open fields, and

feeding onely upon them, without coveting after any other kinde of

sustenance, hath seemed much more pleasing to me, then I thought to

agree with the nature of Fasting, especially, when as it swerveth

from devotion, or is not done as it ought to bee.

 Sonne, Sonne, replied the Confessour, these sinnes are naturall,

and very light, and therefore I would not have thee to charge thy

conscience with them, more then is needfull. It happeneth to every man

(how holy soever he be) that after he hath fasted overlong, feeding

will be welcome to him, and drinking good drinke after his travaile. O

Sir, (said Maister Chappelet) never tell me this to comfort me, for

well you know, and I am not ignorant therein, that such things as

are done for the service of God, ought all to be performed purely, and

without any blemish of the minde; what otherwise is done, savoureth of

sinne. The Friar being well contented with his words, said: It is

not amisse that thou understandest it in this manner, and thy

conscience thus purely cleared, is no little comfort to me. But tell

me now concerning Avarice, hast thou sinned therein, by desiring

more then was reasonable, or withholding from others, such things as

thou oughtst not to detaine? Wherein Maister Chappelet answered.

Good Father, I would not have you to imagine, because you see me

lodged heere in the house of two Usurers, that therefore I am of any

such disposition. No truely Sir, I came hither to no other end, but

onely to chastise and admonish them in friendly manner, to clense

their mindes from such abhominable profit: And assuredly, I should

have prevailed therein, had not this violent sicknesse hindered mine

intention. But understand (holy Father) that my parents left me a rich

man, and immediatly after my Fathers death, the greater part of his

goods I gave away for Gods sake, and then, to sustaine mine owne life,

and to helpe the poore members of Jesus Christ, I betooke my selfe

to a meane estate of Merchandise, desiring none other then honest

gaine thereby, and evermore whatsoever benefit came to me; I

imparted halfe thereof to the poore, converting mine owne small

portion about my necessary affaires, which that other part would

scarcely serve to supply: yet alwayes God gave thereto such a

mercifull blessing, that my businesse dayly thrived more and more,

arising still from good to better.

  Well hast thou done therein good Sonne, said the Confessour: but how

oftentimes hast thou beene angry? Oh Sir (said Maister Chappelet)

therein I assure yee, I have often transgressed. And what man is

able to forbeare it; beholding the dayly actions of men to be so

dishonest? No care of keeping Gods Commandements, nor any feare of his

dreadfull judgements. Many times in a day, I have rather wished my

selfe dead then living, beholding youth pursuing idle vanities, to

sweare and forsweare themselves, tipling in Tavernes, and never

haunting Churches; but rather affecting the worlds follies, then any

such duties as they owe to God. Alas Sonne (quoth the Friar) this is a

good and holy anger, and I can impose no penance on thee for it. But

tell me, hath not rage or furie at any time so over-ruled thee, as

to commit murther or man-slaughter, or to speake evill of any man,

or to doe any other such kinde of injurie? Oh Father (answered Maister

Chappelet) you that seeme to be a man of God, how dare you use any

such vile words? If I had had the very least thought, to doe any

such act as you speake, doe you thinke that God would have suffered me

to live? These are deeds of darknesse, fit for villaines and wicked

livers, of which hellish crew, when at any time I have happened to

meet with some one of them, I have said; God, God convert thee.

  Worthy, and charitable words, replied the Friar: but tell me

Sonne, Didst thou ever beare false witnes against any man, or hast

spoken falsly, or taken ought from any one, contrary to the will of

the owner? Yes indeed Father, said Maister Chappelet, I have spoken

ill of another, because I have sometime seene one of my neighbors, who

with no meane shame of the world, would do nothing else but beat his

wife: and of him once I complained to the poore mans parents,

saying, that he never did it but when he was overcome with drinke.

Those were no ill words, quoth the Friar; but I remember you said,

that you were a Merchant: Did you ever deceive any, as some

Merchants use to doe? Truely Father, answered M. Chappelet, I thinke

not any, except one man, who one day brought me money which he owed me

for a certaine peece of cloath I sold him, and I put it into a purse

without accounting it. About a moneth afterward, I found that there

were foure small pence more then was due to mee: and never happening

to meete with the man againe, after I had kept them the space of a

whole yeare, I then gave them away unto foure poore people, for Gods

sake.

  A small matter, said the Friar, and truly payed backe againe to

the owner, in bestowing them on the poore. Many other questions he

demanded of him, whereto still he answered in the same manner. But

before he proceeded to absolution, Master Chappelet spake thus: I have

yet one sinne more, which I have not revealed to you: when being urged

by the Friar to confesse it, he said. I remember, that I should afford

one day in the weeke, to cleanse the house of my soule, for better

entertainement to my Lord and Saviour, and yet I have done no such

reverence to the Sunday or Sabbath, as I ought to have done. A small

fault Sonne, replyed the Friar. O no (quoth Master Chappelet)

doe not terme it a small fault, because Sunday being a holy day,

is highly to be reverenced: for as on that day, our blessed Lord arose

from death to life. But (quoth the Confessor) hast thou done nothing

else on that day? Yes, said he, being forgetfull of my selfe, once I

did spet in Gods Church. The Friar smiling, said: Alas Sonne, that

is a matter of no moment; for wee that are Religious persons, doe

use to spet there every day. The more is your shame, answered Master

Chappelet, for no place ought to bee kept more pure and cleane then

the sacred Temple, wherein our daily sacrifices are offered up to God.

  In this manner he held on an houre and more, uttering the like

transgressions as these; and at last began to sigh very

passionately, and to shed a few teares, as one that was skilfull

enough in such dissembling pranks: whereat the Confessor being much

mooved, saide: Alas Sonne, what aylest thou? Oh Father (quoth

Chappelet) there remaineth yet one sinne more upon my conscience,

wherof I never at any time made confession, so shamefull it

appeareth to mee to disclose it; and I am partly perswaded, that God

will never pardon me for that sinne. How now Sonne? said the Friar,

never say so; for if all the sinnes that ever were committed by men,

or shall be committed so long as the World endureth, were onely in one

man, and he repenting them, and being so contrite for them, as I see

thou art; the grace and mercy of God is so great, that upon penitent

confession, he will freely pardon him, and therefore spare not to

speake it boldly. Alas Father (said Chappelet, still in pretended

weeping) this sinne of mine is so great, that I can hardly beleeve (if

your earnest prayers do not assist me) that ever I shall obtaine

remission for it. Speake it Sonne, said the Friar, and feare not, I

promise that I will pray to God for thee.

  Master Chappelet still wept and sighed, and continued silent,

notwithstanding all the Confessors comfortable perswasions; but

after hee had helde him a long while in suspence, breathing forth a

sighe, even as if his very heart would have broken, he saide; Holy

Father, seeing you promise to pray to God for me, I will reveale it to

you: Know then, that when I was a little boy, I did once curse my

Mother; which he had no sooner spoken, but he wrung his hands, and

greeved extraordinarily. Oh good Son, saide the Friar: doth that seeme

so great a sinne to thee? Why, men doe daily blaspheme our Lord God,

and yet neverthelesse, upon their hearty repentance, he is alwayes

ready to forgive them; and wilt not thou beleeve to obtaine remission,

for a sinne so ignorantly committed? Weepe no more deare Sonne, but

comfort thy selfe and rest resolved, that if thou wert one of them,

who nayled our blessed Saviour to his Crosse; yet being so truly

repentant, as I see thou art, he would freely forgive thee. Say you so

Father? quoth Chappelet. What mine owne deare Mother? that bare me

in her wombe nine moneths, day and night, and afterwards fed me with

her breasts a thousand times, can I be pardoned for cursing her? Oh

no, it is too haynous a sinne, and except you pray to God very

instantly for me, he will not forgive me.

  When the religious man perceived, that nothing more was to bee

confessed by Master Chappelet; he gave him absolution, and his owne

benediction beside, reputing him to be a most holy man, as verily

beleeving all that hee had said. And who would not have done the like,

hearing a man to speake in this manner, and being upon the very

point of death? Afterward, he saide unto him, Master Chappelet, by

Gods grace you may be soone restored to health, but if it so come to

passe, that God doe take your blessed and well disposed soule to his

mercy, will it please you to have your body buried in our Convent?

Whereto Master Chappelet answered; I thanke you Father for your good

motion, and sorry should I be, if my friends did bury me any where

else, because you have promised to pray to God for me; and beside, I

have alwayes carried a religious devotion to your Order. Wherefore,

I beseech you, so soone as you are come home to your Convent, prevaile

so much by your good meanes, that the holy Eucharist, consecrated this

morning on your high Altar, may be brought unto me: for although I

confesse my selfe utterly unworthy, yet I purpose (by your reverend

permission) to receive it, as also your holy and latest unction, to

this ende, that having lived a greevous sinner, I may yet (at the

last) die a Christian. These words were pleasing to the good olde man,

and he caused every thing to be performed, according as Master

Chappelet had requested.

  The two Brethren, who much doubted the dissembling of Chappelet,

being both in a small partition, which sundered the sicke mans Chamber

from theirs, heard and understood the passage of all, betweene him and

the ghostly Father, being many times scarcely able to refraine from

laughter, at the fraudulent course of his confession. And often they

said within themselves, What manner of man is this, whom neither

age, sickenesse, nor terror of death so neere approaching, and

sensible to his owne soule, nor that which is much more, God, before

whose judgement he knowes not how soone he shall appeare, or else be

sent to a more fearefull place; none of these can alter his wicked

disposition, but that he will needes die according as he hath lived?

Notwithstanding, seeing he had so ordered the matter, that he had

buriall freely allowed him, they cared for no more.

  After that Chappelet had received the Communion, and the other

Ceremonies appointed for him; weakenesse encreasing on him more and

more, the very same day of his goodly confession, he died (not long

after) towards the evening. Whereupon the two Brethren tooke order,

that all needefull things should be in a readinesse, to have him

buried honourably; sending to acquaint the Fathers of the Convent

therewith, that they might come to say their Vigilles, according to

precedent custome, and then on the morrow to fetch the body. The

honest Friar that had confessed him, hearing he was dead, went to

the Prior of the Convent, and by sound of the house Bell, caused all

the Brethren to assemble together, giving them credibly to understand,

that Master Chappelet was a very holy man, as appeared by all the

parts of his confession, and made no doubt, but that many miracles

would be wrought by his sanctified body, perswading them to fetch it

thither with all devoute solemnity and reverence: whereto the Prior,

and all the credulous Brethren presently condiscended very gladly.

  When night was come, they went all to visit the dead body of

Master Chappelet, where they used an especiall and solemne Vigill; and

on the morrow, apparelled in their richest Coapes and Vestiments, with

bookes in their hands, and the Crosse borne before them, singing in

the forme of a very devoute procession, they brought the body

pompeously into their Church, accompanied with all the people of the

Towne, both men and women. The Father Confessor, ascending up into the

Pulpit, preached wonderfull things of him, and the rare holinesse of

his life; his fastes, his virginity, simplicity, innocency, and true

sanctity, recounting also (among other especiall observations) what

Chappelet had confessed, as this most great and greevous sinne, and

how hardly he could be perswaded, that God would grant him pardon

for it. Whereby he tooke occasion to reprove the people then

present, saying; And you (accursed of God) for the verie least and

trifling matter hapning, will not spare to blaspheme God, his

blessed Mother, and the whole Court of heavenly Paradise: Oh, take

example by this singular man, this Saint-like man, nay, a very Saint

indeede.

  Many additions more he made, concerning his faithfulnesse, truth,

and integrity; so that, by the vehement asseveration of his words

(whereto all the people there present gave credible beleefe) he

provoked them unto such zeale and earnest devotion; that the Sermon

was no sooner ended, but (in mighty crowds and throngs) they pressed

about the Biere, kissing his hands and feete, and all the garments

about him were torne in peeces, as precious Reliques of so holy a

person, and happy they thought themselves, that could get the smallest

peece or shred of any thing that came neere to his body: and thus they

continued all the day, the body lying still open, to be visited in

this manner.

  When night was come, they buried him in a goodly Marble tombe,

erected in a faire Chappell purposely; and for many dayes after

following, it was most strange to see, how the people of the Country

came thither on heapes, with holy Candles and other offerings, with

Images of waxe fastened to the Tombe, in signe of Sacred and solemne

Vowes, to this new created Saint. And so farre was spread the fame and

renowne of his sanctity, devotion, and integrity of life, maintained

constantly by the Fathers of the Convent; that if any one fell sicke

in neede, distresse, or adversity, they would make their Vowes to no

other Saint but him: naming him (as yet to this day they do) Saint

Chappelet, affirming upon their Oathes, that infinite miracles were

there daily performed by him, and especially on such, as came in

devotion to visit his shrine.

  In this manner lived and died Master Chappelet du Prat, who before

he became a Saint, was as you have heard: and I will not deny it to be

impossible, but that he may bee at rest among other blessed bodies.

For although he lived lewdly and wickedly, yet such might be his

contrition in the latest extreamity, that (questionlesse) he might

finde mercie. But, because such things remaine unknowne to us, and

speaking by outward appearance, vulgar judgement will censure

otherwise of him, and thinke him to be rather in perdition, then in so

blessed a place as Paradice. But referring that to the Omnipotents

appointment, whose clemencie hath alwayes beene so great to us, that

he regards not our errors, but the integrity of our Faith, making

(by meanes of our continuall Mediator) of an open enemy, a converted

sonne and servant. And as I began in his name, so will I conclude,

desiring that it may evermore be had in due reverence, and referre

we our selves thereto in all our necessities, with this setled

assurance, that he is alwayes ready to heare us. And so he ceased.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE SECOND NOVELL



          WHEREIN IS CONTAINED AND EXPRESSED, THE LIBERALITY AND

            GOODNESSE OF GOD, EXTENDED TO THE CHRISTIAN FAITH



  Abraham a Jew, being admonished or advised by a friend of his,

named Jehannot de Chevigny, travailed from Paris unto Rome: And

beholding there the wicked behaviour of men in the Church, returned

backe to Paris againe, where yet (neverthelesse) he became a

Christian.



  The Novell recited by Pamphilus, was highly pleasing to the company,

and much commended by the Ladies: and after it had beene diligently

observed among them, the Queene commanded Madam Neiphila (who was

seated neerest to Pamphilus) that, in relating another of hers, she

should follow on in the pastime thus begun. She being no lesse

gracious in countenance, then merrily disposed; made answere, that

shee would obey her charge, and began in this manner.

  Pamphilus hath declared to us, by his Tale, how the goodnesse of God

regardeth not our errors, when they proceede from things which wee

cannot discerne. And I intend to approove by mine, what argument of

infallible truth, the same benignity delivereth of it selfe, by

enduring patiently the faults of them, that (both in word and worke)

should declare unfaigned testimony of such gracious goodnesse, and not

to live so dissolutely as they doe. To the end, that others

illumined by their light of life, may beleeve with the stronger

constancy of minde.

  As I have heeretofore heard (Gracious Ladies) there lived a

wealthy Marchant in Paris, being a Mercer, or seller of Silkes,

named Jehannot de Chevigny, a man of faithfull, honest, and upright

dealing; who held great affection and friendship with a very rich Jew,

named Abraham, that was a Merchant also, and a man of very direct

conversation. Jehannot well noting the honesty and loyall dealing of

this Jew, began to have a Religious kinde of compassion in his

soule, much pittying that a man so good in behaviour, so wise and

discreete in all his actions, should be in danger of perdition

thorow want of Faith. In which regard, lovingly he began to intreate

him, that he would leave the errors of his Jewish beleefe, and

follow the truth of Christianity, which he evidently saw (as being

good and holy) daily to prosper and enlarge it selfe, whereas on the

contrary, his profession decreased, and grew to nothing.

  The Jew made answer, that he beleeved nothing to be so good and

holy, as the Jewish Religion, and having beene borne therein, therein

also he purposed to live and dye, no matter whatsoever being able to

remove him from that resolution. For all this stiffe deniall,

Jehannot would not so give him over; but pursued him still day by

day, reitterating continually his former speeches to him: delivering

infinite excellent and pregnant reasons, that Merchants themselves

were not ignorant, how farre the Christian faith excelled the Jewish

falshoods. And albeit the Jew was a very learned man in his owne

Law, yet notwithstanding the intire amity he bare to Jehannot, or

(perhaps) his words fortified by the blessed Spirit, were so

prevailant with him, that the Jew felt a pleasing apprehension in

them, though as yet his obstinacie stoode farre off from Conversion.

But as he thus continued strong in opinion, so Jehannot lefte not

hourely to labour him: insomuch, that the Jew being conquered by

such earnest and continuall importunity, one day spake to Jehannot,

saying.

  My worthy friend Jehannot, thou art extremely desirous, that I

should convert to Christianitie, and I am well contented to doe it;

onely upon this condition: That first I wil journey to Rome, to see

him whom thou sayest, is Gods general Vicar here on earth, and to

consider on the course of his life and manners, and likewise of his

Colledge of Cardinals. If he and they doe appeare such men to mee,

as thy speeches affirme them to be, and thereby I may comprehend

that thy Faith and Religion is better then mine, as with no meane

paines thou endevourest to perswade mee, I will become a Christian

as thou art: but if I finde it otherwise, I will continue as I am, a

Jew.

  Jehannot hearing these words, became exceeding sorrowfull, and sayd

within himselfe; I have lost all the paines which I did thinke to be

well employed, as hoping to have this man converted heere. For, if

he go to the Court of Rome, and behold there the wickednes of the

Priests lives, farewell all hope in me, of ever seeing him to become a

Christian. But rather, were he already a Christian, without all

question he would turne a Jew. And so going neerer to Abraham, he

said. Alas my loving friend, why shouldst thou undertake such a

tedious travel, and so great a charge, as thy journey from hence to

Rome will cost thee? Consider, that to a rich man (as thou art)

travaile by land or Sea is full of infinite dangers. Doest thou not

thinke, that here are Religious men enow, who wil gladly bestow

Baptisme upon thee? To mee therefore it plainely appeareth, that

such a voyage is to no purpose. If thou standest upon any doubt or

scruple, concerning the faith whereto I wish thee; where canst thou

desire conference with greater Doctours, or men more learned in all

respects, then this famous Cittie doth affoord thee, to resolve thee

in any questionable case? Thou must thinke, that the Prelates are such

there, as heere thou seest them to be, and yet they must needes be

in much better condition at Rome, because they are neere to the

principall Pastor. And therefore, if thou wilt credit my counsell,

reserve this journey to some time more convenient, when the Jubilee of

generall Pardon happeneth, and then (perchance) I will beare thee

company, and go along with thee as in vowed Pilgrimage.

  Whereto the Jew replyed: I beleeve Jehannot that all which thou hast

said, may be so. But, to make short with thee, I am fully determined

(if thou wouldst have me a Christian, as thou instantly urgest me to

bee) to goe thither, for otherwise, I will continue as I am.

Jehannot perceyving his setled purpose, said: Goe then in Gods name.

But perswaded himselfe, that hee would never become a Christian, after

he had once seene the Court of Rome: neverthelesse, he counted his

labour not altogither lost, in regard he bestowed it to a good end,

and honest intentions are to be commended.

  The Jew mounted on horse-backe, and made no lingering in his journey

to Rome; where being arrived, he was very honourably entertained by

other Jewes dwelling in Rome. And during the time of his abiding there

(without revealing to any one the reason of his comming thither)

very heedfully he observed the maner of the Popes life, of the

Cardinals, Prelates, and all the Courtiers. And being a man very

discreet and judicious, hee apparantly perceived, both by his owne

eye, and further information of friends; that from the highest to

the lowest (without any restraint, remorse of conscience, shame, or

feare of punishment) all sinned in abhominable luxurie, and not

naturally onely, but in foule Sodomie, so that the credite of

Strumpets and Boyes was not small, and yet might be too easily

obtayned. Moreover, drunkards, belly-Gods, and servants of the paunch,

more then of any thing else (even like brutish beasts after their

luxury) were every where to be met withall. And upon further

observation, hee saw all men so covetous and greedie of Coyne, that

every thing was bought and solde for ready money, not onely the

blood of men, but (in plaine termes) the faith of Christians, yea, and

matters of divinest qualities, how, or to whomsoever appertaining,

were it for Sacrifices or Benefices, whereof was made no mean

merchandize, and more Brokers were there to be found (then in Paris

attending upon all Trades) of manifest Symonie, under the nice name of

Negotiation, and for gluttony, not sustentation: even as if God had

not knowne the signification of vocables, nor the intentions of wicked

hearts, but would suffer himselfe to bee deceived by the outward names

of things, as wretched men commonly use to doe.

  These things, and many more (fitter for silence, then for

publication) were so deepely displeasing to the Jew, being a most

sober and modest man; that he had soone seene enough, resolving on his

returne to Paris, which very speedily he performed. And when

Jehannot heard of his arrivall, crediting much rather other newes from

him, then ever to see him a converted Christian; he went to welcome

him, and kindly they feasted one another. After some few dayes of

resting, Jehannot demanded of him; what he thought of our holy

Father the Pope and his Cardinals, and generally of all the other

Courtiers? Whereto the Jew readily answered; It is strange Jehannot,

that God should give them so much as he doth. For I will truely tell

thee, that if I had beene able to consider all those things, which

there I have both heard and seene: I could then have resolved my

selfe, never to have found in any Priest, either sanctity, devotion,

good worke, example of honest life, or any good thing else beside. But

if a man desire to see luxury, avarice, gluttony, and such wicked

things, yea, worse, if worse may be, and held in generall estimation

of all men; let him but goe to Rome, which I thinke rather to be the

forge of damnable actions, then any way leaning to grace or goodnesse.

And, for ought I could perceive, me thinkes your chiefe Pastour, and

(consequently) all the rest of his dependants, doe strive so much as

they may (with all their engine arte and endevour) to bring to

nothing, or else to banish quite out of the world, Christian Religion,

whereof they should be the support and foundation.

  But because I perceive, that their wicked intent will never come

to passe, but contrariwise, that your faith enlargeth it selfe,

shining every day much more cleare and splendant: I gather thereby

evidently, that the blessed Spirit is the true ground and defence

thereof, as being more true and holy then any other. In which respect,

whereas I stood stiffe and obstinate against the good admonitions, and

never minded to become a Christian: now I freely open my heart unto

thee, that nothing in the world can or shall hinder me, but I will

be a Christian, as thou art. Let us therefore presently goe to the

Church, and there (according to the true custome of your holy

faiths) helpe me to be baptized.

  Jehannot, who expected a farre contrary conclusion then this,

hearing him speake it with such constancy; was the very gladdest man

in the world, and went with him to the Church of Nostre Dame in Paris,

where he requested the Priests there abiding, to bestow baptisme on

Abraham, which they joyfully did, hearing him so earnestly to desire

it. Jehannot was his Godfather, and named him John, and afterward,

by learned Divines he was more fully instructed in the grounds of

our faith; wherein he grew of great understanding, and led a very

vertuous life.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE THIRD NOVELL



            WHEREBY THE AUTHOR, APPROVING THE CHRISTIAN FAITH,

         SHEWETH, HOW BENEFICIALL A SODAINE AND INGENIOUS ANSWERE

         MAY FALL OUT TO BEE, ESPECIALLY WHEN A MAN FINDS HIMSELFE

                         IN SOME EVIDENT DANGER



  Melchisedech a Jew, by recounting a Tale of three Rings, to the

great Soldan, named Saladine, prevented a great danger which was

prepared for him.



  Madame Neiphila having ended her Discourse, which was well allowed

of by all the company; it pleased the Queene, that Madame Philomena

should next succeede in order, who thus began.

  The Tale delivered by Neiphila, maketh mee remember a doubtfull

case, which sometime hapned to another Jew. And because that God,

and the truth of his holy Faith, hath bene already very well

discoursed on: it shall not seeme unfitting (in my poore opinion) to

descend now into the accidents of men. Wherefore, I will relate a

matter unto you, which being attentively heard and considered; may

make you much more circumspect, in answering to divers questions and

demands, then (perhaps) otherwise you would be. Consider then (most

woorthy assembly) that like as folly or dulnesse, many times hath

overthrowne some men from place of eminencie, into most great and

greevous miseries: even so, discreet sense and good understanding,

hath delivered many out of irksome perils, and seated them in safest

security. And to prove it true, that folly hath made many fall from

high authority, into poore and despised calamity; may be avouched by

infinite examples, which now were needelesse to remember: But, that

good sense and able understanding, may proove to be the occasion of

great desolation, without happy prevention, I will declare unto you in

very few words, and make it good according to my promise.

  Saladine, was a man so powerfull and valiant, as not onely his

very valour made him Soldan of Babylon, and also gave him many signall

victories, over Kings of the Sarrazens, and of Christians likewise.

Having in divers Warres, and other magnificent employments, of his

owne, wasted all his treasure, and (by reason of some sodaine accident

happening to him) standing in neede to use some great summe of

money, yet not readily knowing where, or how to procure it; he

remembred a rich Jew named Melchisedech, that lent out money to use or

interest in the City of Alexandria. This man he imagined best able

to furnish him, if he could be won to do it willingly: but he was

knowne to be so gripple and miserable, that hardly any meanes would

drawe him to it. In the end, constrained by necessity, and labouring

his wits for some apt device whereby he might have it: he concluded,

though hee might not compell him to do it, yet by a practise

shadowed with good reason to ensnare him. And having sent for him,

entertained him very familiarly in his Court, and sitting downe by

him, thus began.

  Honest man, I have often heard it reported by many, that thou art

very skilfull, and in cases concerning God, thou goest beyond all

other of these times: wherefore, I would gladly bee informed by

thee, which of those three Lawes or Religions, thou takest to be

truest; that of the Jew, the other of the Sarazen, or that of the

Christian? The Jew, being a very wise man, plainely perceived, that

Saladine sought to entrap him in his answere, and so to raise some

quarrell against him. For, if he commended any one of those Lawes

above the other, he knew that Saladine had what he aymed at.

Wherefore, bethinking himselfe to shape such an answere, as might no

way trouble or entangle him: summoning all his sences together, and

considering, that dallying with the Soldane might redound to his no

meane danger, thus he replied.

  My Lord, the question propounded by you, is faire and worthy, and to

answere my opinion truely thereof, doth necessarily require some

time of consideration, if it might stand with your liking to allow it:

but if not, let me first make entrance to my reply, with a pretty

tale, and well worth the hearing. I have oftentimes heard it reported,

that (long since) there was a very wealthy man, who (among other

precious Jewels of his owne) had a goodly Ring of great valew; the

beauty and estimation whereof, made him earnestly desirous to leave it

as a perpetuall memory and honour to his successors. Whereupon, he

willed and ordained, that he among his male children, with whom this

Ring (being left by the Father) should be found in custody after his

death; hee and none other, was to bee reputed his heire, and to be

honoured and reverenced by all the rest, as being the prime and

worthiest person. That Sonne, to whom this Ring was left by him,

kept the same course to his posterity, dealing (in all respects) as

his predecessor had done; so that (in short time) the Ring (from

hand to hand) had many owners by Legacie.

  At length, came to the hand of one, who had three sonnes, all of

them goodly and vertuous persons, and verie obedient to their

Father: in which regard, he affected them all equally, without any

difference or partiall respect. The custome of this Ring being

knowne to them, each one of them (coveting to beare esteeme above

the other) desired (as hee could best make his meanes) his Father,

that in regard he was now growne very old, he would leave that Ring to

him, whereby he should bee acknowledged for his heire. The good man,

who loved no one of them more then the other, knew not how to make his

choise, nor to which of them he should leave the Ring: yet having past

his promise to them severally, he studied by what meanes to satisfie

them all three. Wherefore, secretly having conferred with a curious

and excellent Goldsmith, hee caused two other Rings to bee made, so

really resembling the first made Ring, that himselfe (when he had them

in his hand) could not distinguish which was the right one.

  Lying upon his death-bed, and his Sonnes then plying him by their

best opportunities, he gave to each of them a Ring. And they (after

his death) presuming severally upon their right to the inheritance and

honor, grew to great contradiction and square: each man producing then

his Ring, which were so truely all alike in resemblance, as no one

could know the right Ring from the other. And therefore, suite in Law,

to distinguish the true heire to his Father, continued long time,

and so it dooth yet to this very day. In like manner my good Lord,

concerning those three Lawes given by God the Father, to three such

people as you have propounded: each of them do imagine that they

have the heritage of God, and his true Law, and also duely to performe

his Commandements; but which of them do so indeede, the question (as

of the three Rings) is yet remaining.

  Saladine well perceyving, that the Jew was too cunning to bee caught

in his snare, and had answered so well, that to doe him further

violence, would redound unto his perpetuall dishonour; resolved to

reveale his neede and extremity, and try if hee would therein friendly

sted him. Having disclosed the matter, and how he purposed to have

dealt with him, if he had not returned so wise an answere; the Jew

lent him so great a sum of money as hee demanded, and Saladine repayed

it againe to him justly, giving him other great gifts beside:

respecting him as his especiall friend, and maintaining him in very

honourable condition, neere unto his owne person.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE FOURTH NOVELL



       WHEREIN MAY BEE NOTED, THAT SUCH MEN AS WILL REPROVE THOSE

      ERROURS IN OTHERS, WHICH REMAINE IN THEMSELVES, COMMONLY ARE

                  THE AUTHORS OF THEIR OWNE REPREHENSION



  A Monke having committed an offence, deserving to be very greevously

punished, freed himselfe from the paine to be inflicted on him, by

wittily reprehending his Abbot, with the very same fault.



  So ceased Madame Philotnena, after the conclusion of her Tale:

when Dioneus sitting next unto her, (without tarrying for any other

command from the Queene, knowing by the order formerly begun, that hee

was to follow in the same course) spake in this manner.

  Gracious Ladies, if I faile not in understanding your generall

intention, we are purposely assembled heere to tell Tales; and

especially such as may please our selves. In which respect, because

nothing shold be done disorderly, I hold it lawfull for every one

(as our Queene decreed before her Dignity) to relate such a

Noveltie, as in their owne judgement may cause most contentment.

Wherefore having heard that by the good admonitions of Jehannot de

Chevigny, Abraham the Jew was advised to the salvation of his soule,

and Melchisedech (by his witty understanding) defended his riches from

the traines of Saladine: I now purpose to tell you in a few plaine

words, without feare of receiving any reprehension, how cunningly a

Monke compassed his deliverance, from a punishment intended towards

him.

  There was in the Country of Lunigiana (which is not far distant from

our owne) a Monastery, which sometime was better furnished with

holinesse and Religion, then now adayes they are: wherein lived (among

divers other) a yong Novice Monke, whose hot and lusty disposition

(being in the vigour of his yeeres) was such, as neither Fasts nor

prayers had any great power over him. It chanced on a fasting day

about high noon, when all the other Monkes were asleep in their

Dormitaries or Dorters, this frolicke Friar was walking alone in their

Church, which stoode in a very solitarie place, where ruminating on

many matters by himselfe, hee espyed a prettie handsome Wench (some

Husbandmans daughter in the Countrey, that had beene gathering

rootes and hearbes in the field) upon her knees before in Altar;

whom he had no sooner seene, but immediately hee felt effeminate

temptations, and such as ill fitted with his profession.

  Lascivious desire, and no religious devotion, made him draw neere

her, and whether under shrift (the onely cloake to compasse carnal

affections) or some other as close conference to as pernitious and

vile a purpose, I know not: but so farre he prevailed upon her

frailety, and such a bargaine passed betweene them, that from the

Church, he wonne her to his Chamber, before any person could

perceive it. Now, while this yong lusty Monke (transported with

overfond affection) was more carelesse of his dalliance, then he

should have bene: the Lord Abbot being newly arisen from sleepe, and

walking softly about the Cloyster, came to the Monkes Dorter doore,

where hearing what noyse was made betweene them, and a feminine

voyce more strange then hee was wont to heare; he layed his eare close

to the Chamber doore, and plainly perceived, that a woman was

within. Wherewith being much moved, he intended sodainly to make him

open the doore; but (upon better consideration) hee conceyved it farre

more fitting for him, to returne backe to his owne Chamber, and

tarry till the Monke should come forth.

  The Monke, though his delight with the Damosell was extraordinary,

yet feare and suspition followed upon it; for, in the very height of

all his wantonnesse, he heard a soft treading about the doore. And

prying thorow a small crevice in the same dore, perceived apparantly,

that the Abbot himselfe stood listening there, and could not be

ignorant but that the Maide was with him in the Chamber. As after

pleasure ensueth paine, for the veniall Monke knew well enough (though

wanton heate would not let him heede it before) that most greevous

punishment must bee inflicted on him, which made him sad beyond all

measure: Neverthelesse, without disclosing his dismay to the yong

Maiden, he began to consider with himselfe on many meanes, whereby

to find out one that might best fit his turne. And suddenly

conceited an apt stratagem, which sorted to such effect as he would

have it: whereupon, seeming satisfied for that season, he tolde the

Damosell, that (being carefull of her credit) as hee had brought her

in unseene of any, so he would free her from thence againe, desiring

her to tarrie there (without making any noyse at all) untill such time

as he returned to her.

  Going forth of the chamber, and locking it fast with the key, he

went directly to the Lord Abbots lodging, and delivering him the saide

key (as every Monke used to doe the like, when he went abroade out

of the Convent) setting a good countenance on the matter, boldly

saide; My Lord, I have not yet brought in all my part of the wood,

which lieth ready cut downe in the Forrest; and having now

convenient time to doe it, if you please to give me leave, I will

goe and fetch it. The Abbot perswading himselfe, that he had not beene

discovered by the Monke, and to be resolved more assuredly in the

offence committed; being not a little jocund of so happy an

accident, gladly tooke the key, and gave him leave to fetch the wood.

  No sooner was he gone, but the Abbot beganne to consider with

himselfe, what he were best to doe in this case, either (in the

presence of all the other Monkes) to open the Chamber doore, that so

the offence being knowne to them all, they might have no occasion of

murmuring against him, when he proceeded in the Monkes punishment;

or rather should first understand of the Damosell her selfe, how,

and in what manner shee was brought thither. Furthermore, he

considered, that shee might be a woman of respect, or some such mans

daughter, as would not take it well, to have her disgraced before

all the Monkes. Wherefore hee concluded, first to see (himselfe)

what shee was, and then (afterward) to resolve upon the rest. So going

very softly to the Chamber, and entring in, locked the doore fast with

the key, when the poore Damosell thinking it had beene the gallant

young Monke; but finding it to be the Lord Abbot, shee fell on her

knees weeping, as fearing now to receive publike shame, by being

betrayed in this unkinde manner.

  My Lord Abbot looking demurely on the Maide, and perceiving her to

be faire, feate, and lovely; felt immediately (although he was olde)

no lesse spurring on to fleshly desires, then the young Monke before

had done; whereupon he beganne to conferre thus privately with

himselfe. Why should I not take pleasure, when I may freely have it?

Cares and molestations I endure every day, but sildome find such

delights prepared for me. This is a delicate sweete young Damosell,

and here is no eye that can discover me. If I can enduce her to doe as

I would have her, I know no reason why I should gaine-say it. No man

can know it, or any tongue blaze it abroade; and sinne so concealed,

is halfe pardoned. Such a faire fortune as this is, perhaps

hereafter will never befall me; and therefore I hold it wisedome, to

take such a benefit when a man may enjoy it.

  Upon this immodest meditation, and his purpose quite altered which

he came for; he went neerer to her, and very kindly began to comfort

her, desiring her to forbeare weeping: and (by further insinuating

speeches) acquainted her with his amorous intention. The Maide, who

was made neither of yron nor diamond, and seeking to prevent one shame

by another, was easily wonne to the Abbots will, which caused him to

embrace and kisse her often.

  Our lusty young novice Monke, whom the Abbot imagined to bee gone

for wood, had hid himselfe aloft upon the roofe of the Dorter,

where, when he saw the Abbot enter alone into the Chamber, he lost a

great part of his former feare, promising to himselfe a kinde of

perswasion, that somewhat would ensue to his better comfort; but

when he beheld him lockt into the Chamber, then his hope grew to

undoubted certainty. A little chincke or crevice favoured him, whereat

he could both heare and see, whatsoever was done or spoken by them:

so, when the Abbot thought hee had staide long enough with the

Damosell, leaving her still there, and locking the doore fast

againe, hee returned thence to his owne Chamber.

  Within some short while after, the Abbot knowing the Monke to be

in the Convent, and supposing him to be lately returned with the wood,

determined to reprove him sharpely, and to have him closely

imprisoned, that the Damosell might remaine solie to himselfe. And

causing him to be called presently before him, with a very stearne and

angry countenance, giving him many harsh and bitter speeches,

commanded, that he should be clapt in prison.

  The Monke very readily answered, saying. My good Lord, I have not

yet beene so long in the Order of Saint Benedict, as to learne all the

particularities thereto belonging. And beside Sir, you never shewed

mee or any of my Brethren, in what manner we young Monkes ought to use

women, as you have otherwise done for our custome of prayer and

fasting. But seeing you have so lately therein instructed mee, and

by your owne example how to doe it: I heere solemnely promise you,

if you please to pardon me but this one error, I will never faile

therein againe, but dayly follow what I have seene you doe.

  The Abbot, being a man of quicke apprehension, perceived instantly

by this answere; that the Monke not onely knew as much as he did,

but also had seene (what was intended) that hee should not. Wherefore,

finding himselfe to be as faulty as the Monke, and that hee could

not shame him, but worthily had deserved as much himselfe; pardoning

him, and imposing silence on eithers offence: they convayed the

poore abused Damosell forth of their doores, she purposing (never

after) to transgresse in the like manner.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE FIFT NOVELL



         DECLARING, THAT WISE AND VERTUOUS LADIES, OUGHT TO HOLD

         THEIR CHASTITIE IN MORE ESTEEME, THEN THE GREATNESSE AND

        TREASURES OF PRINCES: AND THAT A DISCREETE LORD SHOULD NOT

                          OFFER MODESTIE VIOLENCE



  The Lady Marquesse of Montferrat, with a Banquet of Hennes, and

divers other gracious speeches beside, repressed the fond love of

the King of France.



  The Tale reported by Dioneus, at the first hearing of the Ladies,

began to rellish of some immodestie, as the bashfull blood mounting up

into their faces, delivered by apparant testimonie. And beholding

one another with scarse-pleasing lookes, during all the time it was in

discoursing, no sooner had he concluded: but with a few milde and

gentle speeches, they gave him a modest reprehension, and meaning to

let him know that such tales ought not to be tolde among women.

Afterward, the Queene commaunded Madam Fiammetta, (sitting on a

banke of flowers before her) to take her turne as next in order; and

she, smiling with such a virgin blush, as very beautifully became her,

began in this manner.

  It is no little joy to mee, that we understand so well (by the

discourses already past) what power consisteth in the delivery of wise

and readie answeres; And because it is a great part of sence and

judgement in men, to affect women of greater birth and quality then

themselves, as also an admirable fore-sight in women, to keepe off

from being surprized in love, by Lords going beyond them in degree:

a matter offereth it selfe to my memory, well deserving my speech

and your attention, how a Gentlewoman (both in word and deede)

should defend her honor in that kind, when importunity laboureth to

betray it.

  The Marquesse of Montferrat was a worthy and valiant Knight, who

being Captaine Generall for the Church, the necessary service required

his company on the Seas, in a goodly Army of the Christians against

the Turkes. Upon a day, in the Court of King Philip, sirnamed the

one eyed King (who likewise made preparation in France, for a royall

assistance to that expedition) as many speeches were delivered,

concerning the valour and manhoode of this Marquesse: it fortuned,

that a Knight was then present, who knew him very familiarly, and he

gave an addition to the former commendation, that the whole world

contained not a more equall couple in marriage, then the Marquesse and

his Lady. For, as among all knights, the Marquesse could hardly be

paraleld for Armes and Honour; even so his wife, in comparison of

all other Ladies, was scarcely matchable for beauty and vertue.

Which words were so weighty in the apprehension of King Philip, that

sodainly (having as yet never seen her) he began to affect her very

earnestly, concluding to embarke himselfe at Gennes or Genoua, there

to set forward on the intended voyage, and journying thither by

land, hee would shape some honest excuse to see the Lady Marquesse,

whose Lord being then from home, opinion perswaded him over fondly,

that he should easily obtaine the issue of his amorous desire.

  When hee was come within a dayes journey, where the Ladie

Marquesse then lay; he sent her word that she should expect his

company on the morrow at dinner. The Lady, being singularly wise and

judicious, answered the Messenger, that she reputed the Kings

comming to her, as an extraordinary grace and favour, and that he

should bee most heartily welcome. Afterward, entring into further

consideration with her selfe, what the King might meane by his private

visitation, knowing her Husband to be from home, and it to bee no

meane barre to his apter entertainement: at last she discreetly

conceited (and therin was not deceived) that babling report of her

beauty and perfections, might thus occasion the Kings comming thither,

his journey lying else a quite contrary way. Notwithstanding, being

a Princely Lady, and so loyal a wife as ever lived shee intended to

give him her best entertainement: summoning the chiefest Gentlemen

in the Country together, to take due order (by their advice) for

giving the King a gracious Welcome. But concerning the dinner, and

diet for service to his Table, that remained onely at her own

disposing.

  Sending presently abroad, and buying all the Hennes that the Country

affoorded, shee commaunded her Cookes, that onely of them (without any

other provision beside) they should prepare all the services that they

could devise. On the morrow, the King came according to his promise,

and was most honourably welcomed by the Lady, who seemed in his eye

(far beyond the Knights speeches of her) the fairest creature that

ever he had seene before; whereat he mervailed not a little, extolling

her perfections to be peerelesse, which much the more enflamed his

affections, and (almost) made his desires impatient. The King beeing

withdrawne into such Chambers, as orderly were prepared for him, and

as beseemed so great a Prince: the houre of dinner drawing on, the

King and the Lady Marquesse were seated at one Table, and his

attendants placed at other tables, answerable to their degrees of

honour.

  Plenty of dishes being served in, and the rarest Wines that the

Countrey yeelded, the King had more minde to the faire Lady Marques,

then any meate that stood on the Table. Neverthelesse, observing

each service after other, and that all the Viands (though variously

cooked, and in divers kindes) were nothing else but Hennes onely, he

began to wonder; and so much the rather, because he knew the Country

to be of such quality, that it afforded all plenty both of Fowles

and Venison: beside, after the time of his comming was heard, they had

respite enough, both for hawking and hunting; and therefore it

encreased his marvell the more, that nothing was provided for him, but

Hennes onely: wherein to be the better resolved, turning a merry

countenance to the Lady, thus he spake. Madam, are Hennes onely bred

in this Country, and no Cockes? The Lady Marquesse, very well

understanding his demand, which fitted her with an apt opportunity, to

thwart his idle hope, and defend her owne honour; boldly returned

the King this answere. Not so my Lord, but women and wives,

howsoever they differ in garments and graces one from another; yet

notwithstanding, they are all heere as they bee in other places.

  When the King heard this reply, he knew well enough the occasion

of his Henne dinner, as also, what vertue lay couched under her

answere; perceiving apparantly, that wanton words would prove but in

vaine, and such a woman was not easily to be seduced; wherefore, as

hee grew enamored on her inconsiderately, so he found it best

fitting for his honour, to quench this heate with wisedome discreetly.

And so, without any more words, or further hope of speeding in so

unkingly a purpose, dinner being ended, by a sudden departing, he

smoothly shadowed the cause of his comming, and thanking her for the

honour shee had done him, commended her to her chaste disposition, and

posted away with speede to Gennes.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE SIXT NOVELL



        DECLARING, THAT IN FEW, DISCREETE, AND WELL PLACED WORDS,

      THE COVERED CRAFT OF CHURCH-MEN MAY BEE JUSTLY REPROVED, AND

                  THEIR HYPOCRISIE HONESTLY DISCOVERED



  An honest plaine meaning man, (simply and conscionably)

reprehended the malignity, hypocrisie, and misdemeanour of many

Religious persons.



  Madam Aemilia sitting next to the gentle Lady Fiammetta,

perceiving the modest chastisement, which the vertuous Lady

Marquesse had given to the King of France, was generally graced by the

whole Assembly; began (after the Queene had thereto appointed her)

in these words. Nor will I conceale the deserved reprehension, which

an honest simple lay-man, gave to a covetous holy Father, in very

few words; yet more to be commended, then derided.

  Not long since (worthy Ladies) there dwelt in our owne native

City, a Friar Minor, an Inquisitor after matters of Faith; who,

although he laboured greatly to seeme a sanctified man, and an earnest

affecter of Christian Religion, (as all of them appeare to be in

outward shew;) yet he was a much better Inquisitor after them that had

their purses plenteously stored with money, then of such as were

slenderly grounded in Faith. By which diligent continued care in

him, he found out a man, more rich in purse, then understanding; and

yet not so defective in matters of faith, as misguided by his owne

simple speaking, and (perhaps) when his braine was well warmed with

wine, words fell more foolishly from him, then in better judgement

they could have done.

  Being on a day in company, (very little differing in quality from

him selfe) he chanced to say; that he had beene at such good wine,

as God himselfe did never drinke better. Which words (by some

Sicophant then in presence) being carried to this curious

Inquisitor, and he well knowing, that the mans faculties were great,

and his bagges swolne up full with no meane abundance: Cum gladijs

et fustibus; With Booke, Bell, and Candle, he raysed an hoast of

execrations against him, and the Sumner cited him with a solemne

Processe to appeare before him, understanding sufficiently, that

this course would sooner fetch money from him, then amend any

misbeliefe in the man; for no further reformation did he seeke after.

  The man comming before him, hee demanded, if the accusation

intimated against him, was true or no? Whereto the honest man

answered, that he could not denie the speaking of such words, and

declared in what manner they were uttered. Presently the Inquisitor,

most devoutly addicted to Saint John with the golden beard, saide;

What? Doest thou make our Lord a drinker, and a curious quaffer of

wines, as if he were a glutton, a belly-god, or a Taverne haunter,

as thou, and other drunkards are. Being an hypocrite, as thou art,

thou thinkest this to be but a light matter, because it may seeme so

in thine owne opinion: but I tell thee plainely, that it deserveth

fire and faggot, if I should proceede in justice to inflict it on

thee: with these, and other such like threatning words, as also a very

stearne and angry countenance, he made the man beleeve himselfe to

be an Epicure, and that hee denied the eternity of the soule;

whereby he fell into such a trembling feare, as doubting indeede,

least he should be burned; that, to be more mercifully dealt withal,

he rounded him in the eare, and by secret meanes, so annointed his

hands with Saint Johns golden grease (a verie singular remedie against

the Disease Pestilentiall in covetous Priests, especially Friars

Minors, that dare touch no money) as the case became very quickly

altered.

  This soveraigne Unction was of such vertue (though Galen speakes not

a word thereof among all his cheefest Medicines) and so farre

prevailed, that the terrible threatning words of fire and faggot,

became meerly frozen up, and gracious language blew a more gentle

and calmer ayre; the Inquisitor delivering him an hallowed

Crucifixe, creating him a Soldier of the Crosse (because he had

payed Crosses good store for it,) and even as if he were to travell

under that Standard to the holy Land; so did hee appoint him a

home-paying pennance, namely, to visit him thrice every weeke in his

Chamber, and to annoint his hands with the selfe-same yellow

unguent, and afterward, to heare Masse of the holy Crosse, visiting

him also at dinner time, which being ended, to do nothing all the rest

of the day, but according as he directed him.

  The simple man, yet not so simple, but seeing that this weekely

greazing the Inquisitors hands, would in time graspe away all his

gold, grew weary of this annointing, and began to consider with

himselfe, how to stay the course of this chargeable penance. And

comming one morning (according to his injunction) to heare Masse, in

the Gospell he observed these words; You shall receive an hundred

for one, and so possesse eternall life; which saying, he kept

perfectly in his memory: and as he was commanded, at dinner time, he

came to the Inquisitor, finding him (among his fellowes) seated at the

Table. The Inquisitor presently demaunded of him, whether he had heard

Masse that morning, or no? Yes Sir, replyed the man very readily. Hast

thou heard any thing therein (quoth the Inquisitor) whereof thou art

doubtfull, or desirst to be further informed? Surely Sir, answered the

plaine-meaning man, I make no doubt of any thing I have heard, but

do beleeve all constantly: onely one thing troubleth me much, and

maketh me very compassionate of you, and of all these holy Fathers

your brethren, perceiving in what wofull and wretched estate you

will be, when you shall come into another world. What words are these,

quoth the Inquisitor? And why art thou moved to such compassion of us?

O good Sir, saide the man, do you remember the wordes in the Gospell

this morning, You shall receive an hundred for one? That is verie true

replyed the Inquisitor, but what mooveth thee to urge those words?

 I will tell you Sir, answered the plain fellow, so it might please

you not to be offended. Since the time of my resorting hither, I

have daily seene many poore people at your doore, and (out of your

abundance) when you and your Brethren have fed sufficiently, every one

hath had a good messe of Pottage: now Sir, if for every dishfull

given, you are sure to receive an hundred againe, you will all be

meerely drowned in pottage. Although the rest (sitting at the Table

with the Inquisitor) laughed heartily at this jest; yet he found

himselfe toucht in another nature, having hypocritically received for

one poore offence, above three hundred peeces of Gold, and not a mite

to be restored againe. But fearing to be further disclosed, yet

threatning him with another Processe in law, for abusing the words of

the Gospel, he was content to dismisse him for altogither, without

any more golden greasing in the hand.









                    THE FIRST DAY, THE SEVENTH NOVELL



      APPROVING, THAT IT IS MUCH UNFITTING FOR A PRINCE, OR GREAT

         PERSON, TO BEE COVETOUS; BUT RATHER TO BE LIBERALL TO

                               ALL MEN



  Bergamino, by telling a tale of a skilfull man, named Primasso,

and of an Abbot of Clugni; honestly checked a new kinde of

Covetousnesse, in Mayster Can de la Scala.



  The courteous demeanor of Madam Aemilia, and the quaintnesse of

her discourse, caused both the Queene, and the rest of the company, to

commend the invention of carrying the Crosse, and the golden

oyntment appointed for pennance. Afterward, Philostratus, who was in

order to speake next, began in this manner.

  It is a commendable thing (faire Ladies) to hit a But that never

stirreth out of his place: but it is a matter much more admirable,

to see a thing suddainely appearing, and sildome or never frequented

before, to bee as suddenly hit by an ordinary Archer. The vicious

and polluted lives of Priests, yeeldeth matter of it selfe in many

things, deserving speech and reprehension, as a true But of wickednes,

and well worthy to be sharply shot at. And therefore, though that

honest meaning man did wisely, in touching Master Inquisitor to the

quicke, with the hypocriticall charity of Monkes and Friars, in giving

such things to the poore, as were more meete for Swine, or to be worse

throwne away, yet I hold him more to be commended, who (by occasion of

a former tale, and which I purpose to relate) pleasantly reprooved

Master Can de la Scala, a Magnifico and mighty Lord, for a sudden

and unaccustomed covetousnesse appearing in him, figuring by other

men, that which hee intended to say of him, in manner following.

  Master Can de la Scala, as fame ranne abroad of him in all places,

was (beyond the infinite favours of Fortune towards him) one of the

most notable and magnificent Lords that ever lived in Italy, since the

daies of Fredericke the second, Emperor. He determining to procure a

very solemne assembly at Verona, and many people being met there

from divers places, especially Gentlemen of all degrees; suddenly

(upon what occasion I know not) his minde altred, and hee would not

goe forward with his intention. Most of them he partly recompenced

which were come thither, and they dismissed to depart at their

pleasure, one onely man remained unrespected, or in any kinde sort

sent away, whose name was Bergamino, a man very pleasantly disposed,

and so wittily readie in speaking and answering, as none could

easily credit it, but such as heard him; and although his recompence

seemed over-long delayed, yet hee made no doubt of a beneficiall

ending.

  By some enemies of his, Master Can de la Scala was incensed, that

whatsoever he gave or bestowed on him, was as ill imployed and utterly

lost, as if it were throwne into the fire, and therefore he neither

did or spake any thing to him. Some few dayes being passed over, and

Bergamino perceiving, that hee was neither called, nor any account

made of, notwithstanding many manly good parts in him; observing

beside, that hee found a shrewd consumption in his purse, his Inne,

horses, and servants, being chargeable to him, he began to grow

extremely melancholly, and yet hee attended in expectation day by day,

as thinking it farre unfitting for him, to depart before he was bidden

farewell.

  Having brought with him thither three goodly rich garments, which

had beene given him by sundrie Lords, for his more sightly

appearance at this great meeting; the importunate Host being greedie

of payment, first he delivered him one of them, and yet not halfe

the score being wiped off, the second must needes follow; and

beside, except he meant to leave his lodging, hee must live upon the

third so long as it would last, till hee saw what end his hopes

would sort too. It fortuned, during the time of living thus upon his

last refuge, that hee met with Maister Can one day at dinner, where he

presented himselfe before him, with a discontented countenance:

which Maister Can well observing, more to distaste him, then take

delight in any thing that could come from him, he sayd. Bergamino, how

cheerest thou? Thou art very melancholly, I prythee tell us why?

Bergamino suddenly, without any premeditation, yet seeming as if he

had long considered thereon, reported this Tale.

  Sir, I have heard of a certaine man, named Primasso, one skilfully

learned in the Grammar, and (beyond all other) a very witty and

ready versifier: in regard whereof, he was so much admired, and

farre renowned, that such as never saw him, but onely heard of him,

could easily say, this is Primasso. It came to passe, that being

once at Paris, in poore estate, as commonly he could light on no

better fortune (because vertue is slenderly rewarded, by such as

have the greatest possessions) he heard much fame of the Abbot of

Clugni, a man reputed (next to the Pope) to be the richest Prelate

of the Church. Of him he heard wonderfull and magnificent matters,

that he alwayes kept an open and hospitable Court, and never made

refusall of any (from whence soever hee came or went) but they did

eate and drinke freely there; provided, that they came when the

Abbot was set at the Table. Primasso hearing this, and being an

earnest desirer to see magnificent and vertuous men, hee resolved to

goe see this rare bounty of the Abbot, demanding how far he dwelt from

Paris? Being answered, about some three Leagues thence. Primasso

made account, that if he went on betimes in the morning, he should

easily reach thither before the houre for dinner.

  Being instructed in the way, and not finding any to walke along with

him; fearing, if he went without some furnishment, and should stay

long there for his dinner, he might (perhaps) complaine of hunger:

he therefore carried three loaves of bread with him, knowing that he

could meet with water every where, albeit he used to drinke but

little. Having aptly conveyed his bread about him, he went on his

journy, and arrived at the Lord Abbots Court, an indifferent while

before dinner time: wherefore entering into the great Hall, and so

from place to place, beholding the great multitude of Tables,

bountifull preparation in the Kitchin, and what admirable provision

there was for dinner, he said to himselfe; Truly this man is more

magnificent then fame hath made him, because shee speakes too

sparingly of him.

  While thus he went about, considering on all these things very

respectively, he saw the Maister of the Abbots Houshold (because

then it was the houre of dinner) command water to be brought for

washing hands, so everie one sitting down at the Tatle, it fell to the

lot of Primasso, to sit directly against the doore, whereat the

Abbot must enter into the Hall. The custome in this Court was such,

that no manner of Foode should be served to any of the Table, untill

such time as the Lord Abbot was himselfe set: whereupon, every thing

being fit and ready, the Master of the Houshold went to tell his Lord,

that nothing now wanted but his onely presence.

  The Abbot comming from his Chamber to enter the Hall, looking

about him, as hee was wont to doe; the first man hee saw was Primasso,

who being but in homely habite, and he having not seene him before

to his remembrance, a present bad conceite possessed his braine,

that he never saw an unworthier person, saying within himselfe: See

how I give my goods away to bee devoured. So returning backe to his

Chamber againe; commaunded the doore to be made fast, demaunding of

every man neere about him, if they knew the base Knave that sate

before his entrance into the Hall, and all his servants answered no.

Primasso being extreamely hungry, with travailing on foote so farre,

and never used to fast so long; expecting still when meate would be

served in, and that the Abbot came not at all: drew out one of his

loaves which hee brought with him, and very heartily fell to feeding.

  My Lord Abbot, after hee had stayed within an indifferent while,

sent forth one of his men, to see if the poore fellow was gone, or no.

The servant told him, that he stayed there, and fed upon dry bread,

which it seemed he had brought thither with him. Let him feede on

his owne (replyed the Abbot) for he shall taste of none of mine this

day. Gladly wold the Abbot, that Primasso should have gone thence of

himselfe, and yet held it scarsely honest in his Lordship, to dismisse

him by his owne command. Primasso having eaten one of his Loaves,

and yet the Abbot was not come; began to feede upon the second: the

Abbot still sending to expect his absence, and answered as he was

before. At length, the Abbot not comming, and Primasso having eaten up

his second loafe, hunger compeld him to begin with the third.

  When these newes were carried to the Abbot, sodainly he brake

forth and saide. What new kinde of needy tricke hath my braine begotte

this day? Why do I grow disdainfull against any man whatsoever? I have

long time allowed my meate to be eaten by all commers that did

please to visit me, without exception against any person, Gentleman,

Yeoman, poore or rich, Marchant or Minstrill, honest man or knave,

never refraining my presence in the Hall, by basely contemning one

poore man. Beleeve me, covetousnesse of one mans meate, doth ill agree

with mine estate and calling. What though he appeareth a wretched

fellow to me? He may be of greater merit then I can imagine, and

deserve more honor then I am able to give him.

  Having thus discoursed with himselfe, he would needs understand of

whence, and what he was, and finding him to be Primasso, come onely to

see the magnificence which he had reported of him, knowing also (by

the generall fame noysed every where of him) that he was reputed to be

a learned, honest, and ingenious man: he grew greatly ashamed of his

owne folly, and being desirous to make him an amends, strove many

waies how to do him honor. When dinner was ended, the Abbot bestowed

honorable garments on him, such as beseemed his degree and merit,

and putting good store of money in his purse, as also giving him a

good horse to ride on, left it at his owne free election, whether he

would stay there still with him, or depart at his pleasure.

Wherewith Primasso being highly contented, yeelding him the

heartiest thankes he could devise to do, returned to Paris on

horse-backe, albeit he came poorely thether on foot.

  Master Can de la Scala, who was a man of good understanding,

perceived immediately (without any further interpretation) what

Bergamino meant by this morall, and smiling on him, saide:

Bergamino, thou hast honestly expressed thy vertue and necessities,

and justly reprooved mine avarice, niggardnesse, and base folly. And

trust me Bergamino, I never felt such a fit of covetousnesse come upon

me, as this which I have dishonestly declared to thee: and which I

will now banish from me, with the same correction as thou hast

taught mee. So, having payed the Host all his charges, redeeming

also his robes or garments, mounting him on a good Gelding, and

putting plenty of Crownes in his purse, he referd it to his owne

choise to depart, or dwell there still with him.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE EIGHT NOVELL



       WHICH PLAINLY DECLARETH, THAT A COVETOUS GENTLEMAN, IS NOT

                      WORTHY OF ANY HONOR OR RESPECT



  Guillaume Boursier, with a few quaint and familiar words, checkt the

miserable covetousnesse of Signior Herminio de Grimaldi.



  Madam Lauretta, sitting next to Philostratus, when she had heard the

witty conceite of Bergamino; knowing, that she was to say somewhat,

without injunction or command, pleasantly thus began.

  This last discourse (faire and vertuous company) induceth me to tell

you, how an honest Courtier reprehended in like manner (and nothing

unprofitably) base covetousnesse in a Merchant of extraordinary

wealth. Which Tale, although (in effect) it may seeme to resemble

the former; yet perhaps, it will prove no lesse pleasing to you, in

regard it sorted to as good an end.

  It is no long time since, that there lived in Genes or Geneway, a

Gentleman named Signior Herminio de Grimaldo, who (as every one wel

knew) was more rich in inheritances, and ready summes of currant money

then any other knowne Citizen in Italy. And as hee surpassed other men

in wealth, so did he likewise excell them in wretched Avarice, being

so miserably greedy and covetous, as no man in the world could be more

wicked that way; because, not onely he kept his purse lockt up from

pleasuring any, but denied needfull things to himselfe, enduring

many miseries onely to avoid expences, contrary to the Genewayes

generall custom, who alwayes delighted to be decently cloathed, and to

have their dyet of the best. By reason of which most miserable

basenesse, they tooke away from him the Sirname of Grimaldi, whereof

he was in right descended, and called him master Herminio the covetous

Mizer, a nickname very notably agreeing with his gripple nature.

  It came to passe, that in this time of his spending nothing, but

multiplying daily by infinite meanes, that a civill honest Gentleman

(a Courtier of ready wit, and discoursive in Languages) came to

Geneway, being named Guillaume Boursier. A man very farre differing

from divers Courtiers in these dayes, who for soothing shamefull and

gracelesse maners in such as allow them maintenance, are called and

reputed to bee Gentlemen, yea speciall favourites: whereas much more

worthily, they should be accounted as knaves and villaines, being

borne and bred in all filthinesse, and skilfull in every kinde of

basest behaviour, not fit to come in Princes Courts. For, whereas in

passed times, they spent their dayes and paines in making peace,

when Gentlemen were at warre or dissention, or treating on honest

marriages, betweene friends and familiars, and (with loving

speeches) would recreate disturbed mindes, desiring none but

commendable exercises in Court, and sharpely reprooving (like Fathers)

disordred life, or ill actions in any, albeit with recompence

little, or none at all; these upstarts now adayes, employ all their

paines in detractions, sowing questions and quarrels betweene one

another, making no spare of lyes and falshoods. Nay which is worse,

they wil do this in the presence of any man, upbraiding him with

injuries, shames, and scandals (true or not true) upon the very

least occasion. And by false and deceitful flatteries and villanies of

their owne inventing, they make Gentlemen to become as vile as

themselves. For which detestable qualities, they are better beloved

and respected of their misdemeanored Lords, and recompenced in more

bountifull maner, then men of vertuous carriage and desert. Which is

an argument sufficient, that goodnesse is gone up to heaven, and

hath quite forsaken these loathed lower Regions, where men are drowned

in the mud of all abhominable vices.

  But returning where I left (being led out of my way by a just and

religious anger against such deformity) this Gentleman, Master

Guillaume Boursier, was willingly seene, and gladly welcommed by all

the best men in Geneway. Having remained some few daies in the City,

and amongst other matters, heard much talke of the miserable

covetousnesse of master Herminio, he grew very desirous to have a

sight of him. Master Herminio had already understood, that this

Gentleman, Master Guillaume Boursier was vertuously disposed, and (how

covetously soever hee was inclined) having in him some sparkes of

noble nature, gave him very good words, and gracious entertainment,

discoursing with him on divers occasions.

  In company of other Genewayes with him, he brought him to a new

erected house of his, a building of great cost and beauty; where,

after he had shewne him all the variable rarieties, he beganne thus.

Master Guillaume, no doubt but you have heard and seene many things,

and you can instruct me in some queint conceit or device, to be fairly

figured in painting, at the entrance into the great Hall of my

House. Master Guillaume hearing him speake so simply, returned him

this answer: Sir, I cannot advise you in any thing, so rare or unseene

as you talk of: but how to sneeze (after a new manner) upon a full and

over-cloyed stomacke, to avoyde base humours that stupifie the braine,

or other matters of the like quality. But if you would be taught a

good one indeede, and had a disposition to see it fairely effected,

I could instruct you in an excellent Emblem, wherwith (as yet) you

never came acquainted.

  Master Herminio hearing him say so, and expecting no such answer

as he had, saide, Good Master Guillaume, tell me what it is, and on my

faith I will have it fairely painted. Whereto Master Guillaume

suddenly replied; Do nothing but this Sir: Paint over the Portall of

your Halles enterance, the lively picture of Liberality, to bid all

your friends better welcome, then hitherto they have beene. When

Master Herminio heard these words, he becam possessed with such a

sudden shame, that his complexion changed from the former palenesse,

and answered thus. Master Guillaume, I will have your advice so

truly figured over my gate, and shee shall give so good welcome to all

my guests, that both you, and all these Gentlemen shall say, I have

both seene her, and am become reasonably acquainted with her. From

that time forward, the words of Master Guillaume were so effectuall

with Signior Herminio, that he became the most bountifull and best

house-keeper, which lived in his time in Geneway: no man more

honouring and friendly welcoming both strangers and Citizens, then

he continually used to do.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE NINTH NOVELL



        GIVING ALL MEN TO UNDERSTAND, THAT JUSTICE IS NECESSARY

               IN A KING ABOVE AL THINGS ELSE WHATSOEVER



  The King of Cyprus was wittily reprehended, by the words of a

Gentlewoman of Gascoignie, and became vertuously altered from his

vicious disposition.



  The last command of the Queene, remained upon Madam Elissa, or

Eliza, who (without any delaying) thus beganne. Young Ladies, it

hath often beene seene, that much paine hath beene bestowed, and

many reprehensions spent in vaine, till a word happening at adventure,

and perhaps not purposely determined, hath effectually done the deede:

as appeareth by the Tale of Madame Lauretta, and another of mine owne,

where with I intend briefly to acquaint you, approving that when

good words are discreetly observed, they are of soveraigne power and

vertue.

  In the dayes of the first King of Cyprus, after the Conquest made in

the holy Land by Godfrey of Bullen, it fortuned that a Gentlewoman

of Gascoignie, travelling in pilgrimage to visit the sacred

Sepulcher in Jerusalem, returning home againe, arrived at Cyprus,

where shee was villanously abused by certaine base wretches.

Complaining thereof, without any comfort or redresse, shee intended to

make her moane to the King of the Country. Whereupon it was tolde her,

that therein shee should but loose her labour, because hee was so

womanish, and faint-hearted; that not onely he refused to punish

with justice the offence of others, but also suffered shamefull

injuries done to himselfe. And therefore, such as were displeased by

his negligence, might easily discharge their spleene against him,

and doe him what dishonour they would.

  When the Gentlewoman heard this, despairing of any consolation, or

revenge for her wrongs, shee resolved to checke the Kings deniall of

justice, and comming before him weeping, spake in this manner. Sir,

I presume not into your presence, as hoping to have redresse by you,

for divers dishonourable injuries done unto me; but, as full

satisfaction for them, doe but teach me how you suffer such vile

abuses, as daily are offered to your selfe. To the end, that being

therein instructed by you, I may the more patiently beare mine owne;

which (as God knoweth) I would bestow on you very gladly, because

you know so well how to endure them.

  The King, who (till then) had beene very bad, dull, and slothfull,

even as sleeping out his time of governement; beganne to revenge the

wrongs done to this Gentlewoman very severely, and (thence forward)

became a most sharpe Justicer, for the least offence offered against

the honour of his Crowne, or to any of his subjects beside.









                     THE FIRST DAY, THE TENTH NOVELL



       WHEREIN IS DECLARED, THAT HONEST LOVE AGREETH WITH PEOPLE

                               OF ALL AGES



  Master Albert of Bullen, honestly made a Lady to blush, that thought

to have done as much to him, because shee perceived him, to be

amorously affected towards her.



  After that Madam Eliza sate silent, the last charge and labour of

the like employment, remained to the Queene her selfe; whereupon

shee beganne thus to speake: Honest and vertuous young Ladies, like as

the Starres (when the Ayre is faire and cleere) are the adorning and

beauty of Heaven, and flowers (while the Spring time lasteth) doe

graciously embellish the Meadowes; even so sweete speeches and

pleasing conferences, to passe the time with commendable discourses,

are the best habit of the minde, and an outward beauty to the body:

which ornaments of words, when they appeare to be short and sweete,

are much more seemely in women, then in men; because long and

tedious talking (when it may be done in lesser time) is a greater

blemish in women, then in men.

  Among us women, this day, I thinke few or none have therein

offended, but as readily have understood short and pithy speeches, as

they have beene quicke and quaintly delivered. But when answering

suteth not with understanding, it is generally a shame in us, and all

such as live; because our moderne times have converted that vertue,

which was within them who lived before us, into garments of the body,

and shew whose habites were noted to bee most gaudy, fullest of

imbroyderies and fantastick fashions: she was reputed to have most

matter in her, and therefore to be more honoured and esteemed. Never

considering, that whosoever loadeth the backe of an Asse, or puts upon

him the richest braverie; he becommeth not thereby a jot the wiser, or

meriteth any more honor then an Asse should have. I am ashamed to

speake it, because in detecting other, I may (perhaps) as justly taxe

my selfe.

  Such imbroydered bodies, tricked and trimmed in such boasting

bravery, are they any thing else but as Marble Statues, dumbe, dull,

and utterly insensible? Or if (perchaunce) they make an answere,

when some question is demanded of them; it were much better for them

to be silent. For defence of honest devise and conference among men

and women, they would have the world to thinke, that it proceedeth but

from simplicity and precise opinion, covering their owne folly with

the name of honesty: as if there were no other honest woman, but

shee that conferres onely with her Chambermaide, Laundresse, or

Kitchin-woman: as if nature had allowed them, (in their owne idle

conceite) no other kinde of talking.

  Most true it is, that as there is a respect to be used in the action

of things; so, time and place are necessarily to be considered, and

also whom we converse withall; because sometimes it happeneth, that

a man or woman, intending (by a word of jest and merriment) to make

another body blush or be ashamed: not knowing what strength of wit

remaineth in the opposite, doe convert the same disgrace upon

themselves. Therefore, that we may the more advisedly stand upon our

owne guard, and to prevent the common proverbe, That Women (in all

things) make choyse of the worst: I desire that this dayes last

tale, which is to come from my selfe, may make us all wise. To the

end, that as in gentlenesse of minde we conferre with other; so by

excellency in good manners, we may shew our selves not inferiour to

them.

  It is not many yeares since (worthy assembly) that in Bulloigne

there dwelt a learned Physitian, a man famous for skill, and farre

renowned, whose name was Master Albert, and being growne aged, to

the estimate of threescore and tenne yeares: hee had yet such a

sprightly disposition, that though naturall heate and vigour had quite

shaken hands with him, yet amorous flames and desires had not wholly

forsaken him. Having seene (at a Banquet) a very beautifull woman,

being then in the estate of widdowhood, named (as some say) Madam

Margaret de Chisolieri, shee appeared so pleasing in his eye; that his

sences became no lesse disturbed, then as if he had beene of farre

younger temper, and no night could any quietnesse possesse his

soule, except (the day before) he had seene the sweet countenance of

this lovely widdow. In regard whereof, his dayly passage was by her

doore, one while on horsebacke, and then againe on foot; as best might

declare his plaine purpose to see her.

  Both shee and other Gentlewomen, perceiving the occasion of his

passing and repassing; would privately jest thereat together, to see a

man of such yeares and discretion, to be amorously addicted, or

overswayed by effeminate passions. For they were partly perswaded,

that such wanton Ague fits of Love, were fit for none but youthfull

apprehensions, as best agreeing with their chearefull complexion.

Master Albert continuing his dayly walkes by the widdowes lodging,

it chaunced upon a Feastivall day, that shee (accompanied with

divers other women of great account) being sitting at her doore;

espied Master Albert (farre off) comming thitherward, and a resolved

determination among themselves was set downe, to allow him

favourable entertainement, and to jest (in some merry manner) at his

loving folly, as afterward they did indeede.

  No sooner was he come neere, but they all arose, and courteously

invited him to enter with them, conducting him into a goodly Garden,

where readily was prepared choyse of delicate wines and banquetting.

At length, among other pleasant and delightfull discourses, they

demanded of him; how it was possible for him, to be amorously affected

towards so beautifull a woman, both knowing and seeing, how

earnestly she was sollicited by many gracious, gallant, and

youthfull spirits, aptly suting with her yeares and desires? Master

Albert perceiving, that they had drawne him in among them, onely to

scoffe and make a mockery of him; set a merry countenance on the

matter, and honestly thus answered.

  Beleeve mee Gentlewoman (speaking to the widdowe her selfe) it

should not appeare strange to any of wisedome and discretion, that I

am amorously enclined, and especially to you, because you are well

worthy of it. And although those powers, which naturally appertaine to

the exercises of Love, are bereft and gone from aged people; yet

good will thereto cannot be taken from them, neither judgement to know

such as deserve to be affected: for, by how much they exceede youth in

knowledge and experience, by so much the more hath nature made them

meet for respect and reverence. The hope which incited me (being aged)

to love you, that are affected of so many youthfull Gallants, grew

thus. I have often chaunced into divers places, where I have seene

Ladies and Gentlwomen, being disposed to a Collation or rerebanquet

after dinner, to feede on Lupines, and young Onions or Leekes, and

although it may be so, that there is little or no goodnesse at all

in them; yet the heads of them are least hurtfull, and most pleasing

in the mouth. And you Gentlewomen generally (guided by unreasonable

appetite) will hold the heads of them in your hands, and feede upon

the blades or stalkes: which not onely are not good for any thing, but

also are of very bad savour. And what know I (Lady) whether among

the choise of friends, it may fit your fancy to doe the like? For,

if you did so, it were no fault of mine to be chosen of you, but

thereby were all the rest of your suters the sooner answered.

  The widdowed Gentlewoman, and all the rest in her company, being

bashfully ashamed of her owne and their folly, presently said.

Master Albert, you have both well and worthily chastised our over-bold

presumption, and beleeve me Sir, I repute your love and kindnesse of

no meane merrit, comming from a man so wise and vertuous: And

therefore (mine honour reserved) commaund my uttermost, as alwayes

ready to do you any honest service. Master Albert, arising from his

seat, thanking the faire widdow for her gentle offer; tooke leave of

her and all the company, and she blushing, as all the rest were

therein not much behinde her, thinking to checke him, became chidden

her selfe, whereby (if we be wise) let us all take warning.

  The Sunne was now somewhat farre declined, and the heates

extremity well worne away: when the Tales of the seaven Ladies and

three Gentlemen were thus finished, whereupon their Queene

pleasantly said. For this day (faire company) there remaineth nothing

more to be done under my regiment, but onely to bestow a new Queene

upon you, who (according to her judgement) must take her turne, and

dispose what next is to be done, for continuing our time in honest

pleasure. And although the day should endure till darke night; in

regard, that when some time is taken before, the better preparation

may bee made for occasions to follow, to the end also, that whatsoever

the new Queene shall please to appoint, may be the better fitted for

the morrow: I am of opinion, that at the same houre as we now cease,

the following dayes shall severally begin. And therefore, in reverence

to him that giveth life to all things, and in hope of comfort by our

second day; Madam Philomena, a most wise young Lady, shall governe

as Queene this our Kingdome.

  So soone as she had thus spoken, arising from her seate of

dignity, and taking the Lawrell Crowne from off her owne head; she

reverently placed it upon Madam Philomenaes, shee first of all

humbly saluting her, and then all the rest, openly confessing her to

be their Queene, made gracious offer to obey whatsoever she commanded.

Philomena, her cheekes delivering a scarlet tincture, to see her selfe

thus honoured as their Queene, and well remembring the words, so

lately uttered by Madam Pampinea; that dulnesse or neglect might not

be noted in her, tooke cheerefull courage to her, and first of all,

she confirmed the officers, which Pampinea had appointed the day

before, then she ordained for the morrowes provision, as also for

the supper so neere approiching, before they departed away from

thence, and then thus began.

  Lovely Companions, although that Madam Pampinea, more in her owne

courtesie, then any matter of merit remaining in me, hath made me your

Queene: I am not determined, to alter the forme of our intended

life, nor to be guided by mine owne judgement, but to associate the

same with your assistance. And because you may know what I intend to

do, and so (consequently) adde or diminish at your pleasure; in very

few words, you shall plainly understand my meaning. If you have well

considered on the course, which this day hath bene kept by Madam

Pampinea, me thinkes it hath bene very pleasing and commendable; in

which regard, untill by over-tedious continuation, or other

occasions of irkesome offence, it shall seeme injurious, I am of the

minde, not to alter it. Holding on the order then as we have begun

to doe, we will depart from hence to recreate our selves a while,

and when the Sun groweth towards setting, we will sup in the fresh and

open ayre; afterward, with Canzonets and other pastimes, we will

out-weare the houres till bed time. To morrow morning, in the fresh

and gentle breath thereof, we will rise and walke to such places, as

every one shall finde fittest for them, even as already this day we

have done; untill due time shall summon us hither againe, to

continue our discoursive Tales, wherein (me thinkes) consisteth both

pleasure and profit, especially by discreete observation.

  Very true it is, that some things which Madam Pampinea could not

accomplish, by reason of her so small time of authority, I will

begin to undergo, to wit, in restraining some matters whereon we are

to speake, that better premeditation may passe upon them. For, when

respite and a little leysure goeth before them, each discourse will

savour of the more formality; and if it might so please you, thus

would I direct the order. As since the beginning of the world, all men

have bene guided (by Fortune) thorow divers accidents and occasions:

so beyond all hope and expectation, the issue and successe hath bin

good and successful, and accordingly should every one of our arguments

be chosen.

  The Ladies, and the yong Gentlemen likewise, commended her advice,

and promised to imitate it; onely Dioneus excepted, who when every one

was silent, spake thus. Madam, I say as all the rest have done, that

the order by you appointed, is most pleasing and worthy to bee

allowed. But I intreate one speciall favour for my selfe, and to have

it confirmed to mee, so long as our company continueth; namely, that I

may not be constrained to this Law of direction, but to tell my Tale

at liberty, after mine owne minde, and according to the freedome first

instituted. And because no one shall imagine, that I urge this grace

of you, as being unfurnished of discourses in this kinde, I am well

contented to bee the last in every dayes exercise.

  The Queene, knowing him to be a man full of mirth and matter,

began to consider very advisedly, that he would not have mooved this

request, but onely to the end, that if the company grew wearied by any

of the Tales re-counted, hee would shut up the dayes disport with some

mirthfull accident. Wherefore willingly, and with consent of all the

rest he had his suite granted. So, arising all, they walked to a

Christall river, descending downe a little hill into a valley,

graciously shaded with goodly Trees; where washing both their hands

and feete, much pretty pleasure passed among them; till supper time

drawing neere, made them returne home to the Palace. When supper was

ended, and bookes and instruments being laide before them, the

Queene commanded a dance, and that Madam Aemilia, assisted by Madam

Lauretta and Dioneus, should sing a sweet ditty. At which command,

Lauretta undertooke the dance, and led it, Aemilia singing this song

ensuing.



                THE SONG



  So much delight my beauty yeelds to mee,

          That any other Love,

          To wish or prove;

  Can never sute it selfe with my desire.



  Therein I see, upon good observation,

  What sweet content due understanding lends:

  Old or new thoughts cannot in any fashion

  Rob me of that, which mine owne soule commends.

          What object then,

            (mongst infinites of men)

          Can I never finde

            to dispossesse my minde,

  And plaint therein another new desire?

      So much delight, etc.



  But were it so, the blisse that I would chuse,

  Is, by continuall sight to comfort me:

  So rare a presence never to refuse,

  Which mortall tongue or thought, what ere it be

          Must still conceale,

            not able to reveale,

          Such a sacred sweete,

            for none other meete,

  But hearts enflamed with the same desire.

      So much delight, etc.



  The Song being ended, the Chorus whereof was answered by them all,

it passed with generall applause: and after a few other daunces, the

night being well run on, the Queene gave ending to this first dayes

Recreation. So, lights being brought, they departed to their

severall Lodgings, to take their rest till the next morning.

