



Natural Value

	by Friedrich Wieser



Book 6

Value in the Economy of the State

Chapter 1

Introduction

    In the exchange transactions of private economies with one
another, objective exchange value acts as the economical measure
of goods, while, within individual private economies, this part
is taken by subjective value as each individual owner estimates
it, whether it be subjective exchange value in connection with
objective exchange value, or use value independent of it. All
these forms of value, reflecting with more or less truth their
common prototype, go back to one original form, viz. that which
we have indicated as natural value; natural value being, in the
last resort, the resultant of two simple fundamental components,
quantity of goods and utility of goods. Even such phenomena as
land rent, interest on capital, costs, are natural phenomena of
value which could be suppressed only by a force so powerful that
it would at the same time injure economic life and action itself.

    Besides private economies there exist a great many public
economies. The question now is whether, in them also, the value
of goods holds the same place, and whether in them it takes on
any new and peculiar forms. I shall limit my inquiry to the most
important of social economies, that of the state, and deal even
with it only in the most general way. The theory of social
economies is yet in its infancy, and it would be impossible to
discuss value in them at all exhaustively without first having
thoroughly gone into a great many other subjects. It, therefore,
appears to me best to confine myself to an entirely general and
comprehensive statement. 
    State economy divides itself into two great spheres, the
economy of income or finance, and the economy of expenditure or
administration. Administration, however, belongs to the economy
of the state only in so far as it is determined by economical
considerations. This is the case mainly where regard is had to
the material interests of the people, that is to say, in the
economic administration or the economic superintendence of the
state; but there is no single form of national activity but must
follow economic principles, if only in the second instance; viz.
in regard to the careful and economical employment of its
resources. 
    Up till quite recently economists have not, either in finance
or administration, recognised in value that importance which, by
analogy, might be suspected from its role in private economy.
With regard, in particular, to finance, theory has managed to do
almost entirely without value. The principles of taxation have
been and are almost always stated without value being mentioned,
or if mentioned it has been, at the most, only cursorily touched
upon by way of comparison. Taxation gets its warrant in specific
considerations, not in general economic ones. We speak of minimum
of subsistence, ability to pay, sacrifice of taxation,
progressive taxation and so on, almost entirely as if they were
facts and conceptions belonging to a distinct sphere, while
neither is the relation of this sphere to the fundamental
phenomena of all economy made clear, nor is any attempt made to
make it clear. 
    Adam Smith and his school treat the economic administration
of the state also in a similar manner. They explain it simply by
the necessities of national life, and value never enters into
their consideration. Where they do make mention of it exchange
value is always understood, -- that being the only value which
the school, as a rule, recognises. Any peculiar value pertaining
to the economy of a state is never discussed, as in general all
economic conceptions are borrowed entirely from the circumstances
of private economies, and bear their characteristics. Connected
with this -- as cause and effect -- there is a strong tendency to
limit the sphere of state economy, and to extend that of private
economy. Every theory formulates its conceptions in conformity
with its fundamental tendencies, but it strengthens these
fundamental tendencies in turn by the logical weight which the
conceptions once constructed exert. A person who recognises no
other value than exchange value will, wherever his common sense
says that it is a question of value, generally allow exchange
value to decide the matter in its one-sided way, or will, at all
events, give to it too great a preponderance. The way in which
Adam Smith rejects protection and argues for free trade may be
regarded as typical of the school. The national income is to be
measured by exchange value: but thus measured free trade will
undoubtedly give the larger income in the near future:
consequently, as it is always the income of the present that
forms the capital of the future, free trade assures the greatest
amount of well-being for all time to come. 
    In Germany this one-sidedness of the English school was early
recognised. Many writers, as, for instance, Friedrich List,
actively combated it. List placed his "theory of productive
forces" alongside of his "theory of value": exchange value was to
be the determining force in private economic relations, whereas,
in the economy of the state, "productive force" was to take its
place -- an antithesis whose inadequacy is most clearly shown
from the consideration that "productive forces" are themselves
estimated according to exchange value. Most writers took a
different course. They tried, gradually, and at first altogether
academically, to broaden the private economic views of the
English School, in such a way as to make them as far as possible
applicable to all economic relations. As regards value in
particular, exchange value was traced back to the general
conception of use value, and then conceived of as national or
social use value. Thus little by little the theory altered its
formal character. It undoubtedly became more rounded, more
plausible, more adaptable, but at the same time more indefinite
and inexact. Without following accurately the further development
of this theory, I may point out its most important fact: that the
scientific discussion did finally give up its academic
hesitation, and, in spite of the slightness of its theoretic
foundation, laid down with success and decision principles for
the practical formation of a state economy. Like the financial
system of the European states, their economic politics were
gradually reformed by the active assistance of theory, although
theory itself had not completely accomplished its task, nor,
indeed, was quite aware what that task was. The "theory" was a
highly-developed technology, capable of giving right direction,
although it did not succeed in finding its justification -- and
with that, of course, its limitation -- in absolutely convincing
clearness.
    The lately published work of E. Sax (Grundlegung der
Theoretischen Staatswirthschaft) is the first to complete the
transition from technology to the theory of national economy, and
has thus at last reached a goal aimed at by the German economists
through a long and steady development. In the sphere of
administration Sax has succeeded in indicating how public
interests may have the widest play, while still maintaining a
fixed economic conception which holds fast by the essentially
economic. The economic is one and the same in all its forms,
everywhere entirely distinct from the non-economic. Very
important is the application of Sax's work to the sphere of
finance -- all the more important that here he had almost no
predecessors -- and that the idea is thought out into details
with great clearness. The whole system of imposts rests on value:
this simple proposition makes the science of finance for the
first time what it should always have been, a part of political
economy. "Imposts of all kinds are examples of collective
valuation which find their full explanation in the general nature
of the phenomenon of value. The truth which finds expression in
this formula is directly decisive for the theory of national
economy, as a branch of the total theory of political economy,
balancing that of private economy. The simplicity of the solution
is a guarantee of its correctness. The apple falls from the tree
and the stars describe their courses in obedience to one and the
same law, that of gravitation. A Robinson Crusoe and a nation
numbering a hundred million souls obey one and the same law in
their economical transactions, that of value" (pp. 307-8).
    The statement which follows is so general and so condensed
that I have had but little chance of going into the rich contents
of Sax's book. In the interests of the statement I have,
moreover, considered it wiser, even where I disagree with Sax, to
refrain from the most part from any attempt to prove my
divergences with any great exactitude, as, in this portion of my
work, even more than in the former, I have neglected the literary
aspect of the subject. Here, as formerly, my task has been to
demonstrate, comprehensively and as a whole, what has hitherto
been considered only in isolation, if at all. It appeared to me
foreign to the plan of my work, and likely only to increase the
difficulty of the task which chiefly concerned me, -- that of
affording a survey of the whole subject, -- were I to let myself
be carried away by criticism and polemic into detail which I
should not have gone into for its own sake. 

Chapter 2

The Province of a State Economy

    It is generally assumed that the object of the individual
economy is provision for the wants of the individual -- that is
to say, those wants which the individual feels as an individual;
and that the economy of a community provides for the common or
collective wants -- that is, those which are experienced by the
individual as member of a community, or, to put it differently,
the wants of a community. The economy of a state therefore
provides for the wants of the state, i.e. those wants experienced
by the citizens of a state in consideration of their civic
connection with each other. This conception, however, scarcely
corresponds with the actual division of the economic sphere.
National interests, which are undoubtedly to be reckoned under
the head of collective interests, are frequently furthered by
personal sacrifice and expenditure. And more numerous instances
may be adduced of the contrary case -- that individual interests
are fostered by collective efforts. The desire to possess a means
of coming and going to one's business, is undoubtedly personal in
the highest degree; but the highways of traffic have been
included among the concerns of the commonwealth almost since the
beginning of time. In the communistic state the care of providing
for the entire sum of individual wants, would fall altogether to
the economy of the state without these wants having changed their
nature in any way. It must, therefore, be some circumstance which
does not touch the nature of the want itself that determines the
division of the economic sphere. 
    A simple consideration enables us to recognise what
circumstance this is. 
    The personal ability of the individual is in many cases
sufficient to secure him the realisation of his personal wishes.
In particular, the sphere within which the individual is capable
of making himself felt with effect, is quite extraordinarily
enlarged when men have learnt to make use of the division and
co-operation of labour. By means of this they enter into
combinations and exchange with one another, and thus increase
enormously their power of work, while, at the same time, they
calculate and distribute out again to the individual the
advantages obtained, and thus remain separate from each other, as
individuals with individual rights. There are, however, certain
results which demand a more intimate kind of connection, -- a
condition of real community, -- and cannot be obtained without
it. The desire to obtain these results, which often amounts to
the feeing of a peremptory necessity, leads to the formation of
the commonwealth. 
    There are various reasons which may make the attainment of a
certain result dependent upon the formation of collective bodies,
and upon the carrying out of collective actions. 
    In the first place may be mentioned the nature of the action
in question. For many kinds of action the individual, as
individual, is not qualified; he feels himself too weak, or, it
may be, quite incapable. From the first it has devolved upon the
state to represent the common weal, in cases where nothing but
the solidarity of many or of all is able to create the force that
is lacking to the scattered individuals. Only as a united state
can a people hope to ward off its enemies, and to protect its
citizens when in foreign countries. Only a union of people can
succeed in guarding a country's peace, and preserving order
against crime within its borders. From the general feeing of
justice are obtained the weight and power necessary for the
laying down of laws which will bind every one, and for the
appointing of judges and officers who will make every one bow
before the one common law. And thus numerous interests, partly
collective, partly the most ordinary general interests of the
individual, lead to an ever-widening extension of the sphere of
the state's activity, wherever the opinion prevails that only the
state possesses the power of offering any guarantee of the
satisfaction, or the full satisfaction, that is desired. 
    In the case of such actions as are executed in common, there
is an overwhelming tendency to bear the burden in common, and to
enjoy the results in common. Even if the power of the state is
set in motion for the sake of one solitary citizen, the occasion
cannot well be judged merely from the standpoint of the interest
of that one citizen. The very fact that the power of the state
has been set in motion at all, engages the interest of the
public, because this power, once set in motion, cannot be allowed
to move in vain. All its future success depends on the
recognition of this. For this reason the outcome, for instance,
of every single criminal or civil process is full of importance
to the whole community. Every such process must be so conducted
that respect for the law may be strengthened, not shaken. But
generally speaking the occasions on which the machinery of the
state appears on the scene are, in their origin, matters of great
importance and of great compass -- frequently, of the greatest
importance and the greatest compass; they are indeed such matters
as only the united strength of the whole people is sufficient
for. This circumstance of itself makes it impossible, as a rule,
to divide out among the individual citizens the result obtained
by the combined effort, or even to charge it to the individual
according to its effects; hence the necessity of waking the
benefit universally accessible, or ascribing it to the people as
a whole without further distinction. It happens comparatively
seldom that individuals can be indicated and singled out, whose
interests are exceptionally concerned, and for whom the services
of the state may be exceptionally interposed and charged. 
    In the second place, just as the results of a war are not to
be bought or sold, and a war cannot therefore be carried on as a
private matter,(1*) so it happens that, among the undertaking for
which the means and powers of the individual citizens suffice,
there are very many which must be excluded from the circle of
private business because of the impossibility of obtaining any
profit out of them. The most various circumstances may have this
effect. The streets of a town would be useless for purposes of
traffic if they were not free to use without payment; this makes
it impossible that any citizen should retain public routes for
his own benefit. The same principle holds in all cases where
goods whose production costs something must be made over to the
public free of charge -- "quasi-free goods," as Menger calls
them. Many undertakings also, although the public interest
demands them at once, give promise of return only in the distant
future; -- so distant indeed that no private individual could be
expected to wait for it: this is the case, e.g., as regards many
railways. Very often again it is doubtful whether the return of
an undertaking will ever be sufficient to cover the costs, while
at the same time the results in case of success are temptingly
large; here private enterprise would hesitate, either on account
of the great amount of capital necessary or for other incidental
reasons. Very often there is a scarcity of capable and energetic
private undertakers, simply on account of the defective
economical development of the citizens. And there are often cases
where the goods concerned are, for the private economy, only in
process of becoming -- still incomplete, unripe, latent; where
the goods must first be got at, or the goods that are to
supplement and complement them be discovered, before they become
capable of rendering any useful service. How much latent labour
power there is which must first become conscious of its own
existence and train itself, before it can find a market! What
hidden wealth may not slumber in a land favoured by nature but
uncultivated, its existence suspected, even known, but out of
reach owing to the general backward condition of industry, of
wealth, of education, of credit, of law, or of peace! And,
although, in such a case, there is as yet no secure foundation
for private enterprise, what government would not regard it as a
duty itself to come forward and take hold, not only in the way of
general administration, but by economic undertakings which train
and ripen human faculty though they may give no direct return?
Sometimes only the want is there, crying urgently for
satisfaction, while those who feel it have no power to pay for
its satisfaction; in this case no private undertaker can do
anything, and the state must step in to mitigate an evil which
might grow to be a great public ill. Many other similar
circumstances might be added, all acting in the same direction;
that is to say, excluding private enterprise by reason of their
unprofitableness, but demanding the activity of the state on
account of the importance of the goods concerned. 
    In the third place, many undertakings which lie within the
power of a citizen, and which also hold forth to him a promise of
gain, are reserved to the state, for the simple reason that they
would put too much power into the hands of the private
undertaker, or assure him too great a gain. The fear is that the
exceptional position they would necessary give to the person who
undertook them might be misused. The businesses which belong to
this class are mostly necessary monopolies, -- particularly
monopolies of great extent, such as the post and the railway. We
do not expect, in an independent private undertaker, the
requisite reliableness, or the will to undertake such huge
businesses, or to carry them through as we should like; or we
expect that too high a price would be charged for the service.
But in all these points people look for something better from a
government. This does not, however, in the least involve that the
form of undertaking for profit be entirely rejected. It may be
retained, but, with the endeavour to obtain the highest business
return, must be conjoined, in some way or other, the endeavour to
serve the interests of the public. In particular, where any
considerable want is concerned while the power to pay is wanting,
the service must be undertaken at limited prices, -- that is to
say, valuation according to exchange value must be replaced by
valuation according to natural value. Thus emerges the "public
enterprise." In the communistic state all production would be the
affair of the state, and fall under public enterprise, from a
consideration which amounts essentially to this; -- that private
production is one-sided, and looks to the interests of the richer
classes, while putting in the background the interests of the
community in general. Even the affairs of the private household
would be, for the most part, given over to the state. 
    If we cast a glance over the whole series of duties which
constitute the economy of the state, it will easily be seen that,
apart from the diversity of originating causes just described,
they are also distinguished from each other by their content.
Certain of them -- of which the last-mentioned group is the best
instance -- are very closely related to private undertakings.
Like them they have to do with the direct application of labour
to goods; they have to do with detail and with individual
production; and they are scattered in countless separate actions
and occupations -- many of these of a similar nature -- over
countless separate goods. Here it is considerations more remote
and far - reaching that exclude private administration in matters
where, otherwise, it might be suitable enough. This can be most
clearly realised if we consider the businesses of production and
of housekeeping as transferred to a communistic state. These
would indeed cease to be matters of private economy in the
personal sense, but, essentially or technically, they would
remain, if the expression may be employed, "economic in detail."
    Quite different is the character of the remaining acts of
state economy, which chiefly belong to the first and second
groups just described. Their duties do not admit of being
discharged by private economies for various reasons, but these
reasons all lead, in the last resort, to the same issue; -- that
such acts are beyond the calculation of the individual, either
because their products cannot be bought and sold, or cannot be
bought and sold individually. Their results go without money and
without price to the public, -- either in whole or in great part,
-- according to what Sax calls the Princip des allgemeinen
Genussgutes. They are transactions on a great scale, working with
large means, and large returns, -- returns which it is often
entirely impossible to distribute. They assure the general
foundations of personal life and of economic action. Their
results must be distributed over all the community and not
divided out individually, even supposing it possible to conceive
of them as distributed to the individual. Of course they are
undertaken on account of the utility they promise; but it is
frequently far from certain -- as e.g, in the case of war --
whether the desired result will ever be attained. And even if it
is attained its amount can, for the most part, be only
approximately determined, partly on account of the wide range
which it covers, partly on account of the large number of persons
concerned, partly on account of the impossibility of conceiving
the individual's share in it, partly on account of the long
process of development, and the long time that must elapse before
many of its effects emerge. Very often all that one knows of an
action is that it must not be neglected, and that we must summon
all our forces to undertake it; while it is almost entirely
uncertain how in the end the life of the people may be affected
thereby. Often it is other generations that must pass judgment
upon it. 
    In the communistic state also, if all economical matters are
to devolve upon the state, decisions will certainly be made from
this point of view; the affairs of the household and of ordinary
production will be kept separate from those of the general
economic and state administration. In the former case goods will
be estimated at their natural value as that is now determined in
private economy, i.e. according to marginal value; in the latter
case, this form of valuation will be -- as we shall go on to show
-- to a great extent abandoned. Alongside of it, or in its stead,
will be placed another form of valuation, which we may best call
"national economic" valuation, -- a term which certainly does not
express the formulas of communism, but those of existing
economical conditions. 

Chapter 3

Value in the Natural Economy of the State

    Suppose the utopian state of communism actually realised,
there also, as we have just seen, where all economic life has
become the concern of the state, must the same distinction as now
be made between private economy and state economy, though
possibly under different names. On one side must be grouped by
themselves all those businesses of the household and of
production which are now left in the hands of private
individuals, together with many undertaking which essentially
belong to private economy, but are at present, for special
reasons, conducted by the state. On the other side and distinct
from these, must be placed all matters of the general
administration of the state -- or of all that is economic in it
-- and of economic politics in general. Of course, there would be
no lack of transferences to and from each group, and whatever
might be the ruling consideration in the one group would have a
place in the other. This does not, however, in any way conflict
with the statement that the leading principles in each must be
different. 
    In the former, or private economic group, where goods are
capable of being measured very accurately as to their amount and
utility, the main endeavour must be to obtain from every
practically measurable portion of goods the greatest amount of
generally recognised utility. This endeavour must find its
expression in an estimate of value which takes its measure, for
each single good, from the margin at which the most perfectly
utilised supply meets the most perfectly sifted demand. In the
sphere of production such an estimate of value takes, as we are
aware, the form of an estimate of return or of costs. The value
of stocks of similar goods must be represented as multiples: the
value of production goods combined in the shape of products as
sums of multiples. The individual amounts must be calculable --
in many instances very exactly calculable -- against each other.
An exact economic calculus must be established, the advantage and
disadvantage of every sufficiently familiar process being put in
figures; and it must be regarded as the triumph of economic art
to exactly ascertain and exactly realise that plan which the
value calculation indicates as the best. 
    In the latter, or national economic group, the first
principle must also be to secure the greatest amount of utility,
the highest well-being of the citizens. But the utility and its
amount will not be so exactly estimated; will often, indeed, as
we have already proved at length, be very inexactly estimated. As
the means necessary to achieve the ends of the state are for the
most part very extensive, and the more or less cannot be so
exactly determined, the indefiniteness of the valuation will be
increased from the side of the goods also. The estimate of value
will often be very vague, and in many cases unanimity of opinion
regarding it is not to be expected. More exact estimates will be
obtained only as regards such goods as are also employed in
private economy, by transferring to them the definite estimate
obtained by private economy, and also as regards such goods as
are obtained through production. But where national economy makes
use of specific goods which do not, either by reason of their
employment or origin, take to themselves the estimate of private
economy;(1*) where national economy stands absolutely and
entirely by itself, and seeks to guard public interests by
specific public methods; there, in place of the quantitative
estimate of the value of goods in masses, will emerge the vague
and disputable valuation of interests, influenced by inclinations
and passions.(2*)
    The opposition between natural value in national economy and
natural value in private economy reduces itself, in effect, to an
opposition between vagueness and definiteness, subjective
valuation and exact calculation. Even thus the contrast is
sufficiently great to obtain clear and peculiar expression in
practical politics. Theoretically, of course, there can never be
any doubt as to the relation of the two. Just as private economic
interests, where they compete with each other, are ranked
according to their relative importance, so the interests of
private and of national economy are ranked in relation to each
other. The more important aim takes precedence of the less
important -- this forms the theoretic basis on which the estimate
of value is built. But how will this rule work in practice when
any doubt arises as to the degree of importance? As a matter of
fact, the indefinite nature of national economic valuations must
in practice frequently give rise to doubts as to the exact
relation which the acts of private and of national economy should
bear to each other. Very frequently it is the same goods that may
be employed by either private or national economy; in the last
resort, indeed, there is nothing but one fund out of which to
provide for both, and only a few goods are from the first
specifically reserved for one or the other sphere. A
characteristic and common instance of the competition between the
two interests occurs where an undertaking, which is profitable as
a private business as shown by its calculable return in direct
results, is maintained, from the side of national economy, to
have an unfavourable, destructive, or undermining effect; that is
to say, as regards results which are more remote and difficult to
follow. Alongside of this we have the converse instance, that an
undertaking which is unprofitable as a private business, and
whose valuable returns do not cover the costs, may, from the
point of view of national economy, be regarded as profitable,
whether tending to progress or conservative as the case may be.
What holds as regards individual undertakings, also obtains as
regards whole groups of these, -- of the great acts of
legislation and administration, of the various branches and
spheres of production, of the activity of the producing class of
a nation. It might e.g be disputed whether agriculture or the
labouring classes ought to have public subsidy -- i.e. support
which might not be justified, from the point of view of private
economy, by the value of the land products or the results of
labour, but might be justified if one looked at the maintenance
of the stability of the national economy and of the life of the
people. 
    In the communistic state, as in the economy of to-day, there
will be no lack of occasions which will continually force people
to decide anew between considerations of the quantitative and
calculable proximate returns -- considerations of direct profit,
-- and of results more remote and less calculable --
considerations of general interests. Suppose that the subject
were some technical improvement like the establishing of
railways, discussions would undoubtedly arise, -- as they did at
the time when railways were introduced, -- as to their utility,
feasibility, and consequences. And even after experience has put
an end to the general discussion, there will still continue to be
a conflict of opinions as to the more exact relation between the
calculable results and the incalculable. Or, possibly, there may
be a doubt whether the industry of a people should take the
direction of trade or of agriculture; whether the power of the
labouring classes should be more utilised, or more economised;
possibly, also, whether it would be wise to carry on war, whether
preparations should be made for it, or whether it might he better
to foster the arts of peace, and so forth. And certainly there
will always be one party which calculates, and which looks
dispassionately to the profitableness or unprofitableness of any
scheme, and another party which looks far ahead and leaves room
for imagination and passion. Under different names the economical
oppositions of interest to-day will recur. The conflict which we
may observe now between exchange value and public interests,
depends accordingly -- apart altogether from the opposition of
personal advantage -- upon a difference in economic aims which is
inevitable, and arises out of natural economic conditions. 
    If it must be confessed that, in the communistic state, the
private economical valuation of goods is not satisfactory because
it sometimes neglects necessary deductions, sometimes essential
additions, and so comes out too high or too low, we must a
fortiori say the same of exchange value in the present order of
things, where it goes too far in emphasising the characteristics
of the private economy. It is the exact calculation and the
incalculable but actually observed influences, that, together,
make up the full value of goods. The theorist must admit so much,
however hard it is for him, when he considers how greatly
economic theory loses by it in exact conception of its formulas
and precepts. How simple and how easy to apply any advice
whenever only calculable quantities are concerned; -- whatever,
calculated by exchange value, yields a profit is economically
permissible; everything else is forbidden! And how misty and
obscure all theoretical solutions become when they put absolute
laws aside, and are obliged to appeal to concrete existing
circumstances to decide for them! In the end it is to politics we
must leave the task of deciding, as well as of carrying out its
decisions in the concrete -- remembering that politics belongs
not only to the politician but to political science. however much
the pride of theory may suffer in recognising this, it is a fact
not to be gainsaid. In order to observe and understand things,
they are often thought of as being less complicated than they
really are: and this is right enough when nothing further is
intended than to simplify the process of thought by beginning at
the easiest. But it is not permissible to call a halt at this
point, and apply the solution thus found, without more ado, to
reality. This is the sort of thing that might be described as
"the disease of theory": to take things first in the way in which
they can be most simply grasped, and then to represent the whole
world according to the picture we have just been able to think
out for ourselves; to take what is most easily grasped, or at all
events most precisely grasped, for the actual. 
    Like every exaggeration this also produces its own reaction,
viz. the opposition to all theory whatever. The book which my
readers now hold in their hands is a proof that I do not share in
this opposition. Possibly it may not prove equally clearly that I
consider every other direction of investigation, besides the
purely theoretical one, necessary and significant in its own
place; but no candid critic will, I hope, find any reason to
dispute this. 
    That the theory, even when it recognises the influences of
national economy upon value, in some sort paves the way for
politics, is not likely to be denied. The man who has thought out
the theory of value to the end, even within the limits just
mentioned, will have cause to point with pride to the help which
this has afforded him in political science and practical
statecraft. It is a matter of the first importance -- one without
which no decision can be arrived at, -- to recognise that there
is a sphere within which the estimate of exchange value is
applicable, and another in which it is not. Now if we could
define these spheres, even in the most general way; if we could
keep entirely and clearly separate the laws of the national
estimate and the laws of the private estimate of value, so that
every one who followed with sufficient earnestness would be
convinced that they corresponded to the essential demands of
economic action; if it were possible, besides, to indicate the
directions in which the actual course of things diverges from
these laws most frequently and with the most serious results: in
that case the foundation for political action would be so plainly
laid down, and would compare so well with all the errors and
difficulties which beset its path without these principles, that
no one would deny that such a theory had justified its existence.
To mention only one special case. The representing of goods by
weighed and counted sums of barren metal or paper, and the
consequent valuation of goods, and of the well-being they secure,
by numbers and figures, by items and weights, is in itself a
somewhat mysterious matter; a matter which a man who wishes to
obtain a clear view of things might imagine to have an artificial
and unhealthy origin; a matter which does, in fact, lead many an
honest and intelligent thinker to such a conjecture. It is, then,
a conclusion well worthy of consideration when a science succeeds
in proving that such a manner of procedure is, at bottom and in
its own place, sound and simple, and that it would be impossible
to obtain a more exact and distinct measure for the thousandfold
variety of economic satisfactions, than that afforded, under the
necessary conditions, by the natural marginal value of goods. 

NOTES:

1. We may take as illustration the case of a barren island whose
occupation is demanded by military or political considerations.

2. Even in private economy, all thing considered, one has to deal
with masses of goods and with wants of great compass: private
undertaking are in fact more numerous than state undertaking, and
form the principal part of the body economic. All the same, the
extent of the undertaking, in private economy, has only to a
trifling extent that indefiniteness of valuation which it so
easily gives rise to in national economy. In private economy one
has to deal with more, but smaller objects; in state economy,
with isolated but more wide-reaching matters. In the former all
quantities finally resolve themselves into divisible sums; in the
latter, they do not. This contrast is so important, and
recognition of it affords so deep an insight into the structure
of exchange value, that, at the risk of repeating myself, I shall
try once more to give to it as exact expression as possible. 
    There are two considerations which must be carefully taken
into account if we would understand the calculus of private
economy. 
    First: all stocks of goods of a similar kind -- and, along
with these, all goods which, as products, relate themselves
through costs to such stocks -- come within the range of the
marginal law, and are measured as divisible sums made up of the
smallest units, each unit estimated at one and the same value.
This makes it appear as though all wealth were split up into
"atoms," but it is so only in appliance; as a matter of fact
within the sphere of the marginal law every "atom" in the whole
circle of wealth is valued by this method of measurement; not
only are all the marginal employments put in evidence but, with
and though them, all permissible employments from the highest
down to those standing on the margin, -- only that we are saved
the trouble of putting into the calculation any but the marginal
uses. This makes it possible to calculate even the almost
infinite quantities which are destined to meet almost infinitely
various wants. For the purposes of carrying on ordinary private
business, for instance, the whole enormous agricultural wealth of
a nation can be quite properly grasped through the ordinary
economic estimate of the same, even although this estimate, which
only takes stocks and marginal employments into consideration, is
very far from giving expression to the whole importance which
those satisfactions that are provided through agriculture have
for the life of the nation. There is, therefore, nothing more
misleading than to introduce a treatise on the price of
agricultural products by a disquisition upon the importance of
agriculture in this latter sense. The "surplus value" left out
from the calculation need not be taken into the calculation; for
one thing, that it is omitted, not only in agricultural taxation,
but everywhere, and, for another thing, that, as regards detail,
a quite adequate balancing of agriculture against trade,
industry, and the other branches of economy, and also of the
individual businesses of agriculture against each other, may be
obtained, if only the margin be everywhere observed down to which
wants are satisfied, production extended, and cost goods
expended. 
    If this same agricultural wealth be considered with regard to
the purposes of general economic politics, the point of view
changes. We are no longer concerned with innumerable individual
goods as opposed to each other, but with that which affects them
all in common. Thus agriculture, or great parts of it, become a
whole; then is the time to consider the importance of all its
services; and then we have to face an enormous complex of results
which must all be estimated in their entire extent. 
    Second: by private economy the whole productive return --
again taking into account the smallest quantities -- is
distributed among the complementary productive factors without
remainder. The sum of all the "productive contributions" is equal
in value to the total return, and the productive value is
consequently as clearly calculable as the value of the products.
On the other hand, in questions of economic politics, if the
destinies of large quantities of production goods have to be
weighed all at one time, the estimate of the "contribution" does
not suffice. It becomes necessary to undertake the exceedingly
difficult task of considering how deep the "complementarity" of
the productive factors in its ultimate ground may reach, and how
far these factors mutually condition one another -- in the way of
fructifying or serving as foundation -- if they are all at once
brought together in masses, or severed from each other. Here,
again, in the "contribution" of private economy we calculate only
the marginal value, whereas, in the total "co-operation" of
national economy, we calculate the more far-reaching and less
easily calculable importance of the goods. 
    This must all be understood with the above-mentioned
limitation, that we have here indicated only the leading
characteristic of the two economic systems, while each system
always shows traces of the other, and the transitions from one to
the other escape notice. 

Chapter 4

Value in the Present-Day Economy of the State


    The conduct of economic life, as actually carried on, adds
another and a stronger contrast to that which naturally exists
between private and national valuation. 
    The state as it actually exists -- unlike the communistic
state -- has not the management of all economic matters, but only
of a trifling portion of them. And, again, all economic goods do
not belong to the state. Indeed it does not possess even enough
for the proper carrying out of its own objects. As a rule it
possesses only the buildings and the fixed plant necessary for
the exercise of its pubic functions. Whatever beyond is required
for the current service must, for the most part, be handed over
to it by the citizens in the shape of annual contributions from
their property and income. The most important of these
contributions are raised, as we know, in the shape of taxation,
and to the consideration of this alone we shall here confine
ourselves. 
    Schaffle (Steuerpolitik, p. 17) has already laid down the
principle on which the goods which form the income of the
citizens should be divided out, between taxes on the one hand for
the satisfaction of public interests, and domestic outlay on the
other for the satisfaction of private wants. He calls it the
"principle of proportionate provision for the wants of the
individual and the wants of the government." The income of the
citizens must always be devoted to those employments which at the
time are the most important. There must not be too rich an
endowment of the pubic housekeeping at the expense of keeping
down the citizen's, nor of the private housekeeping at the cost
of deterioration in the pubic service. 
    Sax has developed the same idea still further. Goods obtain
their value from the uses to which they are put. The correct
principle for the appropriation of income to the purposes of the
state is therefore simple; it is the universal principle of
economical employment, viz. that goods be employed in accordance
with their value. If the state should claim too much, it
diminishes value, by expending goods for purposes of state
economy which would have a higher value if employed in private
economy. If it claims too little, value is again diminished -- as
in this case also the entire importance of the goods is not
realised. 
    This law obtains its full significance in consequence of the
fact that riches are unequally distributed, and that personal
incomes and, moreover, personal wants are of different degrees.
If every one had the same wealth, income, and wants, all the
citizens would have to contribute the same quota of taxes. But as
this is not so, they must contribute unequal quotas and again it
is value which provides the measure. Every individual economy, in
respect of the relation of supply and demand peculiar to it, has
what Sax calls an "individual Werthstand." The same amounts of
goods are valued differently, or, what amounts to the same thing,
the same amounts of value are expressed in different quantities
of goods. To understand this expression of Sax, it may be best to
recur to a fact which we have already taken as a starting-point
in arriving at the law of price. We said that every intending
purchaser who goes on the market calculates to himself, or ought
to calculate, the money equivalent of the goods he wishes to buy,
i.e. the sum of money whose value to him will equal the value of
the goods, so that it is not economically permissible for him to
go beyond it. Now a similar money-equivalent must be calculated
for the value which the services of the state have to the
individual citizen. More than this money equivalent it cannot,
economically speaking, be the duty of any citizen to pay in
taxation, but, on the other hand, it is the duty of every one to
pay taxes up to this amount in order to meet the costs of th e
public service. 
    This acknowledged, the next matter is the more exact estimate
of the individual equivalents. The circumstances which decide are
wealth, income, and want. The greater the wealth and income, the
greater will be the subjective equivalent or the taxation; and
the greater the degree of want, the smaller will be the
subjective equivalent or the taxation. All the same, taxation
cannot simply be fixed proportionally to wealth and income: a
progressive rate of taxation is justifiable. The man who only
earns enough to sustain the physical minimum of existence has
nothing left to give up to the state. I cannot go further than
this and show the reasons which Sax gives for the claim of
exemption of those who are at the minimum of existence, for the
progressive rate of taxation, and all the other familiar claims
of modern taxation. While it need scarcely be said that, as the
science grows, many things will probably be formulated otherwise,
still he has reached the essential matter. In all points which
have been indicated as important by economic discussion up till
the present, and which developed legislation has called into
notice, he has discovered the connection between them and general
economic facts and principles, and thus given to what has been
empirically reached a basis in theory. 

    Hitherto, as regards the most important points of the theory
of taxation, the science of finance has rested its tenets on an
appeal to the claims of justice. In this almost unanimous
dependence upon outside and non-economic considerations, the
imperfect condition of that science betrays itself even more than
in its lack of agreement over the purely economic part of its
investigation, and so far as this remains it must resign all
claim to be regarded as an essentially economic doctrine. Thanks
to the labours of Sax this is to a great extent altered. All the
principal requirements of the theory of taxation have obtained an
economic foundation in being derived from the general economic
categories --  Want, Goods, Economy, Value. In spite of this,
however, I cannot believe -- though this brings me into
opposition to Sax -- that the economic basis of taxation has
proved so perfect as to be able to dispense altogether with
considerations of justice. Without attempting any complete proof
of this statement -- which could not he done without the
difficult and tedious work of distinguishing between the economic
and the just, -- I should like to advance one single argument
which appears to me sufficiently to corroborate its correctness. 
    Sax as we have seen requires that every one pay in taxation
the full money equivalent in which, according to his own
individual standpoint of value, is expressed the value of the
services of the state to him. This claim is certainly absolutely
economic, in so far as it prevents the less able being taxed at
their maximum or above it, while it taxes the more able under
their maximum. The claim is, further, certainly an economic one,
in so much as it excludes the possibility of any one being taxed
above his maximum. But in so far it is not an absolutely economic
claim; it rests also upon the legal assumption of private
property; it would be uneconomic if it could be proved that
private property is itself uneconomic. But how would it be if
this claim were set against one which demanded that the rich, and
possibly the middle classes also, should be taxed at their
maximum, while the poorer and poorest classes were taxed below
it? What could be opposed to this claim? Certainly no absolutely
economic consideration; for the result of this being realised
would be, economically considered, a more perfect satisfaction of
the people's want. The only thing that could be opposed to it
would be the consideration that, as a matter of justice, the same
formal fundamental proposition must hold for all, -- equal
justice for all; a consideration which might, perhaps, in the
last instance, be traced back to an economic basis, but which, in
the present state of scientific development, is simply derived
from the feeling of justice, and represents a quite distinct
phase of that feeing. It may possibly be that, at a later period
of time, it will be declared the duty of the rich to free the
poorer classes from all pubic burdens, in order somewhat to
mitigate the privations they suffer from the unequal distribution
of wealth. Sax himself suggests (page 522) that, when that time
comes, there may be an active endeavour, based on altruistic
motives, to extend exemption from the "physical" minimum of
subsistence to a "culture" minimum. It is possible that this
endeavour might be only a symptom of gradual development in the
direction of freeing the weakest and weaker classes, entirely or
in part, according to the degree of their weakness, from the
burden of taxation.(1*)
    As it is with the ordering of taxation, so is it, in my
opinion, with all valuations in private and national economy, in
so far as they have to weigh the conflicting interests of many
persons. The principle which will reduce to a common measure of
advantage the interests of persons who are differently situated
in respect of wealth, has, I think I may venture to say without
hesitation, not yet been found. So long as it remains
undiscovered, it is impossible in such cases to dispense with
some reference to that ranking of personal claims with which the
feeing of justice is somewhat satisfied. If we give our assent to
the principle of taxation demanded by economic theory, it is only
because, without having an entirely strict theoretical
justification for it, practical considerations which cannot be
rejected compel us to approve of private property, and, moreover,
of a degree of its utilisation quite definite and in accordance
with modem ideas. 

NOTES:

1. Sax (page 522) remarks that, in any case, as regards the
over-burdening of the rich, the economic margin is already given
in their "individual valuation looking to possible taxation." But
even granting that this margin is of purely economic origin,
there remains, as we have seen, inside of it, sufficient room for
the activity of other than purely economic considerations.

Chapter 5

The Fundamental Law of Collective Valuation

    If the burden of taxation is distributed among the citizens
in the manner just described, a very remarkable contrast emerges
between the law which regulates pubic imposts, and that law of
price (under free exchange on a market uncontrolled by the state)
which regulates the burden that must be borne by all individuals
when they wish to acquire goods produced or offered for sale by
private industry. As return for the services of the state, or as
contribution towards meeting the costs of these services, each
individual gives the maximum which he is able to give, the full
equivalent. In free exchange, on the other hand, the
(approximate) maximum is paid only by the marginal purchaser; the
other purchasers get off more cheaply, as the one price is
established for all, and no one requires to pay more than the
equivalent of the marginal purchaser, even although his own
valuation may be much higher. The state, accordingly, takes
advantage of the purchasing power of every one in a much more
thorough way; and, more especially, the purchasing power of the
wealthier citizens. It does not suffer the rich to pay according
to the standard of the poor, but insists that every one shall be
taxed in accordance with the full measure of his own personal
estimate of the value which the services of the state have for
him.
    Hence is derived a peculiar law of national economic
valuation -- as of collective valuation generally. In every
self-contained economy equal quantities of goods have an equal
value; similar items, or fractions, or units, of a stock have for
their owner the same value. This law holds also in all free
economies, and for the economic bodies created by it; similar
goods have on the same market the same price, the same exchange
value. But it is different in the case of the national economic
body, as, generally, in that of every collective economy which
binds together several otherwise independent economic subjects to
carry out distinct purposes. Here the goods which belong to the
individual economic subjects, and from which the taxes are to be
drawn, are valued as unequal, -- equal taxes have unequal value,
the same value is expressed by unequal taxes. The valuation of
individual wealth and income on the part of a government agrees
exactly with the individual degree of valuation for purposes of
taxation; a government estimates the property of each person
exactly as he estimates it himself, and in so far the collective
economy is not like a self-contained economy. Not until the
government comes to the spending of the taxes does it act in
accordance with the universal law; not till then do sums, which
were valued as unequal so long as the government had to collect
them, come to be equal in value.(1*)
    Not only, then, does the levying of taxes rest on valuation,
but in the levying of taxes is directly expressed a distinct
valuation; a valuation which -- as regards the wants of the
public housekeeping -- estimates every good at a lower figure in
proportion to the number of other goods which are bound up with
it in one individual's wealth, or in proportion to the limited
character of the private wants to which it is devoted. In other
words, the theory of taxation, in its economic foundations,
belongs not to the applications of the theory of value, but to
the theory of value itself. 
    The fact that, when levying taxes, a government, in contrast
to the general law of ordinary economic life, rates economic
property differently according to the individual circumstances of
those who are taxed, has, economically speaking, undoubtedly
beneficial results. It allows that the public burdens of the
poorer classes be put at a lower figure; it allows the ability of
the wealthier to bear taxation to be more fully utilised; and it
thus places the taxes where they will cause least injury to the
satisfaction of private needs. Were the state to act otherwise;
were it to impose equal contributions, like poll taxes, on every
citizen; it would inflict on the poorer classes privations in no
way compensated by the extended indulgence in luxury that would
now be possible to the richer. 
    To this extent it might be desirable that the same principle
should also apply in free economic life; that there also each
should pay according to the amount of his purchasing power. In
this way a universal equalisation of satisfaction might be
attained; if every person were obliged to pay a dearer price
according as he possessed more means, riches would offer no
advantage, poverty no privation; all would have in the long run
the same satisfactions. It need scarcely be said that, so long as
our economy remains free, this cannot be. For so long as it is
so, every one will strive to buy as cheaply as possible, and
sellers will meet buyers in the same spirit -- inasmuch as they
will make the slightest advance in price an occasion to give the
preference to the buyer who offers it, and will not in the least
insist on adapting the objective amounts of price to the
subjective purchasing power of the buyers. And just because this
law of the free economy is so closely united with the freedom of
that economy, it would be useless to condemn it for the undoubted
evil effects which it directly has upon the distribution of the
satisfaction of wants. In order to judge adequately, one must in
any case take into consideration as well the effects of economic
freedom -- or, to put it differently, of private economies and
private property -- on all other economic relations, and
particularly as regards the formation of productive returns. It
may very well be that private property gives rise to great
inequalities in the satisfaction of wants, while it,
nevertheless, secures, even to those who receive the smallest
share in the general distribution, an enormously increased
satisfaction of want on the whole the reason being the enormous
increase in productive return which it allows and bring with it.
And here, perhaps, may be found a reason for the remarkable
phenomenon that one and the same community should contain at the
same time two such diverse organisations as a free economy and a
collective economy. In the former of these it diverges from the
natural measure of value in that it over-estimates the goods
reserved for acquisition by the rich, while, in the latter, it
diverges from it in that it puts all goods possessed by the rich
at a low figure so far as the public housekeeping is concerned.
In the former the community is governed by a law which spares the
rich, except where they come into competition with each other;
while in the latter it lays down a law for itself which utilises
their purchasing power to a quite unlimited extent In the former
it favours the unequal distribution of satisfactions: in the
latter, it helps to equalise them. Such deeply-rooted divergences
can only be explained by showing that the two organisations serve
different purposes, -- purposes in which personal freedom demands
different scope. 
    We could not follow out this line of thought without leaving
the sphere of the theory of value, and trespassing into the wide
sphere of economic justice and economic philosophy. The
explanation of the social organisation within which the
valuations take place, is a task with which the theory of value,
with its limited means, is not capable of dealing. And it is not
only the theory of value which is unequal to this task; only a
theory of society, which took into consideration other than
merely economic facts, could adequately undertake it.
    If now, in closing, there is one thing which, more than
another, I wish to repeat with special emphasis, it is the
intention which has dominated me throughout the whole work, and
in every part of it, -- the intention to be, in the best sense of
the word, empirical. I may perhaps hope that the attainment of
this object has not been disturbed by the fiction -- undoubtedly
unempirical -- of a natural value and of the utopian state of
communism. So far as I can judge of my own work, I have nowhere
pointed to any foreign non-empirical power in the actuality of
economic life. The only liberty I have taken has been to leave
out of consideration facts of whose activity there could be no
doubt: -- the actual imperfections of valuation, the
individualism of our economy, and, finally, the inequality of
wealth. At the same time, however, I have not neglected to
indicate, at all events in a general way, the directions in which
these circumstances must of necessity cause value, both in the
private economy and in the economy of the state, to deviate from
the natural standard. I hope that my statement has not by this
means become untrue, though I know very well that it must of
necessity be imperfect. But what is incompletely stated is
certainly not, on that account alone, non-empirical -- if it were
so, what statement would be empirical, seeing that we are unable
ever to do more than investigate mere fragments of the great
organic structure of our world? All judgment as regards any
attempt at investigation must depend on whether the fragment,
with which the inquiry is concerned, be large enough and solid
enough to have a coherence of its own, and to deserve
consideration by itself. If the imperfect description of the
phenomena of value, which I have attempted to give, is justified
in this sense, it is empirical. 
    The form of the fiction cannot have misled any one. I might,
of course, have stated drily that I intended to abstain from the
consideration of certain facts. But like one who wishes to look
at certain things undisturbed by the impressions of other things,
and aids his senses by spreading a veil over the disturbing
objects, I thought to aid imagination by making use of the easily
comprehended figure of a communistic society, concerned to
abolish in actuality all that I wished to disregard in thought.
The fiction which I have employed must be regarded in that light
alone, and I trust that the veil has been transparent enough to
allow the complete body of phenomena to be clearly outlined at
every turn under its slight disguise 

NOTES:

1. A great deal of the history of taxation may be explained by
the fact that people only learnt gradually to distinguish between
the valuation of goods in national economy and in free economy.
In ordinary economic life one feels injured who has to pay a
higher price than any one else; and it can be easily understood
that in face of this rooted opinion, it was hard to introduce the
principle that every person should pay more taxation for the same
state services according as he possessed more goods for the
satisfaction of his wants -- and that not simply but
progressively.

