



                               BOOK IV
                     Of Knowledge and Probability


                              Chapter I
                       Of Knowledge in General


  1. Our knowledge conversant about our ideas only. Since the mind, in
all its thoughts and reasonings, hath no other immediate object but
its own ideas, which it alone does or can contemplate, it is evident
that our knowledge is only conversant about them.
  2. Knowledge is the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
two ideas. Knowledge then seems to me to be nothing but the perception
of the connexion of and agreement, or disagreement and repugnancy of
any of our ideas. In this alone it consists. Where this perception is,
there is knowledge, and where it is not, there, though we may fancy,
guess, or believe, yet we always come short of knowledge. For when
we know that white is not black, what do we else but perceive, that
these two ideas do not agree? When we possess ourselves with the
utmost security of the demonstration, that the three angles of a
triangle are equal to two right ones, what do we more but perceive,
that equality to two right ones does necessarily agree to, and is
inseparable from, the three angles of a triangle?
  3. This agreement or disagreement may be any of four sorts. But to
understand a little more distinctly wherein this agreement or
disagreement consists, I think we may reduce it all to these four
sorts:
    I. Identity, or diversity.
   II. Relation.
  III. Co-existence, or necessary connexion.
   IV. Real existence.
  4. Of identity, or diversity in ideas. First, As to the first sort
of agreement or disagreement, viz. identity or diversity. It is the
first act of the mind, when it has any sentiments or ideas at all,
to perceive its ideas; and so far as it perceives them, to know each
what it is, and thereby also to perceive their difference, and that
one is not another. This is so absolutely necessary, that without it
there could be no knowledge, no reasoning, no imagination, no distinct
thoughts at all. By this the mind clearly and infallibly perceives
each idea to agree with itself, and to be what it is; and all distinct
ideas to disagree, i.e. the one not to be the other: and this it
does without pains, labour, or deduction; but at first view, by its
natural power of perception and distinction. And though men of art
have reduced this into those general rules, What is, is, and It is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be, for ready
application in all cases, wherein there may be occasion to reflect
on it: yet it is certain that the first exercise of this faculty is
about particular ideas. A man infallibly knows, as soon as ever he has
them in his mind, that the ideas he calls white and round are the very
ideas they are; and that they are not other ideas which he calls red
or square. Nor can any maxim or proposition in the world make him know
it clearer or surer than he did before, and without any such general
rule. This then is the first agreement or disagreement which the
mind perceives in its ideas; which it always perceives at first sight:
and if there ever happen any doubt about it, it will always be found
to be about the names, and not the ideas themselves, whose identity
and diversity will always be perceived, as soon and clearly as the
ideas themselves are; nor can it possibly be otherwise.
  5. Of abstract relations between ideas. Secondly, the next sort of
agreement or disagreement the mind perceives in any of its ideas
may, I think, be called relative, and is nothing but the perception of
the relation between any two ideas, of what kind soever, whether
substances, modes, or any other. For, since all distinct ideas must
eternally be known not to be the same, and so be universally and
constantly denied one of another, there could be no room for any
positive knowledge at all, if we could not perceive any relation
between our ideas, and find out the agreement or disagreement they
have one with another, in several ways the mind takes of comparing
them.
  6. Of their necessary co-existence in substances. Thirdly, The third
sort of agreement or disagreement to be found in our ideas, which
the perception of the mind is employed about, is co-existence or
non-co-existence in the same subject; and this belongs particularly to
substances. Thus when we pronounce concerning gold, that it is
fixed, our knowledge of this truth amounts to no more but this, that
fixedness, or a power to remain in the fire unconsumed, is an idea
that always accompanies and is joined with that particular sort of
yellowness, weight, fusibility, malleableness, and solubility in
aqua regia, which make our complex idea signified by the word gold,
  7. Of real existence agreeing to any idea. Fourthly, The fourth
and last sort is that of actual real existence agreeing to any idea.
  Within these four sorts of agreement or disagreement is, I
suppose, contained all the knowledge we have, or are capable of For
all the inquiries we can make concerning any of our ideas, all that we
know or can affirm concerning any of them, is, That it is, or is
not, the same with some other; that it does or does not always coexist
with some other idea in the same subject; that it has this or that
relation with some other idea; or that it has a real existence without
the mind. Thus, "blue is not yellow," is of identity. "Two triangles
upon equal bases between two parallels are equal," is of relation.
"Iron is susceptible of magnetical impressions," is of co-existence.
"God is," is of real existence. Though identity and co-existence are
truly nothing but relations, yet they are such peculiar ways of
agreement or disagreement of our ideas, that they deserve well to be
considered as distinct heads, and not under relation in general; since
they are so different grounds of affirmation and negation, as will
easily appear to any one, who will but reflect on what is said in
several places of this Essay.
  I should now proceed to examine the several degrees of our
knowledge, but that it is necessary first, to consider the different
acceptations of the word knowledge.
  8. Knowledge is either actual or habitual. There are several ways
wherein the mind is possessed of truth; each of which is called
knowledge.
  I. There is actual knowledge, which is the present view the mind has
of the agreement or disagreement of any of its ideas, or of the
relation they have one to another.
  II. A man is said to know any proposition, which having been once
laid before his thoughts, he evidently perceived the agreement or
disagreement of the ideas whereof it consists; and so lodged it in his
memory, that whenever that proposition comes again to be reflected on,
he, without doubt or hesitation, embraces the right side, assents
to, and is certain of the truth of it. This, I think, one may call
habitual knowledge. And thus a man may be said to know all those
truths which are lodged in his memory, by a foregoing clear and full
perception, whereof the mind is assured past doubt as often as it
has occasion to reflect on them. For our finite understandings being
able to think clearly and distinctly but on one thing at once, if
men had no knowledge of any more than what they actually thought on,
they would all be very ignorant: and he that knew most, would know but
one truth, that being all he was able to think on at one time.
  9. Habitual knowledge is of two degrees. Of habitual knowledge there
are, also, vulgarly speaking. two degrees:
  First, The one is of such truths laid up in the memory as,
whenever they occur to the mind, it actually perceives the relation is
between those ideas. And this is in all those truths whereof we have
an intuitive knowledge; where the ideas themselves, by an immediate
view, discover their agreement or disagreement one with another.
  Secondly, The other is of such truths whereof the mind having been
convinced, it retains the memory of the conviction, without the
proofs. Thus, a man that remembers certainly that he once perceived
the demonstration, that the three angles of a triangle are equal to
two right ones, is certain that he knows it, because he cannot doubt
the truth of it. In his adherence to a truth, where the
demonstration by which it was at first known is forgot, though a man
may be thought rather to believe his memory than really to know, and
this way of entertaining a truth seemed formerly to me like
something between opinion and knowledge; a sort of assurance which
exceeds bare belief, for that relies on the testimony of another;- yet
upon a due examination I find it comes not short of perfect certainty,
and is in effect true knowledge. That which is apt to mislead our
first thoughts into a mistake in this matter is, that the agreement or
disagreement of the ideas in this case is not perceived, as it was
at first, by an actual view of all the intermediate ideas whereby
the agreement or disagreement of those in the proposition was at first
perceived; but by other intermediate ideas, that show the agreement or
disagreement of the ideas contained in the proposition whose certainty
we remember. For example: in this proposition, that "the three
angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones," one who has seen
and clearly perceived the demonstration of this truth knows it to be
true, when that demonstration is gone out of his mind; so that at
present it is not actually in view, and possibly cannot be
recollected: but he knows it in a different way from what he did
before. The agreement of the two ideas joined in that proposition is
perceived; but it is by the intervention of other ideas than those
which at first produced that perception. He remembers, i.e. he knows
(for remembrance is but the reviving of some past knowledge) that he
was once certain of the truth of this proposition, that the three
angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones. The immutability
of the same relations between the same immutable things is now the
idea that shows him, that if the three angles of a triangle were
once equal to two right ones, they will always be equal to two right
ones. And hence he comes to be certain, that what was once true in the
case, is always true; what ideas once agreed will always agree; and
consequently what he once knew to be true, he will always know to be
true; as long as he can remember that he once knew it. Upon this
ground it is, that particular demonstrations in mathematics afford
general knowledge. If then the perception, that the same ideas will
eternally have the same habitudes and relations, be not a sufficient
ground of knowledge, there could be no knowledge of general
propositions in mathematics; for no mathematical demonstration would
be any other than particular: and when a man had demonstrated any
proposition concerning one triangle or circle, his knowledge would not
reach beyond that particular diagram. If he would extend it further,
he must renew his demonstration in another instance, before he could
know it to be true in another like triangle, and so on: by which means
one could never come to the knowledge of any general propositions.
Nobody, I think, can deny, that Mr. Newton certainly knows any
proposition that he now at any time reads in his book to be true;
though he has not in actual view that admirable chain of
intermediate ideas whereby he at first discovered it to be true.
Such a memory as that, able to retain such a train of particulars, may
be well thought beyond the reach of human faculties, when the very
discovery, perception, and laying together that wonderful connexion of
ideas, is found to surpass most readers' comprehension. But yet it
is evident the author himself knows the proposition to be true,
remembering he once saw the connexion of those ideas; as certainly
as he knows such a man wounded another, remembering that he saw him
run him through. But because the memory is not always so clear as
actual perception, and does in all men more or less decay in length of
time, this, amongst other differences, is one which shows that
demonstrative knowledge is much more imperfect than intuitive, as we
shall see in the following chapter.
                              Chapter II
                   Of the Degrees of our Knowledge

  1. Of the degrees, or differences in clearness, of our knowledge: 1.
Intuitive. All our knowledge consisting, as I have said, in the view
the mind has of its own ideas, which is the utmost light and
greatest certainty we, with our faculties, and in our way of
knowledge, are capable of, it may not be amiss to consider a little
the degrees of its evidence. The different clearness of our
knowledge seems to me to lie in the different way of perception the
mind has of the agreement or disagreement of any of its ideas. For
if we will reflect on our own ways of thinking, we will find, that
sometimes the mind perceives the agreement or disagreement of two
ideas immediately by themselves, without the intervention of any
other: and this I think we may call intuitive knowledge. For in this
the mind is at no pains of proving or examining, but perceives the
truth as the eye doth light, only by being directed towards it. Thus
the mind perceives that white is not black, that a circle is not a
triangle, that three are more than two and equal to one and two.
Such kinds of truths the mind perceives at the first sight of the
ideas together, by bare intuition; without the intervention of any
other idea: and this kind of knowledge is the clearest and most
certain that human frailty is capable of. This part of knowledge is
irresistible, and, like bright sunshine, forces itself immediately
to be perceived, as soon as ever the mind turns its view that way; and
leaves no room for hesitation, doubt, or examination, but the mind
is presently filled with the clear light of it. It is on this
intuition that depends all the certainty and evidence of all our
knowledge; Which certainty every one finds to be so great, that he
cannot imagine, and therefore not require a greater: for a man
cannot conceive himself capable of a greater certainty than to know
that any idea in his mind is such as he perceives it to be; and that
two ideas, wherein he perceives a difference, are different and not
precisely the same. He that demands a greater certainty than this,
demands he knows not what, and shows only that he has a mind to be a
sceptic, without being able to be so. Certainty depends so wholly on
this intuition, that, in the next degree of knowledge which I call
demonstrative, this intuition is necessary in all the connexions of
the intermediate ideas, without which we cannot attain knowledge and
certainty.
  2. II. Demonstrative. The next degree of knowledge is, where the
mind perceives the agreement or disagreement of any ideas, but not
immediately. Though wherever the mind perceives the agreement or
disagreement of any of its ideas, there be certain knowledge; yet it
does not always happen, that the mind sees that agreement or
disagreement, which there is between them, even where it is
discoverable; and in that case remains in ignorance, and at most
gets no further than a probable conjecture. The reason why the mind
cannot always perceive presently the agreement or disagreement of
two ideas, is, because those ideas, concerning whose agreement or
disagreement the inquiry is made, cannot by the mind be so put
together as to show it. In this case then, when the mind cannot so
bring its ideas together as by their immediate comparison, and as it
were juxta-position or application one to another, to perceive their
agreement or disagreement, it is fain, by the intervention of other
ideas (one or more, as it happens) to discover the agreement or
disagreement which it searches; and this is that which we call
reasoning. Thus, the mind being willing to know the agreement or
disagreement in bigness between the three angles of a triangle and two
right ones, cannot by an immediate view and comparing them do it:
because the three angles of a triangle cannot be brought at once,
and be compared with any other one, or two, angles; and so of this the
mind has no immediate, no intuitive knowledge. In this case the mind
is fain to find out some other angles, to which the three angles of
a triangle have an equality; and, finding those equal to two right
ones. comes to know their equality to two right ones.
  3. Demonstration depends on clearly perceived proofs. Those
intervening ideas, which serve to show the agreement of any two
others, are called proofs; and where the agreement and disagreement is
by this means plainly and clearly perceived, it is called
demonstration; it being shown to the understanding, and the mind
made to see that it is so. A quickness in the mind to find out these
intermediate ideas, (that shall discover the agreement or disagreement
of any other,) and to apply them right, is, I suppose, that which is
called sagacity.
  4. As certain, but not so easy and ready as intuitive knowledge.
This knowledge, by intervening proofs, though it be certain, yet the
evidence of it is not altogether so clear and bright, nor the assent
so ready, as in intuitive knowledge. For, though in demonstration
the mind does at last perceive the agreement or disagreement of the
ideas it considers; yet it is not without pains and attention: there
must be more than one transient view to find it. A steady
application and pursuit are required to this discovery: and there must
be a progression by steps and degrees, before the mind can in this way
arrive at certainty, and come to perceive the agreement or
repugnancy between two ideas that need proofs and the use of reason to
show it.
  5. The demonstrated conclusion not without doubt, precedent to the
demonstration. Another difference between intuitive and
demonstrative knowledge is, that, though in the latter all doubt be
removed when, by the intervention of the intermediate ideas, the
agreement or disagreement is perceived, yet before the demonstration
there was a doubt; which in intuitive knowledge cannot happen to the
mind that has its faculty of perception left to a degree capable of
distinct ideas; no more than it can be a doubt to the eye (that can
distinctly see white and black), Whether this ink and this paper be
all of a colour. If there be sight in the eyes, it will, at first
glimpse, without hesitation, perceive the words printed on this
paper different from the colour of the paper: and so if the mind
have the faculty of distinct perception, it will perceive the
agreement or disagreement of those ideas that produce intuitive
knowledge. If the eyes have lost the faculty of seeing, or the mind of
perceiving, we in vain inquire after the quickness of sight in one, or
clearness of perception in the other.
  6. Not so clear as intuitive knowledge. It is true, the perception
produced by demonstration is also very clear; yet it is often with a
great abatement of that evident lustre and full assurance that
always accompany that which I call intuitive: like a face reflected by
several mirrors one to another, where, as long as it retains the
similitude and agreement with the object, it produces a knowledge; but
it is still, in every successive reflection, with a lessening of
that perfect clearness and distinctness which is in the first; till at
last, after many removes, it has a great mixture of dimness, and is
not at first sight so knowable, especially to weak eyes. Thus it is
with knowledge made out by a long train of proof.
  7. Each step in demonstrated knowledge must have intuitive evidence.
Now, in every step reason makes in demonstrative knowledge, there is
an intuitive knowledge of that agreement or disagreement it seeks with
the next intermediate idea which it uses as a proof: for if it were
not so, that yet would need a proof; since without the perception of
such agreement or disagreement, there is no knowledge produced: if
it be perceived by itself, it is intuitive knowledge: if it cannot
be perceived by itself, there is need of some intervening idea, as a
common measure, to show their agreement or disagreement. By which it
is plain that every step in reasoning that produces knowledge, has
intuitive certainty; which when the mind perceives, there is no more
required but to remember it, to make the agreement or disagreement
of the ideas concerning which we inquire visible and certain. So
that to make anything a demonstration, it is necessary to perceive the
immediate agreement of the intervening ideas, whereby the agreement or
disagreement of the two ideas under examination (whereof the one is
always the first, and the other the last in the account) is found.
This intuitive perception of the agreement or disagreement of the
intermediate ideas, in each step and progression of the demonstration,
must also be carried exactly in the mind, and a man must be sure
that no part is left out: which, because in long deductions, and the
use of many proofs, the memory does not always so readily and
exactly retain; therefore it comes to pass, that this is more
imperfect than intuitive knowledge, and men embrace often falsehood
for demonstrations.
  8. Hence the mistake, ex praecognitis, et praeconcessis. The
necessity of this intuitive knowledge, in each step of scientifical or
demonstrative reasoning, gave occasion, I imagine, to that mistaken
axiom, That all reasoning was ex pracognitis et praeconcessis:
which, how far it is a mistake, I shall have occasion to show more
at large, when I come to consider propositions, and particularly those
propositions which are called maxims, and to show that it is by a
mistake that they are supposed to be the foundations of all our
knowledge and reasonings.
  9. Demonstration not limited to ideas of mathematical quantity. It
has been generally taken for granted, that mathematics alone are
capable of demonstrative certainty: but to have such an agreement or
disagreement as may intuitively be perceived, being, as I imagine, not
the privilege of the ideas of number, extension, and figure alone,
it may possibly be the want of due method and application in us, and
not of sufficient evidence in things, that demonstration has been
thought to have so little to do in other parts of knowledge, and
been scarce so much as aimed at by any but mathematicians. For
whatever ideas we have wherein the mind can perceive the immediate
agreement or disagreement that is between them, there the mind is
capable of intuitive knowledge; and where it can perceive the
agreement or disagreement of any two ideas, by an intuitive perception
of the agreement or disagreement they have with any intermediate
ideas, there the mind is capable of demonstration: which is not
limited to ideas of extension, figure, number, and their modes.
  10. Why it has been thought to be so limited. The reason why it
has been generally sought for, and supposed to be only in those, I
imagine has been, not only the general usefulness of those sciences:
but because, in comparing their equality or excess, the modes of
numbers have every the least difference very clear and perceivable:
and though in extension every the least excess is not so
perceptible, yet the mind has found out ways to examine, and
discover demonstratively, the just equality of two angles, or
extensions, or figures: and both these, i.e. numbers and figures,
can be set down by visible and lasting marks, wherein the ideas
under consideration are perfectly determined; which for the most
part they are not, where they are marked only by names and words.
  11. Modes of qualities not demonstrable like modes of quantity.
But in other simple ideas, whose modes and differences are made and
counted by degrees, and not quantity, we have not so nice and accurate
a distinction of their differences as to perceive, or find ways to
measure, their just equality, or the least differences. For those
other simple ideas, being appearances of sensations produced in us, by
the size, figure, number, and motion of minute corpuscles singly
insensible; their different degrees also depend upon the variation
of some or of all those causes: which, since it cannot be observed
by us, in particles of matter whereof each is too subtile to be
perceived, it is impossible for us to have any exact measures of the
different degrees of these simple ideas. For, supposing the
sensation or idea we name whiteness be produced in us by a certain
number of globules, which, having a verticity about their own centres,
strike upon the retina of the eye, with a certain degree of
rotation, as well as progressive swiftness; it will hence easily
follow, that the more the superficial parts of any body are so ordered
as to reflect the greater number of globules of light, and to give
them the proper rotation, which is fit to produce this sensation of
white in us, the more white will that body appear, that from an
equal space sends to the retina the greater number of such corpuscles,
with that peculiar sort of motion. I do not say that the nature of
light consists in very small round globules; nor of whiteness in
such a texture of parts as gives a certain rotation to these
globules when it reflects them: for I am not now treating physically
of light or colours. But this I think I may say, that I cannot (and
I would be glad any one would make intelligible that he did), conceive
how bodies without us can any ways affect our senses, but by the
immediate contact of the sensible bodies themselves, as in tasting and
feeling, or the impulse of some sensible particles coming from them,
as in seeing, hearing, and smelling; by the different impulse of which
parts, caused by their different size, figure, and motion, the variety
of sensations is produced in us.
  12. Particles of light and simple ideas of colour. Whether then they
be globules or no; or whether they have a verticity about their own
centres that produces the idea of whiteness in us; this is certain,
that the more particles of light are reflected from a body, fitted
to give them that peculiar motion which produces the sensation of
whiteness in us; and possibly too, the quicker that peculiar motion
is,- the whiter does the body appear from which the greatest number
are reflected, as is evident in the same piece of paper put in the
sunbeams, in the shade, and in a dark hole; in each of which it will
produce in us the idea of whiteness in far different degrees.
  13. The secondary qualities of things not discovered by
demonstration. Not knowing, therefore, what number of particles, nor
what motion of them, is fit to produce any precise degree of
whiteness, we cannot demonstrate the certain equality of any two
degrees of whiteness; because we have no certain standard to measure
them by, nor means to distinguish every the least real difference, the
only help we have being from our senses, which in this point fail
us. But where the difference is so great as to produce in the mind
clearly distinct ideas, whose differences can be perfectly retained,
there these ideas or colours, as we see in different kinds, as blue
and red, are as capable of demonstration as ideas of number and
extension. What I have here said of whiteness and colours, I think
holds true in all secondary qualities and their modes.
  14. Sensitive knowledge of the particular existence of finite beings
without us. These two, viz. intuition and demonstration, are the
degrees of our knowledge; whatever comes short of one of these, with
what assurance soever embraced, is but faith or opinion, but not
knowledge, at least in all general truths. There is, indeed, another
perception of the mind, employed about the particular existence of
finite beings without us, which, going beyond bare probability, and
yet not reaching perfectly to either of the foregoing degrees of
certainty, passes under the name of knowledge. There can be nothing
more certain than that the idea we receive from an external object
is in our minds: this is intuitive knowledge. But whether there be
anything more than barely that idea in our minds; whether we can
thence certainly infer the existence of anything without us, which
corresponds to that idea, is that whereof some men think there may
be a question made; because men may have such ideas in their minds,
when no such thing exists, no such object affects their senses. But
yet here I think we are provided with an evidence that puts us past
doubting. For I ask any one, Whether he be not invincibly conscious to
himself of a different perception, when he looks on the sun by day,
and thinks on it by night; when he actually tastes wormwood, or smells
a rose, or only thinks on that savour or odour? We as plainly find the
difference there is between any idea revived in our minds by our own
memory, and actually coming into our minds by our senses, as we do
between any two distinct ideas. If any one say, a dream may do the
same thing, and all these ideas may be produced in us without any
external objects; he may please to dream that I make him this answer:-
1. That it is no great matter, whether I remove his scruple or no:
where all is but dream, reasoning and arguments are of no use, truth
and knowledge nothing. 2. That I believe he will allow a very manifest
difference between dreaming of being in the fire, and being actually
in it. But yet if he be resolved to appear so sceptical as to
maintain, that what I call being actually in the fire is nothing but a
dream; and that we cannot thereby certainly know, that any such
thing as fire actually exists without us: I answer, That we
certainly finding that pleasure or pain follows upon the application
of certain objects to us, whose existence we perceive, or dream that
we perceive, by our senses; this certainty is as great as our
happiness or misery, beyond which we have no concernment to know or to
be. So that, I think, we may add to the two former sorts of
knowledge this also, of the existence of particular external
objects, by that perception and consciousness we have of the actual
entrance of ideas from them, and allow these three degrees of
knowledge, viz. intuitive, demonstrative, and sensitive: in each of
which there are different degrees and ways of evidence and certainty.
  15. Knowledge not always clear, where the ideas that enter into it
are clear. But since our knowledge is founded on and employed about
our ideas only, will it not follow from thence that it is
conformable to our ideas; and that where our ideas are clear and
distinct, or obscure and confused, our knowledge will be so too? To
which I answer, No: for our knowledge consisting in the perception
of the agreement or disagreement of any two ideas, its clearness or
obscurity consists in the clearness or obscurity of that perception,
and not in the clearness or obscurity of the ideas themselves: v.g.
a man that has as clear ideas of the angles of a triangle, and of
equality to two right ones, as any mathematician in the world, may yet
have but a very obscure perception of their agreement, and so have but
a very obscure knowledge of it. But ideas which, by reason of their
obscurity or otherwise, are confused, cannot produce any clear or
distinct knowledge; because, as far as any ideas are confused, so
far the mind cannot perceive clearly whether they agree or disagree.
Or to express the same thing in a way less apt to be misunderstood: he
that hath not determined ideas to the words he uses, cannot make
propositions of them of whose truth he can be certain.
                             Chapter III
                   Of the Extent of Human Knowledge

  1. Extent of our knowledge. Knowledge, as has been said, lying in
the perception of the agreement or disagreement of any of our ideas,
it follows from hence That,
  It extends no further than we have ideas. First, we can have
knowledge no further than we have ideas.
  2. It extends no further than we can perceive their agreement or
disagreement. Secondly, That we can have no knowledge further than
we can have perception of that agreement or disagreement. Which
perception being: 1. Either by intuition, or the immediate comparing
any two ideas; or, 2. By reason, examining the agreement or
disagreement of two ideas, by the intervention of some others; or,
3. By sensation, perceiving the existence of particular things:
hence it also follows:
  3. Intuitive knowledge extends itself not to all the relations of
all our ideas. Thirdly, That we cannot have an intuitive knowledge
that shall extend itself to all our ideas, and all that we would
know about them; because we cannot examine and perceive all the
relations they have one to another, by juxta-position, or an immediate
comparison one with another. Thus, having the ideas of an obtuse and
an acute angled triangle, both drawn from equal bases, and between
parallels, I can, by intuitive knowledge, perceive the one not to be
the other, but cannot that way know whether they be equal or no;
because their agreement or disagreement in equality can never be
perceived by an immediate comparing them: the difference of figure
makes their parts incapable of an exact immediate application; and
therefore there is need of some intervening qualities to measure
them by, which is demonstration, or rational knowledge.
  4. Nor does demonstrative knowledge. Fourthly, It follows, also,
from what is above observed, that our rational knowledge cannot
reach to the whole extent of our ideas: because between two
different ideas we would examine, we cannot always find such mediums
as we can connect one to another with an intuitive knowledge in all
the parts of the deduction; and wherever that fails, we come short
of knowledge and demonstration.
  5. Sensitive knowledge narrower than either. Fifthly, Sensitive
knowledge reaching no further than the existence of things actually
present to our senses, is yet much narrower than either of the former.
  6. Our knowledge, therefore, narrower than our ideas. Sixthly,
From all which it is evident, that the extent of our knowledge comes
not only short of the reality of things, but even of the extent of our
own ideas. Though our knowledge be limited to our ideas, and cannot
exceed them either in extent or perfection; and though these be very
narrow bounds, in respect of the extent of All-being, and far short of
what we may justly imagine to be in some even created
understandings, not tied down to the dull and narrow information
that is to be received from some few, and not very acute, ways of
perception, such as are our senses; yet it would be well with us if
our knowledge were but as large as our ideas, and there were not
many doubts and inquiries concerning the ideas we have, whereof we are
not, nor I believe ever shall be in this world resolved.
Nevertheless I do not question but that human knowledge, under the
present circumstances of our beings and constitutions, may be
carried much further than it has hitherto been, if men would
sincerely, and with freedom of mind, employ all that industry and
labour of thought, in improving the means of discovering truth,
which they do for the colouring or support of falsehood, to maintain a
system, interest, or party they are once engaged in. But yet after
all, I think I may, without injury to human perfection, be
confident, that our knowledge would never reach to all we might desire
to know concerning those ideas we have; nor be able to surmount all
the difficulties, and resolve all the questions that might arise
concerning any of them. We have the ideas of a square, a circle, and
equality; and yet, perhaps, shall never be able to find a circle equal
to a square, and certainly know that it is so. We have the ideas of
matter and thinking, but possibly shall never be able to know
whether any mere material being thinks or no; it being impossible
for us, by the contemplation of our own ideas, without revelation,
to discover whether Omnipotency has not given to some systems of
matter, fitly disposed, a power to perceive and think, or else
joined and fixed to matter, so disposed, a thinking immaterial
substance: it being, in respect of our notions, not much more remote
from our comprehension to conceive that GOD can, if he pleases,
superadd to matter a faculty of thinking, than that he should superadd
to it another substance with a faculty of thinking; since we know
not wherein thinking consists, nor to what sort of substances the
Almighty has been pleased to give that power, which cannot be in any
created being, but merely by the good pleasure and bounty of the
Creator.
  Whether Matter may not be made by God to think is more than man
can know. For I see no contradiction in it, that the first Eternal
thinking Being, or Omnipotent Spirit, should, if he pleased, give to
certain systems of created senseless matter, put together as he thinks
fit, some degrees of sense, perception, and thought: though, as I
think I have proved, Bk. iv. ch. 10, SS 14, &c., it is no less than
a contradiction to suppose matter (which is evidently in its own
nature void of sense and thought) should be that Eternal
first-thinking Being. What certainty of knowledge can any one have,
that some perceptions, such as, v.g., pleasure and pain, should not be
in some bodies themselves, after a certain manner modified and
moved, as well as that they should be in an immaterial substance, upon
the motion of the parts of body: Body, as far as we can conceive,
being able only to strike and affect body, and motion, according to
the utmost reach of our ideas, being able to produce nothing but
motion; so that when we allow it to produce pleasure or pain, or the
idea of a colour or sound, we are fain to quit our reason, go beyond
our ideas, and attribute it wholly to the good pleasure of our
Maker. For, since we must allow He has annexed effects to motion which
we can no way conceive motion able to produce, what reason have we
to conclude that He could not order them as well to be produced in a
subject we cannot conceive capable of them, as well as in a subject we
cannot conceive the motion of matter can any way operate upon? I say
not this, that I would any way lessen the belief of the soul's
immateriality: I am not here speaking of probability, but knowledge;
and I think not only that it becomes the modesty of philosophy not
to pronounce magisterially, where we want that evidence that can
produce knowledge; but also, that it is of use to us to discern how
far our knowledge does reach; for the state we are at present in,
not being that of vision, we must in many things content ourselves
with faith and probability: and in the present question, about the
Immateriality of the Soul, if our faculties cannot arrive at
demonstrative certainty, we need not think it strange. All the great
ends of morality and religion are well enough secured, without
philosophical proofs of the soul's immateriality; since it is evident,
that he who made us at the beginning to subsist here, sensible
intelligent beings, and for several years continued us in such a
state, can and will restore us to the like state of sensibility in
another world, and make us capable there to receive the retribution he
has designed to men, according to their doings in this life. And
therefore it is not of such mighty necessity to determine one way or
the other, as some, over-zealous for or against the immateriality of
the soul, have been forward to make the world believe. Who, either
on the one side, indulging too much their thoughts immersed altogether
in matter, can allow no existence to what is not material: or who,
on the other side, finding not cogitation within the natural powers of
matter, examined over and over again by the utmost intention of
mind, have the confidence to conclude- That Omnipotency itself
cannot give perception and thought to a substance which has the
modification of solidity. He that considers how hardly sensation is,
in our thoughts, reconcilable to extended matter; or existence to
anything that has no extension at all, will confess that he is very
far from certainly knowing what his soul is. It is a point which seems
to me to be put out of the reach of our knowledge: and he who will
give himself leave to consider freely, and look into the dark and
intricate part of each hypothesis, will scarce find his reason able to
determine him fixedly for or against the soul's materiality. Since, on
which side soever he views it, either as an unextended substance, or
as a thinking extended matter, the difficulty to conceive either will,
whilst either alone is in his thoughts, still drive him to the
contrary side. An unfair way which some men take with themselves: who,
because of the inconceivableness of something they find in one,
throw themselves violently into the contrary hypothesis, though
altogether as unintelligible to an unbiassed understanding. This
serves not only to show the weakness and the scantiness of our
knowledge, but the insignificant triumph of such sort of arguments;
which, drawn from our own views, may satisfy us that we can find no
certainty on one side of the question: but do not at all thereby
help us to truth by running into the opposite opinion; which, on
examination, will be found clogged with equal difficulties. For what
safety, what advantage to any one is it, for the avoiding the
seeming absurdities, and to him unsurmountable rubs, he meets with
in one opinion, to take refuge in the contrary, which is built on
something altogether as inexplicable, and as far remote from his
comprehension? It is past controversy, that we have in us something
that thinks; our very doubts about what it is, confirm the certainty
of its being, though we must content ourselves in the ignorance of
what kind of being it is: and it is in vain to go about to be
sceptical in this, as it is unreasonable in most other cases to be
positive against the being of anything, because we cannot comprehend
its nature. For I would fain know what substance exists, that has
not something in it which manifestly baffles our understandings. Other
spirits, who see and know the nature and inward constitution of
things, how much must they exceed us in knowledge? To which, if we add
larger comprehension, which enables them at one glance to see the
connexion and agreement of very many ideas, and readily supplies to
them the intermediate proofs, which we by single and slow steps, and
long poring in the dark, hardly at last find out, and are often
ready to forget one before we have hunted out another; we may guess at
some part of the happiness of superior ranks of spirits, who have a
quicker and more penetrating sight, as well as a larger field of
knowledge.
  But to return to the argument in hand: our knowledge, I say, is
not only limited to the paucity and imperfections of the ideas we
have, and which we employ it about, but even comes short of that
too: but how far it reaches, let us now inquire.
  7. How far our knowledge reaches. The affirmations or negations we
make concerning the ideas we have, may, as I have before intimated
in general, be reduced to these four sorts, viz. identity,
co-existence, relation, and real existence. I shall examine how far
our knowledge extends in each of these:
  8. Our knowledge of identity and diversity in ideas extends as far
as our ideas themselves. First, as to identity and diversity. In
this way of agreement or disagreement of our ideas, our intuitive
knowledge is as far extended as our ideas themselves: and there can be
no idea in the mind, which it does not, presently, by an intuitive
knowledge, perceive to be what it is, and to be different from any
other.
  9. Of their co-existence, extends only a very little way.
Secondly, as to the second sort, which is the agreement or
disagreement of our ideas in co-existence, in this our knowledge is
very short; though in this consists the greatest and most material
part of our knowledge concerning substances. For our ideas of the
species of substances being, as I have showed, nothing but certain
collections of simple ideas united in one subject, and so
co-existing together; v.g. our idea of flame is a body hot,
luminous, and moving upward; of gold, a body heavy to a certain
degree, yellow, malleable, and fusible: for these, or some such
complex ideas as these, in men's minds, do these two names of the
different substances, flame and gold, stand for. When we would know
anything further concerning these, or any other sort of substances,
what do we inquire, but what other qualities or powers these
substances have or have not? Which is nothing else but to know what
other simple ideas do, or do not co-exist with those that make up that
complex idea?
  10. Because the connexion between simple ideas in substances is
for the most part unknown. This, how weighty and considerable a part
soever of human science, is yet very narrow, and scarce any at all.
The reason whereof is, that the simple ideas whereof our complex ideas
of substances are made up are, for the most part, such as carry with
them, in their own nature, no visible necessary connexion or
inconsistency with any other simple ideas, whose co-existence with
them we would inform ourselves about.
  11. Especially of the secondary qualities of bodies. The ideas
that our complex ones of substances are made up of, and about which
our knowledge concerning substances is most employed, are those of
their secondary qualities; which depending all (as has been shown)
upon the primary qualities of their minute and insensible parts; or,
if not upon them, upon something yet more remote from our
comprehension; it is impossible we should know which have a
necessary union or inconsistency one with another. For, not knowing
the root they spring from, not knowing what size, figure, and
texture of parts they are, on which depend, and from which result
those qualities which make our complex idea of gold, it is
impossible we should know what other qualities result from, or are
incompatible with, the same constitution of the insensible parts of
gold; and so consequently must always co-exist with that complex
idea we have of it, or else are inconsistent with it.
  12. Because necessary connexion between any secondary and the
primary qualities is undiscoverable by us. Besides this ignorance of
the primary qualities of the insensible parts of bodies, on which
depend all their secondary qualities, there is yet another and more
incurable part of ignorance, which sets us more remote from a
certain knowledge of the co-existence or inco-existence (if I may so
say) of different ideas in the same subject; and that is, that there
is no discoverable connexion between any secondary quality and those
primary qualities which it depends on.
  13. We have no perfect knowledge of their primary qualities. That
the size, figure, and motion of one body should cause a change in
the size, figure, and motion of another body, is not beyond our
conception; the separation of the parts of one body upon the intrusion
of another; and the change from rest to motion upon impulse; these and
the like seem to have some connexion one with another. And if we
knew these primary qualities of bodies, we might have reason to hope
we might be able to know a great deal more of these operations of them
one upon another: but our minds not being able to discover any
connexion betwixt these primary qualities of bodies and the sensations
that are produced in us by them, we can never be able to establish
certain and undoubted rules of the consequence or co-existence of
any secondary qualities, though we could discover the size, figure, or
motion of those invisible parts which immediately produce them. We are
so far from knowing what figure, size, or motion of parts produce a
yellow colour, a sweet taste, or a sharp sound, that we can by no
means conceive how any size, figure, or motion of any particles, can
possibly produce in us the idea of any colour, taste, or sound
whatsoever: there is no conceivable connexion between the one and
the other.
  14. And seek in vain for certain and universal knowledge of
unperceived qualities in substances. In vain, therefore, shall we
endeavour to discover by our ideas (the only true way of certain and
universal knowledge) what other ideas are to be found constantly
joined with that of our complex idea of any substance: since we
neither know the real constitution of the minute parts on which
their qualities do depend; nor, did we know them, could we discover
any necessary connexion between them and any of the secondary
qualities: which is necessary to be done before we can certainly
know their necessary co-existence. So, that, let our complex idea of
any species of substances be what it will, we can hardly, from the
simple ideas contained in it, certainly determine the necessary
co-existence of any other quality whatsoever. Our knowledge in all
these inquiries reaches very little further than our experience.
Indeed some few of the primary qualities have a necessary dependence
and visible connexion one with another, as figure necessarily supposes
extension; receiving or communicating motion by impulse, supposes
solidity. But though these, and perhaps some others of our ideas have:
yet there are so few of them that have a visible connexion one with
another, that we can by intuition or demonstration discover the
co-existence of very few of the qualities that are to be found
united in substances: and we are left only to the assistance of our
senses to make known to us what qualities they contain. For of all the
qualities that are co-existent in any subject, without this dependence
and evident connexion of their ideas one with another, we cannot
know certainly any two to co-exist, any further than experience, by
our senses, informs us. Thus, though we see the yellow colour, and,
upon trial, find the weight, malleableness, fusibility, and
fixedness that are united in a piece of gold, yet; because no one of
these ideas has any evident dependence or necessary connexion with the
other, we cannot certainly know that where any four of these are,
the fifth will be there also, how highly probable soever it may be;
because the highest probability amounts not to certainty, without
which there can be no true knowledge. For this co-existence can be
no further known than it is perceived; and it cannot be perceived
but either in particular subjects, by the observation of our senses,
or, in general, by the necessary connexion of the ideas themselves.
  15. Of repugnancy to co-exist, our knowledge is larger. As to the
incompatibility or repugnancy to coexistence, we may know that any
subject may have of each sort of primary qualities but one
particular at once: v.g. each particular extension, figure, number
of parts, motion, excludes all other of each kind. The like also is
certain of all sensible ideas peculiar to each sense; for whatever
of each kind is present in any subject, excludes all other of that
sort: v.g. no one subject can have two smells or two colours at the
same time. To this, perhaps will be said, Has not an opal, or the
infusion of lignum nephriticum, two colours at the same time? To which
I answer, that these bodies, to eyes differently placed, may at the
same time afford different colours: but I take liberty also to say, to
eyes differently placed, it is different parts of the object that
reflect the particles of light: and therefore it is not the same
part of the object, and so not the very same subject, which at the
same time appears both yellow and azure. For, it is as impossible that
the very same particle of any body should at the same time differently
modify or reflect the rays of light, as that it should have two
different figures and textures at the same time.
  16. Our knowledge of the co-existence of powers in bodies extends
but a very little way. But as to the powers of substances to change
the sensible qualities of other bodies, which make a great part of our
inquiries about them, and is no inconsiderable branch of our
knowledge; I doubt as to these, whether our knowledge reaches much
further than our experience; or whether we can come to the discovery
of most of these powers, and be certain that they are in any
subject, by the connexion with any of those ideas which to us make its
essence. Because the active and passive powers of bodies, and their
ways of operating, consisting in a texture and motion of parts which
we cannot by any means come to discover; it is but in very few cases
we can be able to perceive their dependence on, or repugnance to,
any of those ideas which make our complex one of that sort of
things. I have here instanced in the corpuscularian hypothesis, as
that which is thought to go furthest in an intelligible explication of
those qualities of bodies; and I fear the weakness of human
understanding is scarce able to substitute another, which will
afford us a fuller and clearer discovery of the necessary connexion
and coexistence of the powers which are to be observed united in
several sorts of them. This at least is certain, that, whichever
hypothesis be clearest and truest, (for of that it is not my
business to determine,) our knowledge concerning corporeal
substances will be very little advanced by any of them, till we are
made to see what qualities and powers of bodies have a necessary
connexion or repugnancy one with another; which in the present state
of philosophy I think we know but to a very small degree: and I
doubt whether, with those faculties we have, we shall ever be able
to carry our general knowledge (I say not particular experience) in
this part much further. Experience is that which in this part we
must depend on. And it were to be wished that it were more improved.
We find the advantages some men's generous pains have this way brought
to the stock of natural knowledge. And if others, especially the
philosophers by fire, who pretend to it, had been so wary in their
observations, and sincere in their reports as those who call
themselves philosophers ought to have been, our acquaintance with
the bodies here about us, and our insight into their powers and
operations had been yet much greater.
  17. Of the powers that co-exist in spirits yet narrower. If we are
at a loss in respect of the powers and operations of bodies, I think
it is easy to conclude we are much more in the dark in reference to
spirits; whereof we naturally have no ideas but what we draw from that
of our own, by reflecting on the operations of our own souls within
us, as far as they can come within our observation. But how
inconsiderable a rank the spirits that inhabit our bodies hold amongst
those various and possibly innumerable kinds of nobler beings; and how
far short they come of the endowments and perfections of cherubim
and seraphim, and infinite sorts of spirits above us, is what by a
transient hint in another place I have offered to my reader's
consideration.
  18. Of relations between abstracted ideas it is not easy to say
how far our knowledge extends. Thirdly, As to the third sort of our
knowledge, viz. the agreement or disagreement of any of our ideas in
any other relation: this, as it is the largest field of our knowledge,
so it is hard to determine how far it may extend: because the advances
that are made in this part of knowledge, depending on our sagacity
in finding intermediate ideas, that may show the relations and
habitudes of ideas whose co-existence is not considered, it is a
hard matter to tell when we are at an end of such discoveries; and
when reason has all the helps it is capable of, for the finding of
proofs or examining the agreement or disagreement of remote ideas.
They that are ignorant of Algebra cannot imagine the wonders in this
kind are to be done by it: and what further improvements and helps
advantageous to other parts of knowledge the sagacious mind of man may
yet find out, it is not easy to determine. This at least I believe,
that the ideas of quantity are not those alone that are capable of
demonstration and knowledge; and that other, and perhaps more
useful, parts of contemplation, would afford us certainty, if vices,
passions, and domineering interest did not oppose or menace such
endeavours.
  Morality capable of demonstration. The idea of a supreme Being,
infinite in power, goodness, and wisdom, whose workmanship we are, and
on whom we depend; and the idea of ourselves, as understanding,
rational creatures, being such as are clear in us, would, I suppose,
if duly considered and pursued, afford such foundations of our duty
and rules of action as might place morality amongst the sciences
capable of demonstration: wherein I doubt not but from self-evident
propositions, by necessary consequences, as incontestible as those
in mathematics, the measures of right and wrong might be made out,
to any one that will apply himself with the same indifferency and
attention to the one as he does to the other of these sciences. The
relation of other modes may certainly be perceived, as well as those
of number and extension: and I cannot see why they should not also
be capable of demonstration, if due methods were thought on to examine
or pursue their agreement or disagreement. "Where there is no property
there is no injustice," is a proposition as certain as any
demonstration in Euclid: for the idea of property being a right to
anything, and the idea to which the name "injustice" is given being
the invasion or violation of that right, it is evident that these
ideas, being thus established, and these names annexed to them, I
can as certainly know this proposition to be true, as that a
triangle has three angles equal to two right ones. Again: "No
government allows absolute liberty." The idea of government being
the establishment of society upon certain rules or laws which
require conformity to them; and the idea of absolute liberty being for
any one to do whatever he pleases; I am as capable of being certain of
the truth of this proposition as of any in the mathematics.
  19. Two things have made moral ideas to be thought incapable of
demonstration: their unfitness for sensible representation, and
their complexedness. That which in this respect has given the
advantage to the ideas of quantity, and made them thought more capable
of certainty and demonstration, is,
  First, That they can be set down and represented by sensible
marks, which have a greater and nearer correspondence with them than
any words or sounds whatsoever. Diagrams drawn on paper are copies
of the ideas in the mind, and not liable to the uncertainty that words
carry in their signification. An angle, circle, or square, drawn in
lines, lies open to the view, and cannot be mistaken: it remains
unchangeable, and may at leisure be considered and examined, and the
demonstration be revised, and all the parts of it may be gone over
more than once, without any danger of the least change in the ideas.
This cannot be thus done in moral ideas: we have no sensible marks
that resemble them, whereby we can set them down; we have nothing
but words to express them by; which, though when written they remain
the same, yet the ideas they stand for may change in the same man; and
it is very seldom that they are not different in different persons.
  Secondly, Another thing that makes the greater difficulty in
ethics is, That moral ideas are commonly more complex than those of
the figures ordinarily considered in mathematics. From whence these
two inconveniences follow:- First, that their names are of more
uncertain signification, the precise collection of simple ideas they
stand for not being so easily agreed on; and so the sign that is
used for them in communication always, and in thinking often, does not
steadily carry with it the same idea. Upon which the same disorder,
confusion, and error follow, as would if a man, going to demonstrate
something of an heptagon, should, in the diagram he took to do it,
leave out one of the angles, or by oversight make the figure with
one angle more than the name ordinarily imported, or he intended it
should when at first he thought of his demonstration. This often
happens, and is hardly avoidable in very complex moral ideas, where
the same name being retained, one angle, i.e. one simple idea, is left
out, or put in the complex one (still called by the same name) more at
one time than another. Secondly, From the complexedness of these moral
ideas there follows another inconvenience, viz. that the mind cannot
easily retain those precise combinations so exactly and perfectly as
is necessary in the examination of the habitudes and
correspondences, agreements or disagreements, of several of them one
with another; especially where it is to be judged of by long
deductions, and the intervention of several other complex ideas to
show the agreement or disagreement of two remote ones.
  The great help against this which mathematicians find in diagrams
and figures, which remain unalterable in their draughts, is very
apparent, and the memory would often have great difficulty otherwise
to retain them so exactly, whilst the mind went over the parts of them
step by step to examine their several correspondences. And though in
casting up a long sum either in addition, multiplication, or division,
every part be only a progression of the mind taking a view of its
own ideas, and considering their agreement or disagreement, and the
resolution of the question be nothing but the result of the whole,
made up of such particulars, whereof the mind has a clear
perception: yet, without setting down the several parts by marks,
whose precise significations are known, and by marks that last, and
remain in view when the memory had let them go, it would be almost
impossible to carry so many different ideas in the mind, without
confounding or letting slip some parts of the reckoning, and thereby
making all our reasonings about it useless. In which case the
cyphers or marks help not the mind at all to perceive the agreement of
any two or more numbers, their equalities or proportions; that the
mind has only by intuition of its own ideas of the numbers themselves.
But the numerical characters are helps to the memory, to record and
retain the several ideas about which the demonstration is made,
whereby a man may know how far his intuitive knowledge in surveying
several of the particulars has proceeded; that so he may without
confusion go on to what is yet unknown; and at last have in one view
before him the result of all his perceptions and reasonings.
  20. Remedies of our difficulties in dealing demonstratively with
moral ideas. One part of these disadvantages in moral ideas which
has made them be thought not capable of demonstration, may in a good
measure be remedied by definitions, setting down that collection of
simple ideas, which every term shall stand for: and then using the
terms steadily and constantly for that precise collection. And what
methods algebra, or something of that kind, may hereafter suggest,
to remove the other difficulties, it is not easy to foretell.
Confident I am, that, if men would in the same method, and with the
same indifferency, search after moral as they do mathematical
truths, they would find them have a stronger connexion one with
another, and a more necessary consequence from our clear and
distinct ideas, and to come nearer perfect demonstration than is
commonly imagined. But much of this is not to be expected, whilst
the desire of esteem, riches, or power makes men espouse the
well-endowed opinions in fashion, and then seek arguments either to
make good their beauty, or varnish over and cover their deformity.
Nothing being so beautiful to the eye as truth is to the mind; nothing
so deformed and irreconcilable to the understanding as a lie. For
though many a man can with satisfaction enough own a no very
handsome wife to in his bosom; yet who is bold enough openly to avow
that he has espoused a falsehood, and received into his breast so ugly
a thing as a lie? Whilst the parties of men cram their tenets down all
men's throats whom they can get into their power, without permitting
them to examine their truth or falsehood; and will not let truth
have fair play in the world, nor men the liberty to search after it:
what improvements can be expected of this kind? What greater light can
be hoped for in the moral sciences? The subject part of mankind in
most places might, instead thereof, with Egyptian bondage, expect
Egyptian darkness, were not the candle of the Lord set up by himself
in men's minds, which it is impossible for the breath or power of
man wholly to extinguish.
  21. Of the three real existences of which we have certain knowledge.
Fourthly, As to the fourth sort of our knowledge, viz. of the real
actual existence of things, we have an intuitive knowledge of our
own existence, and a demonstrative knowledge of the existence of a
God: of the existence of anything else, we have no other but a
sensitive knowledge; which extends not beyond the objects present to
our senses.
  22. Our ignorance great. Our knowledge being so narrow, as I have
shown, it will perhaps give us some light into the present state of
our minds if we look a little into the dark side, and take a view of
our ignorance; which, being infinitely larger than our knowledge,
may serve much to the quieting of disputes, and improvement of
useful knowledge; if, discovering how far we have clear and distinct
ideas, we confine our thoughts within the contemplation of those
things that are within the reach of our understandings, and launch not
out into that abyss of darkness, (where we have not eyes to see, nor
faculties to perceive anything), out of a presumption that nothing
is beyond our comprehension. But to be satisfied of the folly of
such a conceit, we need not go far. He that knows anything, knows
this, in the first place, that he need not seek long for instances
of his ignorance. The meanest and most obvious things that come in our
way have dark sides, that the quickest sight cannot penetrate into.
The clearest and most enlarged understandings of thinking men find
themselves puzzled and at a loss in every particle of matter. We shall
the less wonder to find it so, when we consider the causes of our
ignorance; which, from what has been said, I suppose will be found
to be these three:-
  Its causes. First, Want of ideas.
  Secondly, Want of a discoverable connexion between the ideas we
have.
  Thirdly, Want of tracing and examining our ideas.
  23. One cause of our ignorance want of ideas. First, There are
some things, and those not a few, that we are ignorant of, for want of
ideas.
  I. Want of simple ideas that other creatures in other parts of the
universe may have. First, all the simple ideas we have are confined
(as I have shown) to those we receive from corporeal objects by
sensation, and from the operations of our own minds as the objects
of reflection. But how much these few and narrow inlets are
disproportionate to the vast whole extent of all beings, will not be
hard to persuade those who are not so foolish as to think their span
the measure of all things. What other simple ideas it is possible
the creatures in other parts of the universe may have, by the
assistance of senses and faculties more or perfecter than we have,
or different from ours, it is not for us to determine. But to say or
think there are no such, because we conceive nothing of them, is no
better an argument than if a blind man should be positive in it,
that there was no such thing as sight and colours, because he had no
manner of idea of any such thing, nor could by any means frame to
himself any notions about seeing. The ignorance and darkness that is
in us no more hinders nor confines the knowledge that is in others,
than the blindness of a mole is an argument against the
quicksightedness of an eagle. He that will consider the infinite
power, wisdom, and goodness of the Creator of all things will find
reason to think it was not all laid out upon so inconsiderable,
mean, and impotent a creature as he will find man to be; who in all
probability is one of the lowest of all intellectual beings. What
faculties, therefore, other species of creatures have to penetrate
into the nature and inmost constitutions of things; what ideas they
may receive of them far different from ours, we know not. This we know
and certainly find, that we want several other views of them besides
those we have, to make discoveries of them more perfect. And we may be
convinced that the ideas we can attain to by our faculties are very
disproportionate to things themselves, when a positive, clear,
distinct one of substance itself, which is the foundation of all the
rest, is concealed from us. But want of ideas of this kind, being a
part as well as cause of our ignorance, cannot be described. Only this
I think I may confidently say of it, That the intellectual and
sensible world are in this perfectly alike: that that part which we
see of either of them holds no proportion with what we see not; and
whatsoever we can reach with our eyes or our thoughts of either of
them is but a point, almost nothing in comparison of the rest.
  24. Want of simple ideas that men are capable of having, but have
not, because of their remoteness. Secondly, Another great cause of
ignorance is the want of ideas we are capable of. As the want of ideas
which our faculties are not able to give us shuts us wholly from those
views of things which it is reasonable to think other beings,
perfecter than we, have, of which we know nothing; so the want of
ideas I now speak of keeps us in ignorance of things we conceive
capable of being known to us. Bulk, figure, and motion we have ideas
of. But though we are not without ideas of these primary qualities
of bodies in general, yet not knowing what is the particular bulk,
figure, and motion, of the greatest part of the bodies of the
universe, we are ignorant of the several powers, efficacies, and
ways of operation, whereby the effects which we daily see are
produced. These are hid from us, in some things by being too remote,
and in others by being too minute. When we consider the vast
distance of the known and visible parts of the world, and the
reasons we have to think that what lies within our ken is but a
small part of the universe, we shall then discover a huge abyss of
ignorance. What are the particular fabrics of the great masses of
matter which make up the whole stupendous frame of corporeal beings;
how far they are extended; what is their motion, and how continued
or communicated; and what influence they have one upon another, are
contemplations that at first glimpse our thoughts lose themselves
in. If we narrow our contemplations, and confine our thoughts to
this little canton- I mean this system of our sun, and the grosser
masses of matter that visibly move about it, What several sorts of
vegetables, animals, and intellectual corporeal beings, infinitely
different from those of our little spot of earth, may there probably
be in the other planets, to the knowledge of which, even of their
outward figures and parts, we can no way attain whilst we are confined
to this earth; there being no natural means, either by sensation or
reflection, to convey their certain ideas into our minds? They are out
of the reach of those inlets of all our knowledge: and what sorts of
furniture and inhabitants those mansions contain in them we cannot
so much as guess, much less have clear and distinct ideas of them.
  25. Because of their minuteness. If a great, nay, far the greatest
part of the several ranks of bodies in the universe escape our
notice by their remoteness, there are others that are no less
concealed from us by their minuteness. These insensible corpuscles,
being the active parts of matter, and the great instruments of nature,
on which depend not only all their secondary qualities, but also
most of their natural operations, our want of precise distinct ideas
of their primary qualities keeps us in an incurable ignorance of
what we desire to know about them. I doubt not but if we could
discover the figure, size, texture, and motion of the minute
constituent parts of any two bodies, we should know without trial
several of their operations one upon another; as we do now the
properties of a square or a triangle. Did we know the mechanical
affections of the particles of rhubarb, hemlock, opium, and a man,
as a watchmaker does those of a watch, whereby it performs its
operations; and of a file, which by rubbing on them will alter the
figure of any of the wheels; we should be able to tell beforehand that
rhubarb will purge, hemlock kill, and opium make a man sleep: as
well as a watchmaker can, that a little piece of paper laid on the
balance will keep the watch from going till it be removed; or that,
some small part of it being rubbed by a file, the machine would
quite lose its motion, and the watch go no more. The dissolving of
silver in aqua fortis, and gold in aqua regia, and not vice versa,
would be then perhaps no more difficult to know than it is to a
smith to understand why the turning of one key will open a lock, and
not the turning of another. But whilst we are destitute of senses
acute enough to discover the minute particles of bodies, and to give
us ideas of their mechanical affections, we must be content to be
ignorant of their properties and ways of operation; nor can we be
assured about them any further than some few trials we make are able
to reach. But whether they will succeed again another time, we
cannot be certain. This hinders our certain knowledge of universal
truths concerning natural bodies: and our reason carries us herein
very little beyond particular matter of fact.
  26. Hence no science of bodies within our reach. And therefore I
am apt to doubt that, how far soever human industry may advance useful
and experimental philosophy in physical things, scientifical will
still be out of our reach: because we want perfect and adequate
ideas of those very bodies which are nearest to us, and most under our
command. Those which we have ranked into classes under names, and we
think ourselves best acquainted with, we have but very imperfect and
incomplete ideas of. Distinct ideas of the several sorts of bodies
that fall under the examination of our senses perhaps we may have: but
adequate ideas, I suspect, we have not of any one amongst them. And
though the former of these will serve us for common use and discourse,
yet whilst we want the latter, we are not capable of scientifical
knowledge; nor shall ever be able to discover general, instructive,
unquestionable truths concerning them. Certainty and demonstration are
things we must not, in these matters, pretend to. By the colour,
figure, taste, and smell, and other sensible qualities, we have as
clear and distinct ideas of sage and hemlock, as we have of a circle
and a triangle: but having no ideas of the particular primary
qualities of the minute parts of either of these plants, nor of
other bodies which we would apply them to, we cannot tell what effects
they will produce; nor when we see those effects can we so much as
guess, much less know, their manner of production. Thus, having no
ideas of the particular mechanical affections of the minute parts of
bodies that are within our view and reach, we are ignorant of their
constitutions, powers, and operations: and of bodies more remote we
are yet more ignorant, not knowing so much as their very outward
shapes, or the sensible and grosser parts of their constitutions.
  27. Much less a science of unembodied spirits. This at first will
show us how disproportionate our knowledge is to the whole extent even
of material beings; to which if we add the consideration of that
infinite number of spirits that may be, and probably are, which are
yet more remote from our knowledge, whereof we have no cognizance, nor
can frame to ourselves any distinct ideas of their several ranks and
sorts, we shall find this cause of ignorance conceal from us, in an
impenetrable obscurity, almost the whole intellectual world; a greater
certainty, and more beautiful world than the material. For, bating
some very few, and those, if I may so call them, superficial ideas
of spirit, which by reflection we get of our own, and from thence
the best we can collect of the Father of all spirits, the eternal
independent Author of them, and us, and all things, we have no certain
information, so much as of the existence of other spirits, but by
revelation. Angels of all sorts are naturally beyond our discovery;
and all those intelligences, whereof it is likely there are more
orders than of corporeal substances, are things whereof our natural
faculties give us no certain account at all. That there are minds
and thinking beings in other men as well as himself, every man has a
reason, from their words and actions, to be satisfied: and the
knowledge of his own mind cannot suffer a man that considers, to be
ignorant that there is a God. But that there are degrees of
spiritual beings between us and the great God, who is there, that,
by his own search and ability, can come to know? Much less have we
distinct ideas of their different natures, conditions, states, powers,
and several constitutions wherein they agree or differ from one
another and from us. And, therefore, in what concerns their
different species and properties we are in absolute ignorance.
  28. Another cause, want of a discoverable connexion between ideas we
have. Secondly, What a small part of the substantial beings that are
in the universe the want of ideas leaves open to our knowledge, we
have seen. In the next place, another cause of ignorance, of no less
moment, is a want of a discoverable connexion between those ideas we
have. For wherever we want that, we are utterly incapable of universal
and certain knowledge; and are, in the former case, left only to
observation and experiment: which, how narrow and confined it is,
how far from general knowledge we need not be told. I shall give
some few instances of this cause of our ignorance, and so leave it. It
is evident that the bulk, figure, and motion of several bodies about
us produce in us several sensations, as of colours, sounds, tastes,
smells, pleasure, and pain, &c. These mechanical affections of
bodies having no affinity at all with those ideas they produce in
us, (there being no conceivable connexion between any impulse of any
sort of body and any perception of a colour or smell which we find
in our minds,) we can have no distinct knowledge of such operations
beyond our experience; and can reason no otherwise about them, than as
effects produced by the appointment of an infinitely Wise Agent, which
perfectly surpass our comprehensions. As the ideas of sensible
secondary qualities which we have in our minds, can by us be no way
deduced from bodily causes, nor any correspondence or connexion be
found between them and those primary qualities which (experience shows
us) produce them in us; so, on the other side, the operation of our
minds upon our bodies is as inconceivable. How any thought should
produce a motion in body is as remote from the nature of our ideas, as
how any body should produce any thought in the mind. That it is so, if
experience did not convince us, the consideration of the things
themselves would never be able in the least to discover to us.
These, and the like, though they have a constant and regular connexion
in the ordinary course of things; yet that connexion being not
discoverable in the ideas themselves, which appearing to have no
necessary dependence one on another, we can attribute their
connexion to nothing else but the arbitrary determination of that
All-wise Agent who has made them to be, and to operate as they do,
in a way wholly above our weak understandings to conceive.
  29. Instances. In some of our ideas there are certain relations,
habitudes, and connexions, so visibly included in the nature of the
ideas themselves, that we cannot conceive them separable from them
by any power whatsoever. And in these only we are capable of certain
and universal knowledge. Thus the idea of a right-lined triangle
necessarily carries with it an equality of its angles to two right
ones. Nor can we conceive this relation, this connexion of these two
ideas, to be possibly mutable, or to depend on any arbitrary power,
which of choice made it thus, or could make it otherwise. But the
coherence and continuity of the parts of matter; the production of
sensation in us of colours and sounds, &c., by impulse and motion;
nay, the original rules and communication of motion being such,
wherein we can discover no natural connexion with any ideas we have,
we cannot but ascribe them to the arbitrary will and good pleasure
of the Wise Architect. I need not, I think, here mention the
resurrection of the dead, the future state of this globe of earth, and
such other things, which are by every one acknowledged to depend
wholly on the determination of a free agent. The things that, as far
as our observation reaches, we constantly find to proceed regularly,
we may conclude do act by a law set them; but yet by a law that we
know not: whereby, though causes work steadily, and effects constantly
flow from them, yet their connexions and dependencies being not
discoverable in our ideas, we can have but an experimental knowledge
of them. From all which it is easy to perceive what a darkness we
are involved in, how little it is of Being, and the things that are,
that we are capable to know. And therefore we shall do no injury to
our knowledge, when we modestly think with ourselves, that we are so
far from being able to comprehend the whole nature of the universe and
all the things contained in it, that we are not capable of a
philosophical knowledge of the bodies that are about us, and make a
part of us: concerning their secondary qualities, powers, and
operations, we can have no universal certainty. Several effects come
every day within the notice of our senses, of which we have so far
sensitive knowledge: but the causes, manner, and certainty of their
production, for the two foregoing reasons, we must be content to be
very ignorant of. In these we can go no further than particular
experience informs us matter of fact, and by analogy to guess what
effects the like bodies are, upon other trials, like to produce. But
as to a perfect science of natural bodies, (not to mention spiritual
beings,) we are, I think, so far from being capable of any such thing,
that I conclude it lost labour to seek after it.
  30. A third cause, want of tracing our ideas. Thirdly, Where we have
adequate ideas, and where there is a certain and discoverable
connexion between them, yet we are often ignorant, for want of tracing
those ideas which we have or may have; and for want of finding out
those intermediate ideas, which may show us what habitude of agreement
or disagreement they have one with another. And thus many are ignorant
of mathematical truths, not out of any imperfection of their
faculties, or uncertainty in the things themselves, but for want of
application in acquiring, examining, and by due ways comparing those
ideas. That which has most contributed to hinder the due tracing of
our ideas, and finding out their relations, and agreements or
disagreements, one with another, has been, I suppose, the ill use of
words. It is impossible that men should ever truly seek or certainly
discover the agreement or disagreement of ideas themselves, whilst
their thoughts flutter about, or stick only in sounds of doubtful
and uncertain significations. Mathematicians abstracting their
thoughts from names, and accustoming themselves to set before their
minds the ideas themselves that they would consider, and not sounds
instead of them, have avoided thereby a great part of that perplexity,
puddering, and confusion, which has so much hindered men's progress in
other parts of knowledge. For whilst they stick in words of
undetermined and uncertain signification, they are unable to
distinguish true from false, certain from probable, consistent from
inconsistent, in their own opinions. This having been the fate or
misfortune of a great part of men of letters, the increase brought
into the stock of real knowledge has been very little, in proportion
to the schools, disputes, and writings, the world has been filled
with; whilst students, being lost in the great wood of words, knew not
whereabouts they were, how far their discoveries were advanced, or
what was wanting in their own, or the general stock of knowledge.
Had men, in the discoveries of the material, done as they have in
those of the intellectual world, involved all in the obscurity of
uncertain and doubtful ways of talking, volumes writ of navigation and
voyages, theories and stories of zones and tides, multiplied and
disputed; nay, ships built, and fleets sent out, would never have
taught us the way beyond the line; and the Antipodes would be still as
much unknown, as when it was declared heresy to hold there were any.
But having spoken sufficiently of words, and the ill or careless use
that is commonly made of them, I shall not say anything more of it
here.
  31. Extent of human knowledge in respect to its universality.
Hitherto we have examined the extent of our knowledge, in respect of
the several sorts of beings that are. There is another extent of it,
in respect of universality, which will also deserve to be
considered; and in this regard, our knowledge follows the nature of
our ideas. If the ideas are abstract, whose agreement or
disagreement we perceive, our knowledge is universal. For what is
known of such general ideas, will be true of every particular thing in
whom that essence, i.e. that abstract idea, is to be found: and what
is once known of such ideas, will be perpetually and for ever true. So
that as to all general knowledge we must search and find it only in
our minds; and it is only the examining of our own ideas that
furnisheth us with that. Truths belonging to essences of things
(that is, to abstract ideas) are eternal; and are to be found out by
the contemplation only of those essences: as the existence of things
is to be known only from experience. But having more to say of this in
the chapters where I shall speak of general and real knowledge, this
may here suffice as to the universality of our knowledge in general.
                              Chapter IV
                     Of the Reality of Knowledge

  1. Objection. "Knowledge placed in our ideas may be all unreal or
chimerical." I doubt not but my reader, by this time, may be apt to
think that I have been all this while only building a castle in the
air; and be ready to say to me:
  "To what purpose all this stir? Knowledge, say you, is only the
perception of the agreement or disagreement of our own ideas: but
who knows what those ideas may be? Is there anything so extravagant as
the imaginations of men's brains? Where is the head that has no
chimeras in it? Or if there be a sober and a wise man, what difference
will there be, by your rules, between his knowledge and that of the
most extravagant fancy in the world? They both have their ideas, and
perceive their agreement and disagreement one with another. If there
be any difference between them, the advantage will be on the
warm-headed man's side, as having the more ideas, and the more lively.
And so, by your rules, he will be the more knowing. If it be true,
that all knowledge lies only in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of our own ideas, the visions of an enthusiast and the
reasonings of a sober man will be equally certain. It is no matter how
things are: so a man observe but the agreement of his own
imaginations, and talk conformably, it is all truth, all certainty.
Such castles in the air will be as strongholds of truth, as the
demonstrations of Euclid. That an harpy is not a centaur is by this
way as certain knowledge, and as much a truth, as that a square is not
a circle."
  "But of what use is all this fine knowledge of men's own
imaginations, to a man that inquires after the reality of things? It
matters not what men's fancies are, it is the knowledge of things that
is only to be prized: it is this alone gives a value to our
reasonings, and preference to one man's knowledge over another's, that
it is of things as they really are, and not of dreams and fancies."
  2. Answer: "Not so, where ideas agree with things." To which I
answer, That if our knowledge of our ideas terminate in them, and
reach no further, where there is something further intended, our
most serious thoughts will be of little more use than the reveries
of a crazy brain; and the truths built thereon of no more weight
than the discourses of a man who sees things clearly in a dream, and
with great assurance utters them. But I hope, before I have done, to
make it evident, that this way of certainty, by the knowledge of our
own ideas, goes a little further than bare imagination: and I
believe it will appear that all the certainty of general truths a
man has lies in nothing else.
  3. But what shall be the criterion of this agreement? It is
evident the mind knows not things immediately, but only by the
intervention of the ideas it has of them. Our knowledge, therefore
is real only so far as there is a conformity between our ideas and the
reality of things. But what shall be here the criterion? How shall the
mind, when it perceives nothing but its own ideas, know that they
agree with things themselves? This, though it seems not to want
difficulty, yet, I think, there be two sorts of ideas that we may be
assured agree with things.
  4. As all simple ideas are really conformed to things. First, The
first are simple ideas, which since the mind, as has been shown, can
by no means make to itself, must necessarily be the product of
things operating on the mind, in a natural way, and producing
therein those perceptions which by the Wisdom and Will of our Maker
they are ordained and adapted to. From whence it follows, that
simple ideas are not fictions of our fancies, but the natural and
regular productions of things without us, really operating upon us;
and so carry with them all the conformity which is intended; or
which our state requires: for they represent to us things under
those appearances which they are fitted to produce in us: whereby we
are enabled to distinguish the sorts of particular substances, to
discern the states they are in, and so to take them for our
necessities, and apply them to our uses. Thus the idea of whiteness,
or bitterness, as it is in the mind, exactly answering that power
which is in any body to produce it there, has all the real
conformity it can or ought to have, with things without us. And this
conformity between our simple ideas and the existence of things, is
sufficient for real knowledge.
  5. All complex ideas, except ideas of substances, are their own
archetypes. Secondly, All our complex ideas, except those of
substances, being archetypes of the mind's own making, not intended to
be the copies of anything, nor referred to the existence of
anything, as to their originals, cannot want any conformity
necessary to real knowledge. For that which is not designed to
represent anything but itself, can never be capable of a wrong
representation, nor mislead us from the true apprehension of anything,
by its dislikeness to it: and such, excepting those of substances, are
all our complex ideas. Which, as I have shown in another place, are
combinations of ideas, which the mind, by its free choice, puts
together, without considering any connexion they have in nature. And
hence it is, that in all these sorts the ideas themselves are
considered as the archetypes, and things no otherwise regarded, but as
they are conformable to them. So that we cannot but be infallibly
certain, that all the knowledge we attain concerning these ideas is
real, and reaches things themselves. Because in all our thoughts,
reasonings, and discourses of this kind, we intend things no further
than as they are conformable to our ideas. So that in these we
cannot miss of a certain and undoubted reality.
  6. Hence the reality of mathematical knowledge. I doubt not but it
will be easily granted, that the knowledge we have of mathematical
truths is not only certain, but real knowledge; and not the bare empty
vision of vain, insignificant chimeras of the brain: and yet, if we
will consider, we shall find that it is only of our own ideas. The
mathematician considers the truth and properties belonging to a
rectangle or circle only as they are in idea in his own mind. For it
is possible he never found either of them existing mathematically,
i.e. precisely true, in his life. But yet the knowledge he has of
any truths or properties belonging to a circle, or any other
mathematical figure, are nevertheless true and certain, even of real
things existing: because real things are no further concerned, nor
intended to be meant by any such propositions, than as things really
agree to those archetypes in his mind. Is it true of the idea of a
triangle, that its three angles are equal to two right ones? It is
true also of a triangle, wherever it really exists. Whatever other
figure exists, that it is not exactly answerable to that idea of a
triangle in his mind, is not at all concerned in that proposition. And
therefore he is certain all his knowledge concerning such ideas is
real knowledge: because, intending things no further than they agree
with those his ideas, he is sure what he knows concerning those
figures, when they have barely an ideal existence in his mind, will
hold true of them also when they have a real existence in matter:
his consideration being barely of those figures, which are the same
wherever or however they exist.
  7. And of moral. And hence it follows that moral knowledge is as
capable of real certainty as mathematics. For certainty being but
the perception of the agreement or disagreement of our ideas, and
demonstration nothing but the perception of such agreement, by the
intervention of other ideas or mediums; our moral ideas, as well as
mathematical, being archetypes themselves, and so adequate and
complete ideas; all the agreement or disagreement which we shall
find in them will produce real knowledge, as well as in mathematical
figures.
  8. Existence not required to make abstract knowledge real. For the
attaining of knowledge and certainty, it is requisite that we have
determined ideas: and, to make our knowledge real, it is requisite
that the ideas answer their archetypes. Nor let it be wondered, that I
place the certainty of our knowledge in the consideration of our
ideas, with so little care and regard (as it may seem) to the real
existence of things: since most of those discourses which take up
the thoughts and engage the disputes of those who pretend to make it
their business to inquire after truth and certainty, will, I
presume, upon examination, be found to be general propositions, and
notions in which existence is not at all concerned. All the discourses
of the mathematicians about the squaring of a circle, conic
sections, or any other part of mathematics, concern not the
existence of any of those figures: but their demonstrations, which
depend on their ideas, are the same, whether there be any square or
circle existing in the world or no. In the same manner, the truth
and certainty of moral discourses abstracts from the lives of men, and
the existence of those virtues in the world whereof they treat: nor
are Tully's Offices less true, because there is nobody in the world
that exactly practises his rules, and lives up to that pattern of a
virtuous man which he has given us, and which existed nowhere when
he writ but in idea. If it be true in speculation, i.e. in idea,
that murder deserves death, it will also be true in reality of any
action that exists conformable to that idea of murder. As for other
actions, the truth of that proposition concerns them not. And thus
it is of all other species of things, which have no other essences but
those ideas which are in the minds of men.
  9. Nor will it be less true or certain, because moral ideas are of
our own making and naming. But it will here be said, that if moral
knowledge be placed in the contemplation of our own moral ideas, and
those, as other modes, be of our own making, What strange notions will
there be of justice and temperance? What confusion of virtues and
vice, if every one may make what ideas of them he pleases? No
confusion or disorder in the things themselves, nor the reasonings
about them; no more than (in mathematics) there would be a disturbance
in the demonstration, or a change in the properties of figures, and
their relations one to another, if a man should make a triangle with
four corners, or a trapezium with four right angles: that is, in plain
English, change the names of the figures, and call that by one name,
which mathematicians call ordinarily by another. For, let a man make
to himself the idea of a figure with three angles, whereof one is a
right one, and call it, if he please, equilaterum or trapezium, or
anything else; the properties of, and demonstrations about that idea
will be the same as if he called it a rectangular triangle. I
confess the change of the name, by the impropriety of speech, will
at first disturb him who knows not what idea it stands for: but as
soon as the figure is drawn, the consequences and demonstrations are
plain and clear. Just the same is it in moral knowledge: let a man
have the idea of taking from others, without their consent, what their
honest industry has possessed them of, and call this justice if he
please. He that takes the name here without the idea put to it will be
mistaken, by joining another idea of his own to that name: but strip
the idea of that name, or take it such as it is in the speaker's mind,
and the same things will agree to it, as if you called it injustice.
Indeed, wrong names in moral discourses breed usually more disorder,
because they are not so easily rectified as in mathematics, where
the figure, once drawn and seen, makes the name useless and of no
force. For what need of a sign, when the thing signified is present
and in view? But in moral names, that cannot be so easily and
shortly done, because of the many decompositions that go to the making
up the complex ideas of those modes. But yet for all this, the
miscalling of any of those ideas, contrary to the usual
signification of the words of that language, hinders not but that we
may have certain and demonstrative knowledge of their several
agreements and disagreements, if we will carefully, as in mathematics,
keep to the same precise ideas, and trace them in their several
relations one to another, without being led away by their names. If we
but separate the idea under consideration from the sign that stands
for it, our knowledge goes equally on in the discovery of real truth
and certainty, whatever sounds we make use of.
  10. Misnaming disturbs not the certainty of the knowledge. One thing
more we are to take notice of, That where God or any other
law-maker, hath defined any moral names, there they have made the
essence of that species to which that name belongs; and there it is
not safe to apply or use them otherwise: but in other cases it is bare
impropriety of speech to apply them contrary to the common usage of
the country. But yet even this too disturbs not the certainty of
that knowledge, which is still to be had by a due contemplation and
comparing of those even nicknamed ideas.
  11. Our complex ideas of substances have their archetypes without
us; and here knowledge comes short. Thirdly, There is another sort
of complex ideas, which, being referred to archetypes without us,
may differ from them, and so our knowledge about them may come short
of being real. Such are our ideas of substances, which, consisting
of a collection of simple ideas, supposed taken from the works of
nature, may yet vary from them; by having more or different ideas
united in them than are to be found united in the things themselves.
From whence it comes to pass, that they may, and often do, fail of
being exactly conformable to things themselves.
  12. So far as our complex ideas agree with those archetypes
without us, so far our knowledge concerning substances is real. I say,
then, that to have ideas of substances which, by being conformable
to things, may afford us real knowledge, it is not enough, as in
modes, to put together such ideas as have no inconsistence, though
they did never before so exist: v.g. the ideas of sacrilege or
perjury, &c., were as real and true ideas before, as after the
existence of any such fact. But our ideas of substances, being
supposed copies, and referred to archetypes without us, must still
be taken from something that does or has existed: they must not
consist of ideas put together at the pleasure of our thoughts, without
any real pattern they were taken from, though we can perceive no
inconsistence in such a combination. The reason whereof is, because
we, knowing not what real constitution it is of substances whereon our
simple ideas depend, and which really is the cause of the strict union
of some of them one with another, and the exclusion of others there
are very few of them that we can be sure are or are not inconsistent
in nature, any further than experience and sensible observation reach.
Herein, therefore, is founded the reality of our knowledge
concerning substances- That all our complex ideas of them must be
such, and such only, as are made up of such simple ones as have been
discovered to co-exist in nature. And our ideas being thus true,
though not perhaps very exact copies, are yet the subjects of real (as
far as we have any) knowledge of them. Which (as has been already
shown) will not be found to reach very far: but so far as it does,
it will still be real knowledge. Whatever ideas we have, the agreement
we find they have with others will still be knowledge. If those
ideas be abstract, it will be general knowledge. But to make it real
concerning substances, the ideas must be taken from the real existence
of things. Whatever simple ideas have been found to co-exist in any
substance, these we may with confidence join together again, and so
make abstract ideas of substances. For whatever have once had an union
in nature, may be united again.
  13. In our inquiries about substances, we must consider ideas, and
not confine our thoughts to names or species supposed set out by
names. This, if we rightly consider, and confine not our thoughts
and abstract ideas to names, as if there were, or could be no other
sorts of things than what known names had already determined, and,
as it were, set out, we should think of things with greater freedom
and less confusion than perhaps we do. It would possibly be thought
a bold paradox, if not a very dangerous falsehood, if I should say
that some changelings, who have lived forty years together, without
any appearance of reason, are something between a man and a beast:
which prejudice is founded upon nothing else but a false
supposition, that these two names, man and beast, stand for distinct
species so set out by real essences, that there can come no other
species between them: whereas if we will abstract from those names,
and the supposition of such specific essences made by nature,
wherein all things of the same denominations did exactly and equally
partake; if we would not fancy that there were a certain number of
these essences, wherein all things, as in moulds, were cast and
formed; we should find that the idea of the shape, motion, and life of
a man without reason, is as much a distinct idea, and makes as much
a distinct sort of things from man and beast, as the idea of the shape
of an ass with reason would be different from either that of man or
beast, and be a species of an animal between, or distinct from both.
  14. Objection against a changeling being something between a man and
beast, answered. Here everybody will be ready to ask, If changelings
may be supposed something between man and beast, pray what are they? I
answer, changelings; which is as good a word to signify something
different from the signification of man or beast, as the names man and
beast are to have significations different one from the other. This,
well considered, would resolve this matter, and show my meaning
without any more ado. But I am not so unacquainted with the zeal of
some men, which enables them to spin consequences, and to see religion
threatened, whenever any one ventures to quit their forms of speaking,
as not to foresee what names such a proposition as this is like to
be charged with: and without doubt it will be asked, If changelings
are something between man and beast, what will become of them in the
other world? To which I answer, I. It concerns me not to know or
inquire. To their own master they stand or fall. It will make their
state neither better nor worse, whether we determine anything of it or
no. They are in the hands of a faithful Creator and a bountiful
Father, who disposes not of his creatures according to our narrow
thoughts or opinions, nor distinguishes them according to names and
species of our contrivance. And we that know so little of this present
world we are in, may, I think, content ourselves without being
peremptory in defining the different states which creatures shall come
into when they go off this stage. It may suffice us, that He hath made
known to all those who are capable of instruction, discoursing, and
reasoning, that they shall come to an account, and receive according
to what they have done in this body.
  15. What will become of changelings in a future state? But,
Secondly, I answer, The force of these men's question (viz. Will you
deprive changelings of a future state?) is founded on one of these two
suppositions, which are both false. The first is, That all things that
have the outward shape and appearance of a man must necessarily be
designed to an immortal future being after this life: or, secondly,
That whatever is of human birth must be so. Take away these
imaginations, and such questions will be groundless and ridiculous.
I desire then those who think there is no more but an accidental
difference between themselves and changelings, the essence in both
being exactly the same, to consider, whether they can imagine
immortality annexed to any outward shape of the body; the very
proposing it is, I suppose, enough to make them disown it. No one yet,
that ever I heard of, how much soever immersed in matter, allowed that
excellency to any figure of the gross sensible outward parts, as to
affirm eternal life due to it, or a necessary consequence of it; or
that any mass of matter should, after its dissolution here, be again
restored hereafter to an everlasting state of sense, perception, and
knowledge, only because it was moulded into this or that figure, and
had such a particular frame of its visible parts. Such an opinion as
this, placing immortality in a certain superficial figure, turns out
of doors all consideration of soul or spirit; upon whose account alone
some corporeal beings have hitherto been concluded immortal, and
others not. This is to attribute more to the outside than inside of
things; and to place the excellency of a man more in the external
shape of his body, than internal perfections of his soul: which is but
little better than to annex the great and inestimable advantage of
immortality and life everlasting, which he has above other material
beings, to annex it, I say, to the cut of his beard, or the fashion of
his coat. For this or that outward mark of our bodies no more
carries with it the hope of an eternal duration, than the fashion of a
man's suit gives him reasonable grounds to imagine it will never
wear out, or that it will make him immortal. It will perhaps be
said, that nobody thinks that the shape makes anything immortal, but
it is the shape is the sign of a rational soul within, which is
immortal. I wonder who made it the sign of any such thing: for
barely saying it, will not make it so. It would require some proofs to
persuade one of it. No figure that I know speaks any such language.
For it may as rationally be concluded, that the dead body of a man,
wherein there is to be found no more appearance or action of life than
there is in a statue, has yet nevertheless a living soul in it,
because of its shape; as that there is a rational soul in a
changeling, because he has the outside of a rational creature, when
his actions carry far less marks of reason with them, in the whole
course of his life, than what are to be found in many a beast.
  16. Monsters. But it is the issue of rational parents, and must
therefore be concluded to have a rational soul. I know not by what
logic you must so conclude. I am sure this is a conclusion that men
nowhere allow of. For if they did, they would not make bold, as
everywhere they do, to destroy ill-formed and mis-shaped
productions. Ay, but these are monsters. Let them be so: what will
your drivelling, unintelligent, intractable changeling be? Shall a
defect in the body make a monster; a defect in the mind (the far
more noble, and, in the common phrase, the far more essential part)
not? Shall the want of a nose, or a neck, make a monster, and put such
issue out of the rank of men; the want of reason and understanding,
not? This is to bring all back again to what was exploded just now:
this is to place all in the shape, and to take the measure of a man
only by his outside. To show that according to the ordinary way of
reasoning in this matter, people do lay the whole stress on the
figure, and resolve the whole essence of the species of man (as they
make it) into the outward shape, how unreasonable soever it be, and
how much soever they disown it, we need but trace their thoughts and
practice a little further, and then it will plainly appear. The
well-shaped changeling is a man, has a rational soul, though it appear
not: this is past doubt, say you: make the ears a little longer, and
more pointed, and the nose a little flatter than ordinary, and then
you begin to boggle: make the face yet narrower, flatter, and
longer, and then you are at a stand: add still more and more of the
likeness of a brute to it, and let the head be perfectly that of
some other animal, then presently it is a monster; and it is
demonstration with you that it hath no rational soul, and must be
destroyed. Where now (I ask) shall be the just measure; which the
utmost bounds of that shape, that carries with it a rational soul?
For, since there have been human foetuses produced, half beast and
half man; and others three parts one, and one part the other; and so
it is possible they may be in all the variety of approaches to the one
or the other shape, and may have several degrees of mixture of the
likeness of a man, or a brute;- I would gladly know what are those
precise lineaments, which, according to this hypothesis, are or are
not capable of a rational soul to be joined to them. What sort of
outside is the certain sign that there is or is not such an inhabitant
within? For till that be done, we talk at random of man: and shall
always, I fear, do so, as long as we give ourselves up to certain
sounds, and the imaginations of settled and fixed species in nature,
we know not what. But, after all, I desire it may be considered,
that those who think they have answered the difficulty, by telling us,
that a mis-shaped foetus is a monster, run into the same fault they
are arguing against; by constituting a species between man and
beast. For what else, I pray, is their monster in the case, (if the
word monster signifies anything at all,) but something neither man nor
beast, but partaking somewhat of either? And just so is the changeling
before mentioned. So necessary is it to quit the common notion of
species and essences, if we will truly look into the nature of things,
and examine them by what our faculties can discover in them as they
exist, and not by groundless fancies that have been taken up about
them.
  17. Words and species. I have mentioned this here, because I think
we cannot be too cautious that words and species, in the ordinary
notions which we have been used to of them, impose not on us. For I am
apt to think therein lies one great obstacle to our clear and distinct
knowledge, especially in reference to substances: and from thence
has risen a great part of the difficulties about truth and
certainty. Would we accustom ourselves to separate our
contemplations and reasonings from words, we might in a great
measure remedy this inconvenience within our own thoughts: but yet
it would still disturb us in our discourse with others, as long as
we retained the opinion, that species and their essences were anything
else but our abstract ideas (such as they are) with names annexed to
them, to be the signs of them.
  18. Recapitulation. Wherever we perceive the agreement or
disagreement of any of our ideas, there is certain knowledge: and
wherever we are sure those ideas agree with the reality of things,
there is certain real knowledge. Of which agreement of our ideas
with the reality of things, having here given the marks, I think, I
have shown wherein it is that certainty, real certainty, consists.
Which, whatever it was to others, was, I confess, to me heretofore,
one of those desiderata which I found great want of.
                              Chapter V
                         Of Truth in General

  1. What truth is. What is truth? was an inquiry many ages since; and
it being that which all mankind either do, or pretend to search after,
it cannot but be worth our while carefully to examine wherein it
consists, and so acquaint ourselves with the nature of it, as to
observe how the mind distinguishes it from falsehood.
  2. A right joining or separating of signs, i.e. either ideas or
words. Truth, then, seems to me, in the proper import of the word,
to signify nothing but the joining or separating of Signs, as the
Things signified by them do agree or disagree one with another. The
joining or separating of signs here meant, is what by another name
we call proposition. So that truth properly belongs only to
propositions: whereof there are two sorts, viz. mental and verbal;
as there are two sorts of signs commonly made use of, viz. ideas and
words.
  3. Which make mental or verbal propositions. To form a clear
notion of truth, it is very necessary to consider truth of thought,
and truth of words, distinctly one from another: but yet it is very
difficult to treat of them asunder. Because it is unavoidable, in
treating of mental propositions, to make use of words: and then the
instances given of mental propositions cease immediately to be
barely mental, and become verbal. For a mental proposition being
nothing but a bare consideration of the ideas, as they are in our
minds, stripped of names, they lose the nature of purely mental
propositions as soon as they are put into words.
  4. Mental propositions are very hard to he treated of. And that
which makes it yet harder to treat of mental and verbal propositions
separately is, that most men, if not all, in their thinking and
reasonings within themselves, make use of words instead of ideas; at
least when the subject of their meditation contains in it complex
ideas. Which is a great evidence of the imperfection and uncertainty
of our ideas of that kind, and may, if attentively made use of,
serve for a mark to show us what are those things we have clear and
perfect established ideas of, and what not. For if we will curiously
observe the way our mind takes in thinking and reasoning, we shall
find, I suppose, that when we make any propositions within our own
thoughts about white or black, sweet or bitter, a triangle or a
circle, we can and often do frame in our minds the ideas themselves,
without reflecting on the names. But when we would consider, or make
propositions about the more complex ideas, as of a man, vitriol,
fortitude, glory, we usually put the name for the idea: because the
ideas these names stand for, being for the most part imperfect,
confused, and undetermined, we reflect on the names themselves,
because they are more clear, certain, and distinct, and readier
occur to our thoughts than the pure ideas: and so we make use of these
words instead of the ideas themselves, even when we would meditate and
reason within ourselves, and make tacit mental propositions. In
substances, as has been already noticed, this is occasioned by the
imperfections of our ideas: we making the name stand for the real
essence, of which we have no idea at all. In modes, it is occasioned
by the great number of simple ideas that go to the making them up. For
many of them being compounded, the name occurs much easier than the
complex idea itself, which requires time and attention to be
recollected, and exactly represented to the mind, even in those men
who have formerly been at the pains to do it; and is utterly
impossible to be done by those who, though they have ready in their
memory the greatest part of the common words of that language, yet
perhaps never troubled themselves in all their lives to consider
what precise ideas the most of them stood for. Some confused or
obscure notions have served their turns; and many who talk very much
of religion and conscience, of church and faith, of power and right,
of obstructions and humours, melancholy and choler, would perhaps have
little left in their thoughts and meditations if one should desire
them to think only of the things themselves and lay by those words
with which they so often confound others, and not seldom themselves
also.
  5. Mental and verbal propositions contrasted. But to return to the
consideration of truth: we must, I say, observe two sorts of
propositions that we are capable of making:-
  First, mental, wherein the ideas in our understandings are without
the use of words put together, or separated, by the mind perceiving or
judging of their agreement or disagreement.
  Secondly, Verbal propositions, which are words, the signs of our
ideas, put together or separated in affirmative or negative sentences.
By which way of affirming or denying, these signs, made by sounds,
are, as it were, put together or separated one from another. So that
proposition consists in joining or separating signs; and truth
consists in the putting together or separating those signs,
according as the things which they stand for agree or disagree.
  6. When mental propositions contain real truth, and when verbal.
Every one's experience will satisfy him, that the mind, either by
perceiving, or supposing, the agreement or disagreement of any of
its ideas, does tacitly within itself put them into a kind of
proposition affirmative or negative; which I have endeavoured to
express by the terms putting together and separating. But this
action of the mind, which is so familiar to every thinking and
reasoning man, is easier to be conceived by reflecting on what
passes in us when we affirm or deny, than to be explained by words.
When a man has in his head the idea of two lines, viz. the side and
diagonal of a square, whereof the diagonal is an inch long, he may
have the idea also of the division of that line into a certain
number of equal parts: v.g. into five, ten, a hundred, a thousand,
or any other number, and may have the idea of that inch line being
divisible, or not divisible, into such equal parts, as a certain
number of them will be equal to the sideline. Now, whenever he
perceives, believes, or supposes such a kind of divisibility to
agree or disagree to his idea of that line, he, as it were, joins or
separates those two ideas, viz. the idea of that line, and the idea of
that kind of divisibility; and so makes a mental proposition, which is
true or false, according as such a kind of divisibility; a
divisibility into such aliquot parts, does really agree to that line
or no. When ideas are so put together, or separated in the mind, as
they or the things they stand for do agree or not, that is, as I may
call it, mental truth. But truth of words is something more; and
that is the affirming or denying of words one of another, as the ideas
they stand for agree or disagree: and this again is two-fold; either
purely verbal and trifling, which I shall speak of, (chap. viii.,)
or real and instructive; which is the object of that real knowledge
which we have spoken of already.
  7. Objection against verbal truth, that "thus it may all be
chimerical." But here again will be apt to occur the same doubt
about truth, that did about knowledge: and it will be objected, that
if truth be nothing but the joining and separating of words in
propositions, as the ideas they stand for agree or disagree in men's
minds, the knowledge of truth is not so valuable a thing as it is
taken to be, nor worth the pains and time men employ in the search
of it: since by this account it amounts to no more than the conformity
of words to the chimeras of men's brains. Who knows not what odd
notions many men's heads are filled with, and what strange ideas all
men's brains are capable of? But if we rest here, we know the truth of
nothing by this rule, but of the visionary words in our own
imaginations; nor have other truth, but what as much concerns
harpies and centaurs, as men and horses. For those, and the like,
may be ideas in our heads, and have their agreement or disagreement
there, as well as the ideas of real beings, and so have as true
propositions made about them. And it will be altogether as true a
proposition to say all centaurs are animals, as that all men are
animals; and the certainty of one as great as the other. For in both
the propositions, the words are put together according to the
agreement of the ideas in our minds: and the agreement of the idea
of animal with that of centaur is as clear and visible to the mind, as
the agreement of the idea of animal with that of man; and so these two
propositions are equally true, equally certain. But of what use is all
such truth to us?
  8. Answered, "Real truth is about ideas agreeing to things."
Though what has been said in the foregoing chapter to distinguish real
from imaginary knowledge might suffice here, in answer to this
doubt, to distinguish real truth from chimerical, or (if you please)
barely nominal, they depending both on the same foundation; yet it may
not be amiss here again to consider, that though our words signify
nothing but our ideas, yet being designed by them to signify things,
the truth they contain when put into propositions will be only verbal,
when they stand for ideas in the mind that have not an agreement
with the reality of things. And therefore truth as well as knowledge
may well come under the distinction of verbal and real; that being
only verbal truth, wherein terms are joined according to the agreement
or disagreement of the ideas they stand for; without regarding whether
our ideas are such as really have, or are capable of having, an
existence in nature. But then it is they contain real truth, when
these signs are joined, as our ideas agree; and when our ideas are
such as we know are capable of having an existence in nature: which in
substances we cannot know, but by knowing that such have existed.
  9. Truth and falsehood in general. Truth is the marking down in
words the agreement or disagreement of ideas as it is. Falsehood is
the marking down in words the agreement or disagreement of ideas
otherwise than it is. And so far as these ideas, thus marked by
sounds, agree to their archetypes, so far only is the truth real.
The knowledge of this truth consists in knowing what ideas the words
stand for, and the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
those ideas, according as it is marked by those words.
  10. General propositions to be treated of more at large. But because
words are looked on as the great conduits of truth and knowledge,
and that in conveying and receiving of truth, and commonly in
reasoning about it, we make use of words and propositions, I shall
more at large inquire wherein the certainty of real truths contained
in propositions consists, and where it is to be had; and endeavour
to show in what sort of universal propositions we are capable of being
certain of their real truth or falsehood.
  I shall begin with general propositions, as those which most
employ our thoughts, and exercise our contemplation. General truths
are most looked after by the mind as those that most enlarge our
knowledge; and by their comprehensiveness satisfying us at once of
many particulars, enlarge our view, and shorten our way to knowledge.
  11. Moral and metaphysical truth. Besides truth taken in the
strict sense before mentioned, there are other sorts of truths: As, 1.
Moral truth, which is speaking of things according to the persuasion
of our own minds, though the proposition we speak agree not to the
reality of things; 2. Metaphysical truth, which is nothing but the
real existence of things, conformable to the ideas to which we have
annexed their names. This, though it seems to consist in the very
beings of things, yet, when considered a little nearly, will appear to
include a tacit proposition, whereby the mind joins that particular
thing to the idea it had before settled with the name to it. But these
considerations of truth, either having been before taken notice of, or
not being much to our present purpose, it may suffice here only to
have mentioned them.
                              Chapter VI
         Of Universal Propositions: their Truth and Certainty

  1. Treating of words necessary to knowledge. Though the examining
and judging of ideas by themselves, their names being quite laid
aside, be the best and surest way to clear and distinct knowledge:
yet, through the prevailing custom of using sounds for ideas, I
think it is very seldom practised. Every one may observe how common it
is for names to be made use of, instead of the ideas themselves,
even when men think and reason within their own breasts; especially if
the ideas be very complex, and made up of a great collection of simple
ones. This makes the consideration of words and propositions so
necessary a part of the Treatise of Knowledge, that it is very hard to
speak intelligibly of the one, without explaining the other.
  2. General truths hardly to be understood, but in verbal
propositions. All the knowledge we have, being only of particular or
general truths, it is evident that whatever may be done in the
former of these, the latter, which is that which with reason is most
sought after, can never be well made known, and is very seldom
apprehended, but as conceived and expressed in words. It is not,
therefore, out of our way, in the examination of our knowledge, to
inquire into the truth and certainty of universal propositions.
  3. Certainty twofold- of truth and of knowledge. But that we may not
be misled in this case by that which is the danger everywhere, I
mean by the doubtfulness of terms, it is fit to observe that certainty
is twofold: certainty of truth and certainty of knowledge. Certainty
of truth is, when words are so put together in propositions as exactly
to express the agreement or disagreement of the ideas they stand
for, as really it is. Certainty of knowledge is to perceive the
agreement or disagreement of ideas, as expressed in any proposition.
This we usually call knowing, or being certain of the truth of any
proposition.
  4. No proposition can be certainly known to be true, where the
real essence of each species mentioned is not known. Now, because we
cannot be certain of the truth of any general proposition, unless we
know the precise bounds and extent of the species its terms stand for,
it is necessary we should know the essence of each species, which is
that which constitutes and bounds it.
  This, in all simple ideas and modes, is not hard to do. For in these
the real and nominal essence being the same, or, which is all one, the
abstract idea which the general term stands for being the sole essence
and boundary that is or can be supposed of the species, there can be
no doubt how far the species extends, or what things are
comprehended under each term; which, it is evident, are all that
have an exact conformity with the idea it stands for, and no other.
  But in substances, wherein a real essence, distinct from the
nominal, is supposed to constitute, determine, and bound the
species, the extent of the general word is very uncertain; because,
not knowing this real essence, we cannot know what is, or what is
not of that species; and, consequently, what may or may not with
certainty be affirmed of it. And thus, speaking of a man, or gold,
or any other species of natural substances, as supposed constituted by
a precise and real essence which nature regularly imparts to every
individual of that kind, whereby it is made to be of that species,
we cannot be certain of the truth of any affirmation or negation
made of it. For man or gold, taken in this sense, and used for species
of things constituted by real essences, different from the complex
idea in the mind of the speaker, stand for we know not what; and the
extent of these species, with such boundaries, are so unknown and
undetermined, that it is impossible with any certainty to affirm, that
all men are rational, or that all gold is yellow. But where the
nominal essence is kept to, as the boundary of each species, and men
extend the application of any general term no further than to the
particular things in which the complex idea it stands for is to be
found, there they are in no danger to mistake the bounds of each
species, nor can be in doubt, on this account, whether any proposition
be true or not. I have chosen to explain this uncertainty of
propositions in this scholastic way, and have made use of the terms of
essences, and species, on purpose to show the absurdity and
inconvenience there is to think of them as of any other sort of
realities, than barely abstract ideas with names to them. To suppose
that the species of things are anything but the sorting of them
under general names, according as they agree to several abstract ideas
of which we make those names the signs, is to confound truth, and
introduce uncertainty into all general propositions that can be made
about them. Though therefore these things might, to people not
possessed with scholastic learning, be treated of in a better and
clearer way; yet those wrong notions of essences or species having got
root in most people's minds who have received any tincture from the
learning which has prevailed in this part of the world, are to be
discovered and removed, to make way for that use of words which should
convey certainty with it.
  5. This more particularly concerns substances. The names of
substances, then, whenever made to stand for species which are
supposed to be constituted by real essences which we know not, are not
capable to convey certainty to the understanding. Of the truth of
general propositions made up of such terms we cannot be sure. The
reason whereof is plain: for how can we be sure that this or that
quality is in gold, when we know not what is or is not gold? Since
in this way of speaking, nothing is gold but what partakes of an
essence, which we, not knowing, cannot know where it is or is not, and
so cannot be sure that any parcel of matter in the world is or is
not in this sense gold; being incurably ignorant whether it has or has
not that which makes anything to be called gold; i.e. that real
essence of gold whereof we have no idea at all. This being as
impossible for us to know as it is for a blind man to tell in what
flower the colour of a pansy is or is not to be found, whilst he has
no idea of the colour of a pansy at an. Or if we could (which is
impossible) certainly know where a real essence, which we know not,
is, v.g. in what parcels of matter the real essence of gold is, yet
could we not be sure that this or that quality could with truth be
affirmed of gold; since it is impossible for us to know that this or
that quality or idea has a necessary connexion with a real essence
of which we have no idea at all, whatever species that supposed real
essence may be imagined to constitute.
  6. The truth of few universal propositions concerning substances
is to be known. On the other side, the names of substances, when
made use of as they should be, for the ideas men have in their
minds, though they carry a clear and determinate signification with
them, will not yet serve us to make many universal propositions of
whose truth we can be certain. Not because in this use of them we
are uncertain what things are signified by them, but because the
complex ideas they stand for are such combinations of simple ones as
carry not with them any discoverable connexion or repugnancy, but with
a very few other ideas.
  7. Because necessary co-existence of simple ideas in substances
can in few cases be known. The complex ideas that our names of the
species of substances properly stand for, are collections of such
qualities as have been observed to co-exist in an unknown
substratum, which we call substance; but what other qualities
necessarily co-exist with such combinations, we cannot certainly know,
unless we can discover their natural dependence; which, in their
primary qualities, we can go but a very little way in; and in all
their secondary qualities we can discover no connexion at all: for the
reasons mentioned, chap. iii. Viz. 1. Because we know not the real
constitutions of substances, on which each secondary quality
particularly depends. 2. Did we know that, it would serve us only
for experimental (not universal) knowledge; and reach with certainty
no further than that bare instance: because our understandings can
discover no conceivable connexion between any secondary quality and
any modification whatsoever of any of the primary ones. And
therefore there are very few general propositions to be made
concerning substances, which can carry with them undoubted certainty.
  8. Instance in gold. "All gold is fixed," is a proposition whose
truth we cannot be certain of, how universally soever it be
believed. For if, according to the useless imagination of the Schools,
any one supposes the term gold to stand for a species of things set
out by nature, by a real essence belonging to it, it is evident he
knows not what particular substances are of that species; and so
cannot with certainty affirm anything universally of gold. But if he
makes gold stand for a species determined by its nominal essence,
let the nominal essence, for example, be the complex idea of a body of
a certain yellow colour, malleable, fusible, and heavier than any
other known;- in this proper use of the word gold, there is no
difficulty to know what is or is not gold. But yet no other quality
can with certainty be universally affirmed or denied of gold, but what
hath a discoverable connexion or inconsistency with that nominal
essence. Fixedness, for example, having no necessary connexion that we
can discover, with the colour, weight, or any other simple idea of our
complex one, or with the whole combination together; it is
impossible that we should certainly know the truth of this
proposition, that all gold is fixed.
  9. No discoverable necessary connexion between nominal essence of
gold and other simple ideas. As there is no discoverable connexion
between fixedness and the colour, weight, and other simple ideas of
that nominal essence of gold; so, if we make our complex idea of gold,
a body yellow, fusible, ductile, weighty, and fixed, we shall be at
the same uncertainty concerning solubility in aqua regia, and for
the same reason. Since we can never, from consideration of the ideas
themselves, with certainty affirm or deny of a body whose complex idea
is made up of yellow, very weighty, ductile, fusible, and fixed,
that it is soluble in aqua regia: and so on of the rest of its
qualities. I would gladly meet with one general affirmation concerning
any quality of gold, that any one can certainly know is true. It will,
no doubt, be presently objected, Is not this an universal proposition,
All gold is malleable? To which I answer, It is a very certain
proposition, if malleableness be a part of the complex idea the word
gold stands for. But then here is nothing affirmed of gold, but that
that sound stands for an idea in which malleableness is contained: and
such a sort of truth and certainty as this it is, to say a centaur
is four-footed. But if malleableness make not a part of the specific
essence the name of gold stands for, it is plain, all gold is
malleable, is not a certain proposition. Because, let the complex idea
of gold be made up of whichsoever of its other qualities you please,
malleableness will not appear to depend on that complex idea, nor
follow from any simple one contained in it: the connexion that
malleableness has (if it has any) with those other qualities being
only by the intervention of the real constitution of its insensible
parts; which, since we know not, it is impossible we should perceive
that connexion, unless we could discover that which ties them
together.
  10. As far as any such co-existence can be known, so far universal
propositions may be certain. But this will go but a little way. The
more, indeed, of these coexisting qualities we unite into one
complex idea, under one name, the more precise and determinate we make
the signification of that word; but never yet make it thereby more
capable of universal certainty, in respect of other qualities not
contained in our complex idea: since we perceive not their connexion
or dependence on one another; being ignorant both of that real
constitution in which they are all founded, and also how they flow
from it. For the chief part of our knowledge concerning substances
is not, as in other things, barely of the relation of two ideas that
may exist separately; but is of the necessary connexion and
co-existence of several distinct ideas in the same subject, or of
their repugnancy so to co-exist. Could we begin at the other end,
and discover what it was wherein that colour consisted, what made a
body lighter or heavier, what texture of parts made it malleable,
fusible, and fixed, and fit to be dissolved in this sort of liquor,
and not in another;- if, I say, we had such an idea as this of bodies,
and could perceive wherein all sensible qualities originally
consist, and how they are produced; we might frame such abstract ideas
of them as would furnish us with matter of more general knowledge, and
enable us to make universal propositions, that should carry general
truth and certainty with them. But whilst our complex ideas of the
sorts of substances are so remote from that internal real constitution
on which their sensible qualities depend, and are made up of nothing
but an imperfect collection of those apparent qualities our senses can
discover, there can be few general propositions concerning
substances of whose real truth we can be certainly assured; since
there are but few simple ideas of whose connexion and necessary
coexistence we can have certain and undoubted knowledge. I imagine,
amongst all the secondary qualities of substances, and the powers
relating to them, there cannot any two be named, whose necessary
co-existence, or repugnance to coexist, can certainly be known; unless
in those of the same sense, which necessarily exclude one another,
as I have elsewhere shown. No one, I think, by the colour that is in
any body, can certainly know what smell, taste, sound, or tangible
qualities it has, nor what alterations it is capable to make or
receive on or from other bodies. The same may be said of the sound
or taste, &c. Our specific names of substances standing for any
collections of such ideas, it is not to be wondered that we can with
them make very few general propositions of undoubted real certainty.
But yet so far as any complex idea of any sort of substances
contains in it any simple idea, whose necessary existence with any
other may be discovered, so far universal propositions may with
certainty be made concerning it: v.g. could any one discover a
necessary connexion between malleableness and the colour or weight
of gold, or any other part of the complex idea signified by that name,
he might make a certain universal proposition concerning gold in
this respect; and the real truth of this proposition, that all gold is
malleable, would be as certain as of this, the three angles of all
right-lined triangles are all equal to two right ones.
  11. The qualities which make our complex ideas of substances
depend mostly on external, remote, and unperceived causes. Had we such
ideas of substances as to know what real constitutions produce those
sensible qualities we find in them, and how those qualities flowed
from thence, we could, by the specific ideas of their real essences in
our own minds, more certainly find out their properties, and
discover what qualities they had or had not, than we can now by our
senses: and to know the properties of gold, it would be no more
necessary that gold should exist, and that we should make
experiments upon it, than it is necessary for the knowing the
properties of a triangle, that a triangle should exist in any
matter, the idea in our minds would serve for the one as well as the
other. But we are so far from being admitted into the secrets of
nature, that we scarce so much as ever approach the first entrance
towards them. For we are wont to consider the substances we meet with,
each of them, as an entire thing by itself, having all its qualities
in itself, and independent of other things; overlooking, for the
most part, the operations of those invisible fluids they are
encompassed with, and upon whose motions and operations depend the
greatest part of those qualities which are taken notice of in them,
and are made by us the inherent marks of distinction whereby we know
and denominate them. Put a piece of gold anywhere by itself,
separate from the reach and influence of all other bodies, it will
immediately lose all its colour and weight, and perhaps
malleableness too; which, for aught I know, would be changed into a
perfect friability. Water, in which to us fluidity is an essential
quality, left to itself, would cease to be fluid. But if inanimate
bodies owe so much of their present state to other bodies without
them, that they would not be what they appear to us were those
bodies that environ them removed; it is yet more so in vegetables,
which are nourished, grow, and produce leaves, flowers, and seeds,
in a constant succession. And if we look a little nearer into the
state of animals, we shall find that their dependence, as to life,
motion, and the most considerable qualities to be observed in them, is
so wholly on extrinsical causes and qualities of other bodies that
make no part of them, that they cannot subsist a moment without
them: though yet those bodies on which they depend are little taken
notice of, and make no part of the complex ideas we frame of those
animals. Take the air but for a minute from the greatest part of
living creatures, and they presently lose sense, life, and motion.
This the necessity of breathing has forced into our knowledge. But how
many other extrinsical and possibly very remote bodies do the
springs of these admirable machines depend on, which are not
vulgarly observed, or so much as thought on; and how many are there
which the severest inquiry can never discover? The inhabitants of this
spot of the universe, though removed so many millions of miles from
the sun, yet depend so much on the duly tempered motion of particles
coming from or agitated by it, that were this earth removed but a
small part of the distance out of its present situation, and placed
a little further or nearer that source of heat, it is more than
probable that the greatest part of the animals in it would immediately
perish: since we find them so often destroyed by an excess or defect
of the sun's warmth, which an accidental position in some parts of
this our little globe exposes them to. The qualities observed in a
loadstone must needs have their source far beyond the confines of that
body; and the ravage made often on several sorts of animals by
invisible causes, the certain death (as we are told) of some of
them, by barely passing the line, or, as it is certain of other, by
being removed into a neighbouring country; evidently show that the
concurrence and operations of several bodies, with which they are
seldom thought to have anything to do, is absolutely necessary to make
them be what they appear to us, and to preserve those qualities by
which we know and distinguish them. We are then quite out of the
way, when we think that things contain within themselves the qualities
that appear to us in them; and we in vain search for that constitution
within the body of a fly or an elephant, upon which depend those
qualities and powers we observe in them. For which, perhaps, to
understand them aright, we ought to look not only beyond this our
earth and atmosphere, but even beyond the sun or remotest star our
eyes have yet discovered. For how much the being and operation of
particular substances in this our globe depends on causes utterly
beyond our view, is impossible for us to determine. We see and
perceive some of the motions and grosser operations of things here
about us; but whence the streams come that keep all these curious
machines in motion and repair, how conveyed and modified, is beyond
our notice and apprehension: and the great parts and wheels, as I
may say so, of this stupendous structure of the universe, may, for
aught we know, have such a connexion and dependence in their
influences and operations one upon another, that perhaps things in
this our mansion would put on quite another face, and cease to be what
they are, if some one of the stars or great bodies incomprehensibly
remote from us, should cease to be or move as it does. This is
certain: things, however absolute and entire they seem in
themselves, are but retainers to other parts of nature, for that which
they are most taken notice of by us. Their observable qualities,
actions, and powers are owing to something without them; and there
is not so complete and perfect a part that we know of nature, which
does not owe the being it has, and the excellences of it, to its
neighbours; and we must not confine our thoughts within the surface of
any body, but look a great deal further, to comprehend perfectly those
qualities that are in it.
  12. Our nominal essences of substances furnish few universal
propositions about them that are certain. If this be so, it is not
to be wondered that we have very imperfect ideas of substances, and
that the real essences, on which depend their properties and
operations, are unknown to us. We cannot discover so much as that
size, figure, and texture of their minute and active parts, which is
really in them; much less the different motions and impulses made in
and upon them by bodies from without, upon which depends, and by which
is formed the greatest and most remarkable part of those qualities
we observe in them, and of which our complex ideas of them are made
up. This consideration alone is enough to put an end to all our
hopes of ever having the ideas of their real essences; which whilst we
want, the nominal essences we make use of instead of them will be able
to furnish us but very sparingly with any general knowledge, or
universal propositions capable of real certainty.
  13. Judgment of probability concerning substances may reach further:
but that is not knowledge. We are not therefore to wonder, if
certainty be to be found in very few general propositions made
concerning substances: our knowledge of their qualities and properties
goes very seldom further than our senses reach and inform us. Possibly
inquisitive and observing men may, by strength of judgment,
penetrate further, and, on probabilities taken from wary
observation, and hints well laid together, often guess right at what
experience has not yet discovered to them. But this is but guessing
still; it amounts only to opinion, and has not that certainty which is
requisite to knowledge. For all general knowledge lies only in our own
thoughts, and consists barely in the contemplation of our own abstract
ideas. Wherever we perceive any agreement or disagreement amongst
them, there we have general knowledge; and by putting the names of
those ideas together accordingly in propositions, can with certainty
pronounce general truths. But because the abstract ideas of
substances, for which their specific names stand, whenever they have
any distinct and determinate signification, have a discoverable
connexion or inconsistency with but a very few other ideas, the
certainty of universal propositions concerning substances is very
narrow and scanty, in that part which is our principal inquiry
concerning them; and there are scarce any of the names of
substances, let the idea it is applied to be what it will, of which we
can generally, and with certainty, pronounce, that it has or has not
this or that other quality belonging to it, and constantly co-existing
or inconsistent with that idea, wherever it is to be found.
  14. What is requisite for our knowledge of substances. Before we can
have any tolerable knowledge of this kind, we must First know what
changes the primary qualities of one body do regularly produce in
the primary qualities of another, and how. Secondly, We must know what
primary qualities of any body produce certain sensations or ideas in
us. This is in truth no less than to know all the effects of matter,
under its divers modifications of bulk, figure, cohesion of parts,
motion and rest. Which, I think every body will allow, is utterly
impossible to be known by us without revelation. Nor if it were
revealed to us what sort of figure, bulk, and motion of corpuscles
would produce in us the sensation of a yellow colour, and what sort of
figure, bulk, and texture of parts in the superficies of any body were
fit to give such corpuscles their due motion to produce that colour;
would that be enough to make universal propositions with certainty,
concerning the several sorts of them; unless we had faculties acute
enough to perceive the precise bulk, figure, texture, and motion of
bodies, in those minute parts, by which they operate on our senses, so
that we might by those frame our abstract ideas of them. I have
mentioned here only corporeal substances, whose operations seem to lie
more level to our understandings. For as to the operations of spirits,
both their thinking and moving of bodies, we at first sight find
ourselves at a loss; though perhaps, when we have applied our thoughts
a little nearer to the consideration of bodies and their operations,
and examined how far our notions, even in these, reach with any
clearness beyond sensible matter of fact, we shall be bound to confess
that, even in these too, our discoveries amount to very little
beyond perfect ignorance and incapacity.
  15. Whilst our complex ideas of substances contain not ideas of
their real constitutions, we can make but few general certain
propositions concerning them. This is evident, the abstract complex
ideas of substances. for which their general names stand, not
comprehending their real constitutions, can afford us very little
universal certainty. Because our ideas of them are not made up of that
on which those qualities we observe in them, and would inform
ourselves about, do depend, or with which they have any certain
connexion: v.g. let the ideas to which we give the name man be, as
it commonly is, a body of the ordinary shape, with sense, voluntary
motion, and reason joined to it. This being the abstract idea, and
consequently the essence of our species, man, we can make but very few
general certain propositions concerning man, standing for such an
idea. Because, not knowing the real constitution on which sensation,
power of motion, and reasoning, with that peculiar shape, depend,
and whereby they are united together in the same subject, there are
very few other qualities with which we can perceive them to have a
necessary connexion: and therefore we cannot with certainty affirm:
That all men sleep by intervals; That no man can be nourished by
wood or stones; That all men will be poisoned by hemlock: because
these ideas have no connexion nor repugnancy with this our nominal
essence of man, with this abstract idea that name stands for. We must,
in these and the like, appeal to trial in particular subjects, which
can reach but a little way. We must content ourselves with probability
in the rest: but can have no general certainty, whilst our specific
idea of man contains not that real constitution which is the root
wherein all his inseparable qualities are united, and from whence they
flow. Whilst our idea the word man stands for is only an imperfect
collection of some sensible qualities and powers in him, there is no
discernible connexion or repugnance between our specific idea, and the
operation of either the parts of hemlock or stones upon his
constitution. There are animals that safely eat hemlock, and others
that are nourished by wood and stones: but as long as we want ideas of
those real constitutions of different sorts of animals whereon these
and the like qualities and powers depend, we must not hope to reach
certainty in universal propositions concerning them. Those few ideas
only which have a discernible connexion with our nominal essence, or
any part of it, can afford us such propositions. But these are so few,
and of so little moment, that we may justly look on our certain
general knowledge of substances as almost none at all.
  16. Wherein lies the general certainty of propositions. To conclude:
general propositions, of what kind soever, are then only capable of
certainty, when the terms used in them stand for such ideas, whose
agreement or disagreement, as there expressed, is capable to be
discovered by us. And we are then certain of their truth or falsehood,
when we perceive the ideas the terms stand for to agree or not
agree, according as they are affirmed or denied one of another. Whence
we may take notice, that general certainty is never to be found but in
our ideas. Whenever we go to seek it elsewhere, in experiment or
observations without us, our knowledge goes not beyond particulars. It
is the contemplation of our own abstract ideas that alone is able to
afford us general knowledge.
                             Chapter VII
                              Of Maxims

  1. Maxims or axioms are self-evident propositions. There are a
sort of propositions, which, under the name of maxims and axioms, have
passed for principles of science: and because they are self-evident,
have been supposed innate, without that anybody (that I know) ever
went about to show the reason and foundation of their clearness or
cogency. It may, however, be worth while to inquire into the reason of
their evidence, and see whether it be peculiar to them alone; and also
to examine how far they influence and govern our other knowledge.
  2. Wherein that self-evidence consists. Knowledge, as has been
shown, consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement
of ideas. Now, where that agreement or disagreement is perceived
immediately by itself, without the intervention or help of any
other, there our knowledge is self-evident. This will appear to be
so to any who will but consider any of those propositions which,
without any proof, he assents to at first sight: for in all of them he
will find that the reason of his assent is from that agreement or
disagreement which the mind, by an immediate comparing them, finds
in those ideas answering the affirmation or negation in the
proposition.
  3. Self-evidence not peculiar to received axioms. This being so,
in the next place, let us consider whether this self-evidence be
peculiar only to those propositions which commonly pass under the name
of maxims, and have the dignity of axioms allowed them. And here it is
plain, that several other truths, not allowed to be axioms, partake
equally with them in this self-evidence. This we shall see, if we go
over these several sorts of agreement or disagreement of ideas which I
have above mentioned, viz. identity, relation, coexistence, and real
existence; which will discover to us, that not only those few
propositions which have had the credit of maxims are self-evident, but
a great many, even almost an infinite number of other propositions are
such.
  4. I. As to identity and diversity, all propositions are equally
self-evident. For, First, The immediate perception of the agreement or
disagreement of identity being founded in the mind's having distinct
ideas, this affords us as many self-evident propositions as we have
distinct ideas. Every one that has any knowledge at all, has, as the
foundation of it, various and distinct ideas: and it is the first
act of the mind (without which it can never be capable of any
knowledge) to know every one of its ideas by itself, and distinguish
it from others. Every one finds in himself, that he knows the ideas he
has; that he knows also, when any one is in his understanding, and
what it is; and that when more than one are there, he knows them
distinctly and unconfusedly one from another; which always being so,
(it being impossible but that he should perceive what he perceives,)
he can never be in doubt when any idea is in his mind, that it is
there, and is that idea it is; and that two distinct ideas, when
they are in his mind, are there, and are not one and the same idea. So
that all such affirmations and negations are made without any
possibility of doubt, uncertainty, or hesitation, and must necessarily
be assented to as soon as understood; that is, as soon as we have in
our minds determined ideas, which the terms in the proposition stand
for. And, therefore, whenever the mind with attention considers any
proposition, so as to perceive the two ideas signified by the terms,
and affirmed or denied one of the other to be the same or different;
it is presently and infallibly certain of the truth of such a
proposition; and this equally whether these propositions be in terms
standing for more general ideas, or such as are less so: v.g.
whether the general idea of Being be affirmed of itself, as in this
proposition, "whatsoever is, is"; or a more particular idea be
affirmed of itself, as "a man is a man"; or, "whatsoever is white is
white"; or whether the idea of being in general be denied of
not-Being, which is the only (if I may so call it) idea different from
it, as in this other proposition, "it is impossible for the same thing
to be and not to be": or any idea of any particular being be denied of
another different from it, as "a man is not a horse"; "red is not
blue." The difference of the ideas, as soon as the terms are
understood, makes the truth of the proposition presently visible,
and that with an equal certainty and easiness in the less as well as
the more general propositions; and all for the same reason, viz.
because the mind perceives, in any ideas that it has, the same idea to
be the same with itself; and two different ideas to be different,
and not the same; and this it is equally certain of, whether these
ideas be more or less general, abstract, and comprehensive. It is not,
therefore, alone to these two general propositions- "whatsoever is,
is"; and "it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be"-
that this sort of self-evidence belongs by any peculiar right. The
perception of being, or not being, belongs no more to these vague
ideas, signified by the terms whatsoever, and thing, than it does to
any other ideas. These two general maxims, amounting to no more, in
short, but this, that the same is the same, and the same is not
different, are truths known in more particular instances, as well as
in those general maxims; and known also in particular instances,
before these general maxims are ever thought on; and draw all their
force from the discernment of the mind employed about particular
ideas. There is nothing more visible than that the mind, without the
help of any proof, or reflection on either of these general
propositions, perceives so clearly, and knows so certainly, that the
idea of white is the idea of white, and not the idea of blue; and that
the idea of white, when it is in the mind, is there, and is not
absent; that the consideration of these axioms can add nothing to
the evidence or certainty of its knowledge. Just so it is (as every
one may experiment in himself) in all the ideas a man has in his mind:
he knows each to be itself, and not to be another; and to be in his
mind, and not away when it is there, with a certainty that cannot be
greater; and, therefore, the truth of no general proposition can be
known with a greater certainty, nor add anything to this. So that,
in respect of identity, our intuitive knowledge reaches as far as
our ideas. And we are capable of making as many self-evident
propositions, as we have names for distinct ideas. And I appeal to
every one's own mind, whether this proposition, "a circle is a
circle," be not as self-evident a proposition as that consisting of
more general terms, "whatsoever is, is"; and again, whether this
proposition, "blue is not red," be not a proposition that the mind can
no more doubt of, as soon as it understands the words, than it does of
that axiom, "it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be?"
And so of all the like.
  5. II. In co-existence we have few self-evident propositions.
Secondly, as to co-existence, or such a necessary connexion between
two ideas that, in the subject where one of them is supposed, there
the other must necessarily be also: of such agreement or
disagreement as this, the mind has an immediate perception but in very
few of them. And therefore in this sort we have but very little
intuitive knowledge: nor are there to be found very many
propositions that are self-evident, though some there are: v.g. the
idea of filling a place equal to the contents of its superficies,
being annexed to our idea of body, I think it is a self-evident
proposition, that two bodies cannot be in the same place.
  6. III. In other relations we may have many. Thirdly, As to the
relations of modes, mathematicians have framed many axioms
concerning that one relation of equality. As, "equals taken from
equals, the remainder will be equal"; which, with the rest of that
kind, however they are received for maxims by the mathematicians,
and are unquestionable truths, yet, I think, that any one who
considers them will not find that they have a clearer self-evidence
than these,- that "one and one are equal to two"; that "if you take
from the five fingers of one hand two, and from the five fingers of
the other hand two, the remaining numbers will be equal." These and
a thousand other such propositions may be found in numbers, which,
at the very first hearing, force the assent, and carry with them an
equal, if not greater clearness, than those mathematical axioms.
  7. IV. Concerning real existence, we have none. Fourthly, as to real
existence, since that has no connexion with any other of our ideas,
but that of ourselves, and of a First Being, we have in that,
concerning the real existence of all other beings, not so much as
demonstrative, much less a self-evident knowledge: and, therefore,
concerning those there are no maxims.
  8. These axioms do not much influence our other knowledge. In the
next place let us consider, what influence these received maxims
have upon the other parts of our knowledge. The rules established in
the schools, that all reasonings are Ex praeognitis et
praeconcessis, seem to lay the foundation of all other knowledge in
these maxims, and to suppose them to be praecognita. Whereby, I think,
are meant these two things: first, that these axioms are those
truths that are first known to the mind; and, secondly, that upon them
the other parts of our knowledge depend.
  9. Because maxims or axioms are not the truths we first knew. First,
That they are not the truths first known to the mind is evident to
experience, as we have shown in another place. (Bk. I. chap. i.) Who
perceives not that a child certainly knows that a stranger is not
its mother; that its sucking-bottle is not the rod, long before he
knows that "it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to
be?" And how many truths are there about numbers, which it is
obvious to observe that the mind is perfectly acquainted with, and
fully convinced of, before it ever thought on these general maxims, to
which mathematicians, in their arguings, do sometimes refer them?
Whereof the reason is very plain: for that which makes the mind assent
to such propositions, being nothing else but the perception it has
of the agreement or disagreement of its ideas, according as it finds
them affirmed or denied one of another in words it understands; and
every idea being known to be what it is, and every two distinct
ideas being known not to be the same; it must necessarily follow, that
such self-evident truths must be first known which consist of ideas
that are first in the mind. And the ideas first in the mind, it is
evident, are those of particular things, from whence, by slow degrees,
the understanding proceeds to some few general ones; which being taken
from the ordinary and familiar objects of sense, are settled in the
mind, with general names to them. Thus particular ideas are first
received and distinguished, and so knowledge got about them; and
next to them, the less general or specific, which are next to
particular. For abstract ideas are not so obvious or easy to children,
or the yet unexercised mind, as particular ones. If they seem so to
grown men, it is only because by constant and familiar use they are
made so. For, when we nicely reflect upon them, we shall find that
general ideas are fictions and contrivances of the mind, that carry
difficulty with them, and do not so easily offer themselves as we
are apt to imagine. For example, does it not require some pains and
skill to form the general idea of a triangle, (which is yet none of
the most abstract, comprehensive, and difficult,) for it must be
neither oblique nor rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor
scalenon; but all and none of these at once. In effect, it is
something imperfect, that cannot exist; an idea wherein some parts
of several different and inconsistent ideas are put together. It is
true, the mind, in this imperfect state, has need of such ideas, and
makes all the haste to them it can, for the conveniency of
communication and enlargement of knowledge; to both which it is
naturally very much inclined. But yet one has reason to suspect such
ideas are marks of our imperfection; at least, this is enough to
show that the most abstract and general ideas are not those that the
mind is first and most easily acquainted with, nor such as its
earliest knowledge is conversant about.
  10. Because on perception of them the other parts of our knowledge
do not depend. Secondly, from what has been said it plainly follows,
that these magnified maxims are not the principles and foundations
of all our other knowledge. For if there be a great many other truths,
which have as much self-evidence as they, and a great many that we
know before them, it is impossible they should be the principles
from which we deduce all other truths. Is it impossible to know that
one and two are equal to three, but by virtue of this, or some such
axiom, viz. "the whole is equal to all its parts taken together?" Many
a one knows that one and two are equal to three, without having heard,
or thought on, that or any other axiom by which it might be proved;
and knows it as certainly as any other man knows, that "the whole is
equal to all its parts," or any other maxim; and all from the same
reason of self-evidence: the equality of those ideas being as
visible and certain to him without that or any other axiom as with it,
it needing no proof to make it perceived. Nor after the knowledge,
that the whole is equal to all its parts, does he know that one and
two are equal to three, better or more certainly than he did before.
For if there be any odds in those ideas, the whole and parts are
more obscure, or at least more difficult to be settled in the mind
than those of one, two, and three. And indeed, I think, I may ask
these men, who will needs have all knowledge, besides those general
principles themselves, to depend on general, innate, and
self-evident principles. What principle is requisite to prove that one
and one are two, that two and two are four, that three times two are
six? Which being known without any proof, do evince, That either all
knowledge does not depend on certain praecognita or general maxims,
called principles; or else that these are principles: and if these are
to be counted principles, a great part of numeration will be so. To
which, if we add all the self-evident propositions which may be made
about all our distinct ideas, principles will be almost infinite, at
least innumerable, which men arrive to the knowledge of, at
different ages; and a great many of these innate principles they never
come to know all their lives. But whether they come in view of the
mind earlier or later, this is true of them, that they are all known
by their native evidence; are wholly independent; receive no light,
nor are capable of any proof one from another; much less the more
particular from the more general, or the more simple from the more
compounded; the more simple and less abstract being the most familiar,
and the easier and earlier apprehended. But whichever be the
clearest ideas, the evidence and certainty of all such propositions is
in this, That a man sees the same idea to be the same idea, and
infallibly perceives two different ideas to be different ideas. For
when a man has in his understanding the ideas of one and of two, the
idea of yellow, and the idea of blue, he cannot but certainly know
that the idea of one is the idea of one, and not the idea of two;
and that the idea of yellow is the idea of yellow, and not the idea of
blue. For a man cannot confound the ideas in his mind, which he has
distinct: that would be to have them confused and distinct at the same
time, which is a contradiction: and to have none distinct, is to
have no use of our faculties, to have no knowledge at all. And,
therefore, what idea soever is affirmed of itself, or whatsoever two
entire distinct ideas are denied one of another, the mind cannot but
assent to such a proposition as infallibly true, as soon as it
understands the terms, without hesitation or need of proof, or
regarding those made in more general terms and called maxims.
  11. What use these general maxims or axioms have. What shall we then
say? Are these general maxims of no use? By no means; though perhaps
their use is not that which it is commonly taken to be. But, since
doubting in the least of what hath been by some men ascribed to
these maxims may be apt to be cried out against, as overturning the
foundations of all the sciences; it may be worth while to consider
them with respect to other parts of our knowledge, and examine more
particularly to what purposes they serve, and to what not.
  (1) It is evident from what has been already said, that they are
of no use to prove or confirm less general self-evident propositions.
  (2) It is as plain that they are not, nor have been the
foundations whereon any science hath been built. There is, I know, a
great deal of talk, propagated from scholastic men, of sciences and
the maxims on which they are built: but it has been my ill-luck
never to meet with any such sciences; much less any one built upon
these two maxims, what is, is; and it is impossible for the same thing
to be and not to be. And I would be glad to be shown where any such
science, erected upon these or any other general axioms is to be
found: and should be obliged to any one who would lay before me the
frame and system of any science so built on these or any such like
maxims, that could not be shown to stand as firm without any
consideration of them. I ask, Whether these general maxims have not
the same use in the study of divinity, and in theological questions,
that they have in other sciences? They serve here, too, to silence
wranglers, and put an end to dispute. But I think that nobody will
therefore say, that the Christian religion is built upon these maxims,
or that the knowledge we have of it is derived from these
principals. It is from revelation we have received it, and without
revelation these maxims had never been able to help us to it. When
we find out an idea by whose intervention we discover the connexion of
two others, this is a revelation from God to us by the voice of
reason: for we then come to know a truth that we did not know
before. When God declares any truth to us, this is a revelation to
us by the voice of his Spirit, and we are advanced in our knowledge.
But in neither of these do we receive our light or knowledge from
maxims. But in the one, the things themselves afford it: and we see
the truth in them by perceiving their agreement or disagreement. In
the other, God himself affords it immediately to us: and we see the
truth of what he says in his unerring veracity.
  (3) They are not of use to help men forward in the advancement of
sciences, or new discoveries of yet unknown truths. Mr. Newton, in his
never enough to be admired book, has demonstrated several
propositions, which are so many new truths, before unknown to the
world, and are further advances in mathematical knowledge: but, for
the discovery of these, it was not the general maxims, "what is,
is;" or, "the whole is bigger than a part," or the like, that helped
him. These were not the clues that led him into the discovery of the
truth and certainty of those propositions. Nor was it by them that
he got the knowledge of those demonstrations, but by finding out
intermediate ideas that showed the agreement or disagreement of the
ideas, as expressed in the propositions he demonstrated. This is the
greatest exercise and improvement of human understanding in the
enlarging of knowledge, and advancing the sciences; wherein they are
far enough from receiving any help from the contemplation of these
or the like magnified maxims. Would those who have this traditional
admiration of these propositions, that they think no step can be
made in knowledge without the support of an axiom, no stone laid in
the building of the sciences without a general maxim, but
distinguish between the method of acquiring knowledge, and of
communicating it; between the method of raising any science, and
that of teaching it to others, as far as it is advanced- they would
see that those general maxims were not the foundations on which the
first discoverers raised their admirable structures, not the keys that
unlocked and opened those secrets of knowledge. Though afterwards,
when schools were erected, and sciences had their professors to
teach what others had found out, they often made use of maxims, i.e.
laid down certain propositions which were self-evident, or to be
received for true; which being settled in the minds of their
scholars as unquestionable verities they on occasion made use of, to
convince them of truths in particular instances, that were not so
familiar to their minds as those general axioms which had before
been inculcated to them, and carefully settled in their minds.
Though these particular instances, when well reflected on, are no less
self-evident to the understanding than the general maxims brought to
confirm them: and it was in those particular instances that the
first discoverer found the truth, without the help of the general
maxims: and so may any one else do, who with attention considers them.
  Maxims of use in the exposition of what has been discovered, and
in silencing obstinate wranglers. To come, therefore, to the use
that is made of maxims.
  (1) They are of use, as has been observed, in the ordinary methods
of teaching sciences as far as they are advanced: but of little or
none in advancing them further.
  (2) They are of use in disputes, for the silencing of obstinate
wranglers, and bringing those contests to some conclusion. Whether a
need of them to that end came not in the manner following, I crave
leave to inquire. The Schools having made disputation the touchstone
of men's abilities, and the criterion of knowledge, adjudged victory
to him that kept the field: and he that had the last word was
concluded to have the better of the argument, if not of the cause. But
because by this means there was like to be no decision between skilful
combatants, whilst one never failed of a medius terminus to prove
any proposition; and the other could as constantly, without or with
a distinction, deny the major or minor; to prevent, as much as could
be, running out of disputes into an endless train of syllogisms,
certain general propositions- most of them, indeed, self-evident- were
introduced into the Schools: which being such as all men allowed and
agreed in, were looked on as general measures of truth, and served
instead of principles (where the disputants had not lain down any
other between them) beyond which there was no going, and which must
not be receded from by either side. And thus these maxims, getting the
name of principles, beyond which men in dispute could not retreat,
were by mistake taken to be the originals and sources from whence
all knowledge began, and the foundations whereon the sciences were
built. Because when in their disputes they came to any of these,
they stopped there, and went no further; the matter was determined.
But how much this is a mistake, hath been already shown.
  How maxims came to be so much in vogue. This method of the
Schools, which have been thought the fountains of knowledge,
introduced, as I suppose, the like use of these maxims into a great
part of conversation out of the Schools, to stop the mouths of
cavillers, whom any one is excused from arguing any longer with,
when they deny these general self-evident principles received by all
reasonable men who have once thought of them: but yet their use herein
is but to put an end to wrangling. They in truth, when urged in such
cases, teach nothing: that is already done by the intermediate ideas
made use of in the debate, whose connexion may be seen without the
help of those maxims, and so the truth known before the maxim is
produced, and the argument brought to a first principle. Men would
give off a wrong argument before it came to that, if in their disputes
they proposed to themselves the finding and embracing of truth, and
not a contest for victory. And thus maxims have their use to put a
stop to their perverseness, whose ingenuity should have yielded
sooner. But the method of the Schools having allowed and encouraged
men to oppose and resist evident truth till they are baffled, i.e.
till they are reduced to contradict themselves, or some established
principles: it is no wonder that they should not in civil conversation
be ashamed of that which in the Schools is counted a virtue and a
glory, viz. obstinately to maintain that side of the question they
have chosen, whether true or false, to the last extremity; even
after conviction. A strange way to attain truth and knowledge: and
that which I think the rational part of mankind, not corrupted by
education, could scarce believe should ever be admitted amongst the
lovers of truth, and students of religion or nature, or introduced
into the seminaries of those who are to propagate the truths of
religion or philosophy amongst the ignorant and unconvinced. How
much such a way of learning is like to turn young men's minds from the
sincere search and love of truth; nay, and to make them doubt
whether there is any such thing, or, at least, worth the adhering
to, I shall not now inquire. This I think, that, bating those
places, which brought the Peripatetick Philosophy into their
schools, where it continued many ages, without teaching the world
anything but the art of wrangling, these maxims were nowhere thought
the foundations on which the sciences were built, nor the great
helps to the advancement of knowledge.
  Of great use to stop wranglers in disputes, but of little use to the
discovery of truths. As to these general maxims, therefore, they
are, as I have said, of great use in disputes, to stop the mouths of
wranglers; but not of much use to the discovery of unknown truths,
or to help the mind forwards in its search after knowledge. For who
ever began to build his knowledge on the general proposition, what is,
is; or, it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be: and
from either of these, as from a principle of science, deduced a system
of useful knowledge? Wrong opinions often involving contradictions,
one of these maxims, as a touchstone, may serve well to show whither
they lead. But yet, however fit to lay open the absurdity or mistake
of a man's reasoning or opinion, they are of very little use for
enlightening the understanding: and it will not be found that the mind
receives much help from them in its progress in knowledge; which would
be neither less, nor less certain, were these two general propositions
never thought on. It is true, as I have said, they sometimes serve
in argumentation to stop a wrangler's mouth, by showing the
absurdity of what he saith, and by exposing him to the shame of
contradicting what all the world knows, and he himself cannot but
own to be true. But it is one thing to show a man that he is in an
error, and another to put him in possession of truth; and I would fain
know what truths these two propositions are able to teach, and by
their influence make us know, which we did not know before, or could
not know without them. Let us reason from them as well as we can, they
are only about identical predications, and influence, if any at all,
none but such. Each particular proposition concerning identity or
diversity is as clearly and certainly known in itself, if attended to,
as either of these general ones: only these general ones, as serving
in all cases, are therefore more inculcated and insisted on. As to
other less general maxims, many of them are no more than bare verbal
propositions, and teach us nothing but the respect and import of names
one to another. "The whole is equal to all its parts": what real
truth, I beseech you, does it teach us? What more is contained in that
maxim, than what the signification of the word totum, or the whole,
does of itself import? And he that knows that the word whole stands
for what is made up of all its parts, knows very little less than that
the whole is equal to all its parts. And, upon the same ground, I
think that this proposition, "A hill is higher than a valley," and
several the like, may also pass for maxims. But yet masters of
mathematics, when they would, as teachers of what they know,
initiate others in that science, do not without reason place this
and some other such maxims at the entrance of their systems; that
their scholars, having in the beginning perfectly acquainted their
thoughts with these propositions, made in such general terms, may be
used to make such reflections, and have these more general
propositions, as formed rules and sayings, ready to apply to all
particular cases. Not that if they be equally weighed, they are more
clear and evident than the particular instances they are brought to
confirm; but that, being more familiar to the mind, the very naming
them is enough to satisfy the understanding. But this, I say, is
more from our custom of using them, and the establishment they have
got in our minds by our often thinking of them, than from the
different evidence of the things. But before custom has settled
methods of thinking and reasoning in our minds, I am apt to imagine it
is quite otherwise; and that the child, when a part of his apple is
taken away, knows it better in that particular instance, than by
this general proposition, "The whole is equal to all its parts"; and
that, if one of these have need to be confirmed to him by the other,
the general has more need to be let into his mind by the particular,
than the particular by the general. For in particulars our knowledge
begins, and so spreads itself, by degrees, to generals. Though
afterwards the mind takes the quite contrary course, and having
drawn its knowledge into as general propositions as it can, makes
those familiar to its thoughts, and accustoms itself to have
recourse to them, as to the standards of truth and falsehood. By which
familiar use of them, as rules to measure the truth of other
propositions, it comes in time to be thought, that more particular
propositions have their truth and evidence from their conformity to
these more general ones, which, in discourse and argumentation, are so
frequently urged, and constantly admitted. And this I think to be
the reason why, amongst so many self-evident propositions, the most
general only have had the title of maxims.
  12. Maxims, if care he not taken in the use of words, may prove
contradictions. One thing further, I think, it may not be amiss to
observe concerning these general maxims, That they are so far from
improving or establishing our minds in true knowledge, that if our
notions be wrong, loose, or unsteady, and we resign up our thoughts to
the sound of words, rather than fix them on settled, determined
ideas of things; I say these general maxims will serve to confirm us
in mistakes; and in such a way of use of words, which is most
common, will serve to prove contradictions: v.g. he that with
Descartes shall frame in his mind an idea of what he calls body to
be nothing but extension, may easily demonstrate that there is no
vacuum, i.e. no space void of body, by this maxim, What is, is. For
the idea to which he annexes the name body, being bare extension,
his knowledge that space cannot be without body, is certain. For he
knows his own idea of extension clearly and distinctly, and knows that
it is what it is, and not another idea, though it be called by these
three names,- extension, body, space. Which three words, standing
for one and the same idea, may, no doubt, with the same evidence and
certainty be affirmed one of another, as each of itself: and it is
as certain, that, whilst I use them all to stand for one and the
same idea, this predication is as true and identical in its
signification, that "space is body," as this predication is true and
identical, that "body is body," both in signification and sound.
  13. Instance in vacuum. But if another should come and make to
himself another idea, different from Descartes's, of the thing,
which yet with Descartes he calls by the same name body, and make
his idea, which he expresses by the word body, to be of a thing that
hath both extension and solidity together; he will as easily
demonstrate, that there may be a vacuum or space without a body, as
Descartes demonstrated the contrary. Because the idea to which he
gives the name space being barely the simple one of extension, and the
idea to which he gives the name body being the complex idea of
extension and resistibility or solidity, together in the same subject,
these two ideas are not exactly one and the same, but in the
understanding as distinct as the ideas of one and two, white and
black, or as of corporeity and humanity, if I may use those
barbarous terms: and therefore the predication of them in our minds,
or in words standing for them, is not identical, but the negation of
them one of another; viz. this proposition: "Extension or space is not
body," is as true and evidently certain as this maxim, It is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be, can make any
proposition.
  14. But they prove not the existence of things without us. But
yet, though both these propositions (as you see) may be equally
demonstrated, viz. that there may be a vacuum, and that there cannot
be a vacuum, by these two certain principles, viz. what is, is, and
the same thing cannot be and not be: yet neither of these principles
will serve to prove to us, that any, or what bodies do exist: for that
we are left to our senses to discover to us as far as they can.
Those universal and self-evident principles being only our constant,
clear, and distinct knowledge of our own ideas, more general or
comprehensive, can assure us of nothing that passes without the
mind: their certainty is founded only upon the knowledge we have of
each idea by itself, and of its distinction from others, about which
we cannot be mistaken whilst they are in our minds; though we may be
and often are mistaken when we retain the names without the ideas;
or use them confusedly, sometimes for one and sometimes for another
idea. In which cases the force of these axioms, reaching only to the
sound, and not the signification of the words, serves only to lead
us into confusion, mistake, and error. It is to show men that these
maxims, however cried up for the great guards of truth, will not
secure them from error in a careless loose use of their words, that
I have made this remark. In all that is here suggested concerning
their little use for the improvement of knowledge, or dangerous use in
undetermined ideas, I have been far enough from saying or intending
they should be laid aside; as some have been too forward to charge me.
I affirm them to be truths, self-evident truths; and so cannot be laid
aside. As far as their influence will reach, it is in vain to
endeavour, nor will I attempt, to abridge it. But yet, without any
injury to truth or knowledge, I may have reason to think their use
is not answerable to the great stress which seems to be laid on
them; and I may warn men not to make an ill use of them, for the
confirming themselves in errors.
  15. They cannot add to our knowledge of substances, and their
application to complex ideas is dangerous. But let them be of what use
they will in verbal propositions, they cannot discover or prove to
us the least knowledge of the nature of substances, as they are
found and exist without us, any further than grounded on experience.
And though the consequence of these two propositions, called
principles, be very clear, and their use not dangerous or hurtful,
in the probation of such things wherein there is no need at all of
them for proof, but such as are clear by themselves without them, viz.
where our ideas are [determined] and known by the names that stand for
them: yet when these principles, viz. what is, is, and it is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be, are made use of
in the probation of propositions wherein are words standing for
complex ideas, v.g. man, horse, gold, virtue; there they are of
infinite danger, and most commonly make men receive and retain
falsehood for manifest truth, and uncertainty for demonstration:
upon which follow error, obstinacy, and all the mischiefs that can
happen from wrong reasoning. The reason whereof is not, that these
principles are less true or of less force in proving propositions made
of terms standing for complex ideas, than where the propositions are
about simple ideas. But because men mistake generally,- thinking
that where the same terms are preserved, the propositions are about
the same things, though the ideas they stand for are in truth
different, therefore these maxims are made use of to support those
which in sound and appearance are contradictory propositions; and is
clear in the demonstrations above mentioned about a vacuum. So that
whilst men take words for things, as usually they do, these maxims may
and do commonly serve to prove contradictory propositions; as shall
yet be further made manifest.
  16. Instance in demonstrations about man, which can only be
verbal. For instance: let man be that concerning which you would by
these first principles demonstrate anything, and we shall see, that so
far as demonstration is by these principles, it is only verbal, and
gives us no certain, universal, true proposition, or knowledge, of any
being existing without us. First, a child having framed the idea of
a man, it is probable that his idea is just like that picture which
the painter makes of the visible appearances joined together; and such
a complication of ideas together in his understanding makes up the
single complex idea which he calls man, whereof white or
flesh-colour in England being one, the child can demonstrate to you
that a negro is not a man, because white colour was one of the
constant simple ideas of the complex idea he calls man; and
therefore he can demonstrate, by the principle, It is impossible for
the same thing to be and not to be, that a negro is not a man; the
foundation of his certainty being not that universal proposition,
which perhaps he never heard nor thought of, but the clear, distinct
perception he hath of his own simple ideas of black and white, which
he cannot be persuaded to take, nor can ever mistake one for
another, whether he knows that maxim or no. And to this child, or
any one who hath such an idea, which he calls man, can you never
demonstrate that a man hath a soul, because his idea of man includes
no such notion or idea in it. And therefore, to him, the principle
of What is, is, proves not this matter; but it depends upon collection
and observation, by which he is to make his complex idea called man.
  17. Another instance. Secondly, Another that hath gone further in
framing and collecting the idea he calls man, and to the outward shape
adds laughter and rational discourse, may demonstrate that infants and
changelings are no men, by this maxim, it is impossible for the same
thing to he and not to be; and I have discoursed with very rational
men, who have actually denied that they are men.
  18. A third instance. Thirdly, Perhaps another makes up the
complex idea which he calls man, only out of the ideas of body in
general, and the powers of language and reason, and leaves out the
shape wholly: this man is able to demonstrate that a man may have no
hands, but be quadrupes, neither of those being included in his idea
of man: and in whatever body or shape he found speech and reason
joined, that was a man; because, having a clear knowledge of such a
complex idea, it is certain that What is, is.
  19. Little use of these maxims in proofs where we have clear and
distinct ideas. So that, if rightly considered, I think we may say,
That where our ideas are determined in our minds, and have annexed
to them by us known and steady names under those settled
determinations, there is little need, or no use at all of these
maxims, to prove the agreement or disagreement of any of them. He that
cannot discern the truth or falsehood of such propositions, without
the help of these and the like maxims, will not be helped by these
maxims to do it: since he cannot be supposed to know the truth of
these maxims themselves without proof, if he cannot know the truth
of others without proof, which are as self-evident as these. Upon this
ground it is that intuitive knowledge neither requires nor admits
any proof, one part of it more than another. He that will suppose it
does, takes away the foundation of all knowledge and certainty; and he
that needs any proof to make him certain, and give his assent to
this proposition, that two are equal to two, will also have need of
a proof to make him admit, that what is, is. He that needs a probation
to convince him that two are not three, that white is not black,
that a triangle is not a circle, &c., or any other two [determined]
distinct ideas are not one and the same, will need also a
demonstration to convince him that It is impossible for the same thing
to be and not to be.
  20. Their use dangerous, where our ideas are not determined. And
as these maxims are of little use where we have determined ideas, so
they are, as I have shown, of dangerous use where our ideas are not
determined; and where we use words that are not annexed to
determined ideas, but such as are of a loose and wandering
signification, sometimes standing for one, and sometimes for another
idea: from which follow mistake and error, which these maxims (brought
as proofs to establish propositions, wherein the terms stand for
undetermined ideas) do by their authority confirm and rivet.
                             Chapter VIII
                       Of Trifling Propositions

  1. Some propositions bring no increase to our knowledge. Whether the
maxims treated of in the foregoing chapter be of that use to real
knowledge as is generally supposed, I leave to be considered. This,
I think, may confidently be affirmed, That there are universal
propositions, which, though they be certainly true, yet they add no
light to our understanding; bring no increase to our knowledge. Such
are-
  2. I. As identical propositions. First, All purely identical
propositions. These obviously and at first blush appear to contain
no instruction in them; for when we affirm the said term of itself,
whether it be barely verbal, or whether it contains any clear and real
idea, it shows us nothing but what we must certainly know before,
whether such a proposition be either made by, or proposed to us.
Indeed, that most general one, what is, is, may serve sometimes to
show a man the absurdity he is guilty of, when, by circumlocution or
equivocal terms, he would in particular instances deny the same
thing of itself; because nobody will so openly bid defiance to
common sense, as to affirm visible and direct contradictions in
plain words; or, if he does, a man is excused if he breaks off any
further discourse with him. But yet I think I may say, that neither
that received maxim, nor any other identical proposition, teaches us
anything; and though in such kind of propositions this great and
magnified maxim, boasted to be the foundation of demonstration, may be
and often is made use of to confirm them, yet all it proves amounts to
no more than this, That the same word may with great certainty be
affirmed of itself, without any doubt of the truth of any such
proposition; and let me add, also, without any real knowledge.
  3. Examples. For, at this rate, any very ignorant person, who can
but make a proposition, and knows what he means when he says ay or no,
may make a million of propositions of whose truth he may be infallibly
certain, and yet not know one thing in the world thereby; v.g. "what
is a soul, is a soul,"; or, "a soul is a soul"; "a spirit is a
spirit"; "a fetiche is a fetiche," &c. These all being equivalent to
this proposition, viz. what is, is; i.e. what hath existence, hath
existence; or, who hath a soul, hath a soul. What is this more than
trifling with words? It is but like a monkey shifting his oyster
from one hand to the other: and had he but words, might no doubt
have said, "Oyster in right hand is subject, and oyster in left hand
is predicate": and so might have made a self-evident proposition of
oyster, i.e. oyster is oyster; and yet, with all this, not have been
one whit the wiser or more knowing: and that way of handling the
matter would much at once have satisfied the monkey's hunger, or a
man's understanding, and they would have improved in knowledge and
bulk together.
  How identical propositions are trifling. I know there are some
who, because identical propositions are self-evident, show a great
concern for them, and think they do great service to philosophy by
crying them up; as if in them was contained all knowledge, and the
understanding were led into all truth by them only. I grant as
forwardly as any one, that they are all true and self-evident. I grant
further, that the foundation of all our knowledge lies in the
faculty we have of perceiving the same idea to be the same, and of
discerning it from those that are different; as I have shown in the
foregoing chapter. But how that vindicates the making use of identical
propositions, for the improvement of knowledge, from the imputation of
trifling, I do not see. Let any one repeat, as often as he pleases,
that "the will is the will," or lay what stress on it he thinks fit;
of what use is this, and an infinite the like propositions, for the
enlarging our knowledge? Let a man abound, as much as the plenty of
words which he has will permit, in such propositions as these: "a
law is a law," and "obligation is obligation"; "right is right," and
"wrong is wrong":- will these and the like ever help him to an
acquaintance with ethics, or instruct him or others in the knowledge
of morality? Those who know not, nor perhaps ever will know, what is
right and what is wrong, nor the measures of them, can with as much
assurance make, and infallibly know, the truth of these and all such
propositions, as he that is best instructed in morality can do. But
what advance do such propositions give in the knowledge of anything
necessary or useful for their conduct?
  He would be thought to do little less than trifle, who, for the
enlightening the understanding in any part of knowledge, should be
busy with identical propositions and insist on such maxims as these:
"substance is substance," and "body is body"; "a vacuum is a
vacuum," and "a vortex is a vortex"; "a centaur is a centaur," and
"a chimera is a chimera," &c. For these and all such are equally true,
equally certain, and equally self-evident. But yet they cannot but
be counted trifling, when made use of as principles of instruction,
and stress laid on them as helps to knowledge; since they teach
nothing but what every one who is capable of discourse knows without
being told, viz. that the same term is the same term, and the same
idea the same idea. And upon this account it was that I formerly
did, and do still think, the offering and inculcating such
propositions, in order to give the understanding any new light, or
inlet into the knowledge of things, no better than trifling.
  Instruction lies in something very different; and he that would
enlarge his own or another's mind to truths he does not yet know, must
find out intermediate ideas, and then lay them in such order one by
another, that the understanding may see the agreement or
disagreement of those in question. Propositions that do this are
instructive; but they are far from such as affirm the same term of
itself; which is no way to advance one's self or others in any sort of
knowledge. It no more helps to that than it would help any one in
his learning to read, to have such propositions as these inculcated to
him- "An A is an A," and "a B is a B"; which a man may know as well as
any schoolmaster, and yet never be able to read a word as long as he
lives. Nor do these, or any such identical propositions help him one
jot forwards in the skill of reading, let him make what use of them he
can.
  If those who blame my calling them trifling propositions had but
read and been at the pains to understand what I have above writ in
very plain English, they could not but have seen that by identical
propositions I mean only such wherein the same term, importing the
same idea, is affirmed of itself: which I take to be the proper
signification of identical propositions; and concerning all such, I
think I may continue safely to say, that to propose them as
instructive is no better than trifling. For no one who has the use
of reason can miss them, where it is necessary they should be taken
notice of; nor doubt of their truth when he does take notice of them.
  But if men will call propositions identical, wherein the same term
is not affirmed of itself, whether they speak more properly than I,
others must judge; this is certain, all that they say of
propositions that are not identical in my sense, concerns not me nor
what I have said; all that I have said relating to those
propositions wherein the same term is affirmed of itself. And I
would fain see an instance wherein any such can be made use of, to the
advantage and improvement of any one's knowledge. Instances of other
kinds, whatever use may be made of them, concern not me, as not
being such as I call identical.
  4. II. Secondly, propositions in which a part of any complex idea is
predicated of the whole. Another sort of trifling propositions is,
when a part of the complex idea is predicated of the name of the
whole; a part of the definition of the word defined. Such are all
propositions wherein the genus is predicated of the species, or more
comprehensive of less comprehensive terms. For what information,
what knowledge, carries this proposition in it, viz. "Lead is a metal"
to a man who knows the complex idea the name lead stands for? All
the simple ideas that go to the complex one signified by the term
metal, being nothing but what he before comprehended and signified
by the name lead. Indeed, to a man that knows the signification of the
word metal, and not of the word lead, it is a shorter way to explain
the signification of the word lead, by saying it is a metal, which
at once expresses several of its simple ideas, than to enumerate
them one by one, telling him it is a body very heavy, fusible, and
malleable.
  5. As part of the definition of the term defined. Alike trifling
it is to predicate any other part of the definition of the term
defined, or to affirm any one of the simple ideas of a complex one
of the name of the whole complex idea; as, "All gold is fusible."
For fusibility being one of the simple ideas that goes to the making
up the complex one the sound gold stands for, what can it be but
playing with sounds, to affirm that of the name gold, which is
comprehended in its received signification? It would be thought little
better than ridiculous to affirm gravely, as a truth of moment, that
gold is yellow; and I see not how it is any jot more material to say
it is fusible, unless that quality be left out of the complex idea, of
which the sound gold is the mark in ordinary speech. What
instruction can it carry with it, to tell one that which he hath
been told already, or he is supposed to know before? For I am supposed
to know the signification of the word another uses to me, or else he
is to tell me. And if I know that the name gold stands for this
complex idea of body, yellow, heavy, fusible, malleable, it will not
much instruct me to put it solemnly afterwards in a proposition, and
gravely say, all gold is fusible. Such propositions can only serve
to show the disingenuity of one who will go from the definition of his
own terms, by reminding him sometimes of it; but carry no knowledge
with them, but of the signification of words, however certain they be.
  6. Instance, man and palfrey. "Every man is an animal, or living
body," is as certain a proposition as can be; but no more conducing to
the knowledge of things than to say, a palfrey is an ambling horse, or
a neighing, ambling animal, both being only about the signification of
words, and make me know but this- That body, sense, and motion, or
power of sensation and moving, are three of those ideas that I
always comprehend and signify by the word man: and where they are
not to be found together, the name man belongs not to that thing:
and so of the other- That body, sense, and a certain way of going,
with a certain kind of voice, are some of those ideas which I always
comprehend and signify by the word palfrey; and when they are not to
be found together, the name palfrey belongs not to that thing. It is
just the same, and to the same purpose, when any term standing for any
one or more of the simple ideas, that altogether make up that
complex idea which is called man, is affirmed of the term man:- v.g.
suppose a Roman signified by the word homo all these distinct ideas
united in one subject, corporietas, sensibilitas, potentia se
movendi rationalitas, risibilitas; he might, no doubt, with great
certainty, universally affirm one, more, or all of these together of
the word homo, but did no more than say that the word homo, in his
country, comprehended in its signification all these ideas. Much
like a romance knight, who by the word palfrey signified these ideas:-
body of a certain figure, four-legged, with sense, motion, ambling,
neighing, white, used to have a woman on his back- might with the same
certainty universally affirm also any or all of these of the word
palfrey: but did thereby teach no more, but that the word palfrey,
in his or romance language, stood for all these, and was not to be
applied to anything where any of these was wanting. But he that
shall tell me, that in whatever thing sense, motion, reason, and
laughter, were united, that thing had actually a notion of God, or
would be cast into a sleep by opium, made indeed an instructive
proposition: because neither having the notion of God, nor being
cast into sleep by opium, being contained in the idea signified by the
word man, we are by such propositions taught something more than
barely what the word man stands for: and therefore the knowledge
contained in it is more than verbal.
  7. For this teaches but the signification of words. Before a man
makes any proposition, he is supposed to understand the terms he
uses in it, or else he talks like a parrot, only making a noise by
imitation, and framing certain sounds, which he has learnt of
others; but not as a rational creature, using them for signs of
ideas which he has in his mind. The hearer also is supposed to
understand the terms as the speaker uses them, or else he talks
jargon, and makes an unintelligible noise. And therefore he trifles
with words who makes such a proposition, which, when it is made,
contains no more than one of the terms does, and which a man was
supposed to know before: v.g. a triangle hath three sides, or
saffron is yellow. And this is no further tolerable than where a man
goes to explain his terms to one who is supposed or declares himself
not to understand him; and then it teaches only the signification of
that word, and the use of that sign.
  8. But adds no real knowledge. We can know then the truth of two
sorts of propositions with perfect certainty. The one is, of those
trifling propositions which have a certainty in them, but it is only a
verbal certainty, but not instructive. And, secondly, we can know
the truth, and so may be certain in propositions, which affirm
something of another, which is a necessary consequence of its
precise complex idea, but not contained in it: as that the external
angle of all triangles is bigger than either of the opposite
internal angles. Which relation of the outward angle to either of
the opposite internal angles, making no part of the complex idea
signified by the name triangle, this is a real truth, and conveys with
it instructive real knowledge.
  9. General propositions concerning substances are often trifling. We
having little or no knowledge of what combinations there be of
simple ideas existing together in substances, but by our senses, we
cannot make any universal certain propositions concerning them, any
further than our nominal essences lead us. Which being to a very few
and inconsiderable truths, in respect of those which depend on their
real constitutions, the general propositions that are made about
substances, if they are certain, are for the most part but trifling;
and if they are instructive, are uncertain, and such as we can have no
knowledge of their real truth, how much soever constant observation
and analogy may assist our judgment in guessing. Hence it comes to
pass, that one may often meet with very clear and coherent discourses,
that amount yet to nothing. For it is plain that names of
substantial beings, as well as others, as far as they have relative
significations affixed to them, may, with great truth, be joined
negatively and affirmatively in propositions, as their relative
definitions make them fit to be so joined; and propositions consisting
of such terms, may, with the same clearness, be deduced one from
another, as those that convey the most real truths: and all this
without any knowledge of the nature or reality of things existing
without us. By this method one may make demonstrations and undoubted
propositions in words, and yet thereby advance not one jot in the
knowledge of the truth of things: v.g. he that having learnt these
following words, with their ordinary mutual relative acceptations
annexed to them: v.g. substance, man, animal, form, soul,
vegetative, sensitive, rational, may make several undoubted
propositions about the soul, without knowing at all what the soul
really is: and of this sort, a man may find an infinite number of
propositions, reasonings, and conclusions, in books of metaphysics,
school-divinity, and some sort of natural philosophy: and, after
all, know as little of God, spirits, or bodies, as he did before he
set out.
  10. And why. He that hath liberty to define, i.e. to determine the
signification of his names of substances (as certainly every one
does in effect, who makes them stand for his own ideas), and makes
their significations at a venture, taking them from his own or other
men's fancies, and not from an examination or inquiry into the
nature of things themselves; may with little trouble demonstrate
them one of another, according to those several respects and mutual
relations he has given them one to another; wherein, however things
agree or disagree in their own nature, he needs mind nothing but his
own notions, with the names he hath bestowed upon them: but thereby no
more increases in his own knowledge than he does his riches, who,
taking a bag of counters, calls one in a certain place a pound,
another in another place a shilling, and a third in a third place a
penny; and so proceeding, may undoubtedly reckon right, and cast up
a great sum, according to his counters so placed, and standing for
more or less as he pleases, without being one jot the richer, or
without even knowing how much a pound, shilling, or penny is, but only
that one is contained in the other twenty times, and contains the
other twelve: which a man may also do in the signification of words,
by making them, in respect of one another, more or less, or equally
comprehensive.
  11. Thirdly, using words variously is trifling with them. Though yet
concerning most words used in discourses, equally argumentative and
controversial, there is this more to be complained of, which is the
worst sort of trifling, and which sets us yet further from the
certainty of knowledge we hope to attain by them, or find in them;
viz. that most writers are so far from instructing us in the nature
and knowledge of things, that they use their words loosely and
uncertainly, and do not. by using them constantly and steadily in
the same significations, make plain and clear deductions of words
one from another, and make their discourses coherent and clear, (how
little soever they were instructive); which were not difficult to
do, did they not find it convenient to shelter their ignorance or
obstinacy under the obscurity and perplexedness of their terms: to
which, perhaps, inadvertency and ill custom do in many men much
contribute.
  12. Marks of verbal propositions. To conclude. Barely verbal
propositions may be known by these following marks:
  Predication in abstract. First, All propositions wherein two
abstract terms are affirmed one of another, are barely about the
signification of sounds. For since no abstract idea can be the same
with any other but itself, when its abstract name is affirmed of any
other term, it can signify no more but this, that it may, or ought
to be called by that name; or that these two names signify the same
idea. Thus, should any one say that parsimony is frugality, that
gratitude is justice, that this or that action is or is not temperate:
however specious these and the like propositions may at first sight
seem, yet when we come to press them, and examine nicely what they
contain, we shall find that it all amounts to nothing but the
signification of those terms.
  13. A part of the definition predicated of any term. Secondly, All
propositions wherein a part of the complex idea which any term
stands for is predicated of that term, are only verbal: v.g. to say
that gold is a metal, or heavy. And thus all propositions wherein more
comprehensive words, called genera, are affirmed of subordinate or
less comprehensive, called species, or individuals, are barely verbal.
  When by these two rules we have examined the propositions that
make up the discourses we ordinarily meet with, both in and out of
books, we shall perhaps find that a greater part of them than is
usually suspected are purely about the signification of words, and
contain nothing in them but the use and application of these signs.
  This I think I may lay down for an infallible rule, That, wherever
the distinct idea any word stands for is not known and considered, and
something not contained in the idea is not affirmed or denied of it,
there our thoughts stick wholly in sounds, and are able to attain no
real truth or falsehood. This, perhaps, if well heeded, might save
us a great deal of useless amusement and dispute; and very much
shorten our trouble and wandering in the search of real and true
knowledge.
                              Chapter IX
               Of our Threefold Knowledge of Existence

  1. General propositions that are certain concern not existence.
Hitherto we have only considered the essences of things; which being
only abstract ideas, and thereby removed in our thoughts from
particular existence, (that being the proper operation of the mind, in
abstraction, to consider an idea under no other existence but what
it has in the understanding,) gives us no knowledge of real
existence at all. Where, by the way, we may take notice, that
universal propositions of whose truth or falsehood we can have certain
knowledge concern not existence: and further, that all particular
affirmations or negations that would not be certain if they were
made general, are only concerning existence; they declaring only the
accidental union or separation of ideas in things existing, which,
in their abstract natures, have no known necessary union or
repugnancy.
  2. A threefold knowledge of existence. But, leaving the nature of
propositions, and different ways of predication to be considered
more at large in another place, let us proceed now to inquire
concerning our knowledge of the existence of things, and how we come
by it. I say, then, that we have the knowledge of our own existence by
intuition; of the existence of God by demonstration; and of other
things by sensation.
  3. Our knowledge of our own existence is intuitive. As for our own
existence, we perceive it so plainly and so certainly, that it neither
needs nor is capable of any proof. For nothing can be more evident
to us than our own existence. I think, I reason, I feel pleasure and
pain: can any of these be more evident to me than my own existence? If
I doubt of all other things, that very doubt makes me perceive my
own existence, and will not suffer me to doubt of that. For if I
know I feel pain, it is evident I have as certain perception of my own
existence, as of the existence of the pain I feel: or if I know I
doubt, I have as certain perception of the existence of the thing
doubting, as of that thought which I call doubt. Experience then
convinces us, that we have an intuitive knowledge of our own
existence, and an internal infallible perception that we are. In every
act of sensation, reasoning, or thinking, we are conscious to
ourselves of our own being; and, in this matter, come not short of the
highest degree of certainty.
                              Chapter X
              Of our Knowledge of the Existence of a God

  1. We are capable of knowing certainly that there is a God. Though
God has given us no innate ideas of himself; though he has stamped
no original characters on our minds, wherein we may read his being;
yet having furnished us with those faculties our minds are endowed
with, he hath not left himself without witness: since we have sense,
perception, and reason, and cannot want a clear proof of him, as
long as we carry ourselves about us. Nor can we justly complain of our
ignorance in this great point; since he has so plentifully provided us
with the means to discover and know him; so far as is necessary to the
end of our being, and the great concernment of our happiness. But,
though this be the most obvious truth that reason discovers, and
though its evidence be (if I mistake not) equal to mathematical
certainty: yet it requires thought and attention; and the mind must
apply itself to a regular deduction of it from some part of our
intuitive knowledge, or else we shall be as uncertain and ignorant
of this as of other propositions, which are in themselves capable of
clear demonstration. To show, therefore, that we are capable of
knowing, i.e. being certain that there is a God, and how we may come
by this certainty, I think we need go no further than ourselves, and
that undoubted knowledge we have of our own existence.
  2. For man knows that he himself exists. I think it is beyond
question, that man has a clear idea of his own being; he knows
certainly he exists, and that he is something. He that can doubt
whether he be anything or no, I speak not to; no more than I would
argue with pure nothing, or endeavour to convince nonentity that it
were something. If any one pretends to be so sceptical as to deny
his own existence, (for really to doubt of it is manifestly
impossible,) let him for me enjoy his beloved happiness of being
nothing, until hunger or some other pain convince him of the contrary.
This, then, I think I may take for a truth, which every one's
certain knowledge assures him of, beyond the liberty of doubting, viz.
that he is something that actually exists.
  3 He knows also that nothing cannot produce a being; therefore
something must have existed from eternity. In the next place, man
knows, by an intuitive certainty, that bare nothing can no more
produce any real being, than it can be equal to two right angles. If a
man knows not that nonentity, or the absence of all being, cannot be
equal to two right angles, it is impossible he should know any
demonstration in Euclid. If, therefore, we know there is some real
being, and that nonentity cannot produce any real being, it is an
evident demonstration, that from eternity there has been something;
since what was not from eternity had a beginning; and what had a
beginning must be produced by something else.
  4. And that eternal Being must be most powerful. Next, it is
evident, that what had its being and beginning from another, must also
have all that which is in and belongs to its being from another too.
All the powers it has must be owing to and received from the same
source. This eternal source, then, of all being must also be the
source and original of all power; and so this eternal Being must be
also the most powerful.
  5. And most knowing. Again, a man finds in himself perception and
knowledge. We have then got one step further; and we are certain now
that there is not only some being, but some knowing, intelligent being
in the world. There was a time, then, when there was no knowing being,
and when knowledge began to be; or else there has been also a
knowing being from eternity. If it be said, there was a time when no
being had any knowledge, when that eternal being was void of all
understanding; I reply, that then it was impossible there should
ever have been any knowledge: it being as impossible that things
wholly void of knowledge, and operating blindly, and without any
perception, should produce a knowing being, as it is impossible that a
triangle should make itself three angles bigger than two right ones.
For it is as repugnant to the idea of senseless matter, that it should
put into itself sense, perception, and knowledge, as it is repugnant
to the idea of a triangle, that it should put into itself greater
angles than two right ones.
  6. And therefore God. Thus, from the consideration of ourselves, and
what we infallibly find in our own constitutions, our reason leads
us to the knowledge of this certain and evident truth,- That there
is an eternal, most powerful, and most knowing Being; which whether
any one will please to call God, it matters not. The thing is evident;
and from this idea duly considered, will easily be deduced all those
other attributes, which we ought to ascribe to this eternal Being. If,
nevertheless, any one should be found so senselessly arrogant, as to
suppose man alone knowing and wise, but yet the product of mere
ignorance and chance; and that all the rest of the universe acted only
by that blind haphazard; I shall leave with him that very rational and
emphatical rebuke of Tully (I. ii. De Leg.), to be considered at his
leisure: "What can be more sillily arrogant and misbecoming, than
for a man to think that he has a mind and understanding in him, but
yet in all the universe beside there is no such thing? Or that those
things, which with the utmost stretch of his reason he can scarce
comprehend, should be moved and managed without any reason at all?"
Quid est enim verius, quam neminem esse oportere tam stulte
arrogantem, ut in se mentem et rationem putet inesse, in caelo
mundoque non putet? Aut ea quae vix summa ingenii ratione
comprehendat, nulla ratione moveri putet?
  From what has been said, it is plain to me we have a more certain
knowledge of the existence of a God, than of anything our senses
have not immediately discovered to us. Nay, I presume I may say,
that we more certainly know that there is a God, than that there is
anything else without us. When I say we know, I mean there is such a
knowledge within our reach which we cannot miss, if we will but
apply our minds to that, as we do to several other inquiries.
  7. Our idea of a most perfect Being, not the sole proof of a God.
How far the idea of a most perfect being, which a man may frame in his
mind, does or does not prove the existence of a God, I will not here
examine. For in the different make of men's tempers and application of
their thoughts, some arguments prevail more on one, and some on
another, for the confirmation of the same truth. But yet, I think,
this I may say, that it is an ill way of establishing this truth,
and silencing atheists, to lay the whole stress of so important a
point as this upon that sole foundation: and take some men's having
that idea of God in their minds, (for it is evident some men have
none, and some worse than none, and the most very different,) for
the only proof of a Deity; and out of an over fondness of that darling
invention, cashier, or at least endeavour to invalidate all other
arguments; and forbid us to hearken to those proofs, as being weak
or fallacious, which our own existence, and the sensible parts of
the universe offer so clearly and cogently to our thoughts, that I
deem it impossible for a considering man to withstand them. For I
judge it as certain and clear a truth as can anywhere be delivered,
that "the invisible things of God are clearly seen from the creation
of the world, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead." Though our own being furnishes us, as I
have shown, with an evident and incontestable proof of a Deity; and
I believe nobody can avoid the cogency of it, who will but as
carefully attend to it, as to any other demonstration of so many
parts: yet this being so fundamental a truth, and of that consequence,
that all religion and genuine morality depend thereon, I doubt not but
I shall be forgiven by my reader if I go over some parts of this
argument again, and enlarge a little more upon them.
  8. Recapitulation- something from eternity. There is no truth more
evident than that something must be from eternity. I never yet heard
of any one so unreasonable, or that could suppose so manifest a
contradiction, as a time wherein there was perfectly nothing. This
being of all absurdities the greatest, to imagine that pure nothing,
the perfect negation and absence of all beings, should ever produce
any real existence.
  It being, then, unavoidable for all rational creatures to
conclude, that something has existed from eternity; let us next see
what kind of thing that must be.
  9. Two sorts of beings, cogitative and incogitative. There are but
two sorts of beings in the world that man knows or conceives.
  First, such as are purely material, without sense, perception, or
thought, as the clippings of our beards, and parings of our nails.
  Secondly, sensible, thinking, perceiving beings, such as we find
ourselves to be. Which, if you please, we will hereafter call
cogitative and incogitative beings; which to our present purpose, if
for nothing else, are perhaps better terms than material and
immaterial.
  10. Incogitative being cannot produce a cogitative being. If,
then, there must be something eternal, let us see what sort of being
it must be. And to that it is very obvious to reason, that it must
necessarily be a cogitative being. For it is as impossible to conceive
that ever bare incogitative matter should produce a thinking
intelligent being, as that nothing should of itself produce matter.
Let us suppose any parcel of matter eternal, great or small, we
shall find it, in itself, able to produce nothing. For example: let us
suppose the matter of the next pebble we meet with eternal, closely
united, and the parts firmly at rest together; if there were no
other being in the world, must it not eternally remain so, a dead
inactive lump? Is it possible to conceive it can add motion to itself,
being purely matter, or produce anything? Matter, then, by its own
strength, cannot produce in itself so much as motion: the motion it
has must also be from eternity, or else be produced, and added to
matter by some other being more powerful than matter; matter, as is
evident, having not power to produce motion in itself. But let us
suppose motion eternal too: yet matter, incogitative matter and
motion, whatever changes it might produce of figure and bulk, could
never produce thought: knowledge will still be as far beyond the power
of motion and matter to produce, as matter is beyond the power of
nothing or nonentity to produce. And I appeal to every one's own
thoughts, whether he cannot as easily conceive matter produced by
nothing, as thought to be produced by pure matter, when, before, there
was no such thing as thought or an intelligent being existing?
Divide matter into as many parts as you will, (which we are apt to
imagine a sort of spiritualizing, or making a thinking thing of it,)
vary the figure and motion of it as much as you please- a globe, cube,
cone, prism, cylinder, &c., whose diameters are but 100,000th part
of a gry, will operate no otherwise upon other bodies of
proportionable bulk, than those of an inch or foot diameter; and you
may as rationally expect to produce sense, thought, and knowledge,
by putting together, in a certain figure and motion, gross particles
of matter, as by those that are the very minutest that do anywhere
exist. They knock, impel, and resist one another, just as the
greater do; and that is all they can do. So that, if we will suppose
nothing first or eternal, matter can never begin to be: if we
suppose bare matter without motion, eternal, motion can never begin to
be: if we suppose only matter and motion first, or eternal, thought
can never begin to be. For it is impossible to conceive that matter,
either with or without motion, could have, originally, in and from
itself, sense, perception, and knowledge; as is evident from hence,
that then sense, perception, and knowledge, must be a property
eternally inseparable from matter and every particle of it. Not to
add, that, though our general or specific conception of matter makes
us speak of it as one thing, yet really all matter is not one
individual thing, neither is there any such thing existing as one
material being, or one single body that we know or can conceive. And
therefore, if matter were the eternal first cogitative being, there
would not be one eternal, infinite, cogitative being, but an
infinite number of eternal, finite, cogitative beings, independent one
of another, of limited force, and distinct thoughts, which could never
produce that order, harmony, and beauty which are to be found in
nature. Since, therefore, whatsoever is the first eternal being must
necessarily be cogitative; and whatsoever is first of all things
must necessarily contain in it, and actually have, at least, all the
perfections that can ever after exist; nor can it ever give to another
any perfection that it hath not either actually in itself, or, at
least, in a higher degree; it necessarily follows, that the first
eternal being cannot be matter.
  11. Therefore, there has been an eternal cogitative Being. If,
therefore, it be evident, that something necessarily must exist from
eternity, it is also as evident, that that something must
necessarily be a cogitative being: for it is as impossible that
incogitative matter should produce a cogitative being, as that
nothing, or the negation of all being, should produce a positive being
or matter.
  12. The attributes of the eternal cogitative Being. Though this
discovery of the necessary existence of an eternal Mind does
sufficiently lead us into the knowledge of God; since it will hence
follow, that all other knowing beings that have a beginning must
depend on him, and have no other ways of knowledge or extent of
power than what he gives them; and therefore, if he made those, he
made also the less excellent pieces of this universe,- all inanimate
beings, whereby his omniscience, power, and providence will be
established, and all his other attributes necessarily follow: yet,
to clear up this a little further, we will see what doubts can be
raised against it.
  13. Whether the eternal Mind may he also material or no. First,
Perhaps it will be said, that, though it be as clear as
demonstration can make it, that there must be an eternal Being, and
that Being must also be knowing: yet it does not follow but that
thinking Being may also be material. Let it be so, it equally still
follows that there is a God. For if there be an eternal, omniscient,
omnipotent Being, it is certain that there is a God, whether you
imagine that Being to be material or no. But herein, I suppose, lies
the danger and deceit of that supposition:- there being no way to
avoid the demonstration, that there is an eternal knowing Being,
men, devoted to matter, would willingly have it granted, that this
knowing Being is material; and then, letting slide out of their minds,
or the discourse, the demonstration whereby an eternal knowing Being
was proved necessarily to exist, would argue all to be matter, and
so deny a God, that is, an eternal cogitative Being: whereby they
are so far from establishing, that they destroy their own
hypothesis. For, if there can be, in their opinion, eternal matter,
without any eternal cogitative Being, they manifestly separate
matter and thinking, and suppose no necessary connexion of the one
with the other, and so establish the necessity of an eternal Spirit,
but not of matter; since it has been proved already, that an eternal
cogitative Being is unavoidably to be granted. Now, if thinking and
matter may be separated, the eternal existence of matter will not
follow from the eternal existence of a cogitative Being, and they
suppose it to no purpose.
  14. Not material: first, because each particle of matter is not
cogitative. But now let us see how they can satisfy themselves, or
others, that this eternal thinking Being is material.
  I. I would ask them, whether they imagine that all matter, every
particle of matter, thinks? This, I suppose, they will scarce say;
since then there would be as many eternal thinking beings as there are
particles of matter, and so an infinity of gods. And yet, if they will
not allow matter as matter, that is, every particle of matter, to be
as well cogitative as extended, they will have as hard a task to
make out to their own reasons a cogitative being out of incogitative
particles, as an extended being out of unextended parts, if I may so
speak.
  15. II. Secondly, because one particle alone of matter cannot be
cogitative. If all matter does not think, I next ask, Whether it be
only one atom that does so? This has as many absurdities as the other;
for then this atom of matter must be alone eternal or not. If this
alone be eternal, then this alone, by its powerful thought or will,
made all the rest of matter. And so we have the creation of matter
by a powerful thought, which is that the materialists stick at; for if
they suppose one single thinking atom to have produced all the rest of
matter, they cannot ascribe that pre-eminency to it upon any other
account than that of its thinking, the only supposed difference. But
allow it to be by some other way which is above our conception, it
must still be creation; and these men must give up their great
maxim, Ex nihilo nil fit. If it be said, that all the rest of matter
is equally eternal as that thinking atom, it will be to say anything
at pleasure, though ever so absurd. For to suppose all matter eternal,
and yet one small particle in knowledge and power infinitely above all
the rest, is without any the least appearance of reason to frame an
hypothesis. Every particle of matter, as matter, is capable of all the
same figures and motions of any other; and I challenge any one, in his
thoughts, to add anything else to one above another.
  16. III. Thirdly, because a system of incogitative matter cannot
be cogitative. If then neither one peculiar atom alone can be this
eternal thinking being; nor all matter, as matter, i.e. every particle
of matter, can be it; it only remains, that it is some certain
system of matter, duly put together, that is this thinking eternal
Being. This is that which, I imagine, is that notion which men are
aptest to have of God; who would have him a material being, as most
readily suggested to them by the ordinary conceit they have of
themselves and other men, which they take to be material thinking
beings. But this imagination, however more natural, is no less
absurd than the other: for to suppose the eternal thinking Being to be
nothing else but a composition of particles of matter, each whereof is
incogitative, is to ascribe all the wisdom and knowledge of that
eternal Being only to the juxta-position of parts; than which
nothing can be more absurd. For unthinking particles of matter,
however put together, can have nothing thereby added to them, but a
new relation of position, which it is impossible should give thought
and knowledge to them.
  17. And that whether this corporeal system is in motion or at
rest. But further: this corporeal system either has all its parts at
rest, or it is a certain motion of the parts wherein its thinking
consists. If it be perfectly at rest, it is but one lump, and so can
have no privileges above one atom.
  If it be the motion of its parts on which its thinking depends,
all the thoughts there must be unavoidably accidental and limited;
since all the particles that by motion cause thought, being each of
them in itself without any thought, cannot regulate its own motions,
much less be regulated by the thought of the whole; since that thought
is not the cause of motion, (for then it must be antecedent to it, and
so without it,) but the consequence of it; whereby freedom, power,
choice, and all rational and wise thinking or acting, will be quite
taken away: so that such a thinking being will be no better nor
wiser than pure blind matter; since to resolve all into the accidental
unguided motions of blind matter, or into thought depending on
unguided motions of blind matter, is the same thing: not to mention
the narrowness of such thoughts and knowledge that must depend on
the motion of such parts. But there needs no enumeration of any more
absurdities and impossibilities in this hypothesis (however full of
them it be) than that before mentioned; since, let this thinking
system be all or a part of the matter of the universe, it is
impossible that any one particle should either know its own, or the
motion of any other particle, or the whole know the motion of every
particle; and so regulate its own thoughts or motions, or indeed
have any thought resulting from such motion.
  18. Matter not co-eternal with an eternal Mind. Secondly, Others
would have Matter to be eternal, notwithstanding that they allow an
eternal, cogitative, immaterial Being. This, though it take not away
the being of a God, yet, since it denies one and the first great piece
of his workmanship, the creation, let us consider it a little.
Matter must be allowed eternal: Why? because you cannot conceive how
it can be made out of nothing: why do you not also think yourself
eternal? You will answer, perhaps, Because, about twenty or forty
years since, you began to be. But if I ask you, what that you is,
which began then to be, you can scarce tell me. The matter whereof you
are made began not then to be: for if it did, then it is not
eternal: but it began to be put together in such a fashion and frame
as makes up your body; but yet that frame of particles is not you,
it makes not that thinking thing you are; (for I have now to do with
one who allows an eternal, immaterial, thinking Being, but would
have unthinking Matter eternal too;) therefore, when did that thinking
thing begin to be? If it did never begin to be, then have you always
been a thinking thing from eternity; the absurdity whereof I need
not confute, till I meet with one who is so void of understanding as
to own it. If, therefore, you can allow a thinking thing to be made
out of nothing, (as all things that are not eternal must be,) why also
can you not allow it possible for a material being to be made out of
nothing by an equal power, but that you have the experience of the one
in view, and not of the other? Though, when well considered,
creation of a spirit will be found to require no less power than the
creation of matter. Nay, possibly, if we would emancipate ourselves
from vulgar notions, and raise our thoughts, as far as they would
reach, to a closer contemplation of things, we might be able to aim at
some dim and seeming conception how matter might at first be made, and
begin to exist, by the power of that eternal first Being: but to
give beginning and being to a spirit would be found a more
inconceivable effect of omnipotent power. But this being what would
perhaps lead us too far from the notions on which the philosophy now
in the world is built, it would not be pardonable to deviate so far
from them; or to inquire, so far as grammar itself would authorize, if
the common settled opinion opposes it: especially in this place, where
the received doctrine serves well enough to our present purpose, and
leaves this past doubt, that the creation or beginning of any one
SUBSTANCE out of nothing being once admitted, the creation of all
other but the CREATOR himself, may, with the same ease, be supposed.
  19. Objection: "Creation out of nothing." But you will say, Is it
not impossible to admit of the making anything out of nothing, since
we cannot possibly conceive it? I answer, No. Because it is not
reasonable to deny the power of an infinite being, because we cannot
comprehend its operations. We do not deny other effects upon this
ground, because we cannot possibly conceive the manner of their
production. We cannot conceive how anything but impulse of body can
move body; and yet that is not a reason sufficient to make us deny
it possible, against the constant experience we have of it in
ourselves, in all our voluntary motions; which are produced in us only
by the free action or thought of our own minds, and are not, nor can
be, the effects of the impulse or determination of the motion of blind
matter in or upon our own bodies; for then it could not be in our
power or choice to alter it. For example: my right hand writes, whilst
my left hand is still: What causes rest in one, and motion in the
other? Nothing but my will,- a thought of my mind; my thought only
changing, the right hand rests, and the left hand moves. This is
matter of fact, which cannot be denied: explain this and make it
intelligible, and then the next step will be to understand creation.
For the giving a new determination to the motion of the animal spirits
(which some make use of to explain voluntary motion) clears not the
difficulty one jot. To alter the determination of motion, being in
this case no easier nor less, than to give motion itself: since the
new determination given to the animal spirits must be either
immediately by thought, or by some other body put in their way by
thought which was not in their way before, and so must owe its
motion to thought: either of which leaves voluntary motion as
unintelligible as it was before. In the meantime, it is an overvaluing
ourselves to reduce all to the narrow measure of our capacities, and
to conclude all things impossible to be done, whose manner of doing
exceeds our comprehension. This is to make our comprehension infinite,
or God finite, when what He can do is limited to what we can
conceive of it. If you do not understand the operations of your own
finite mind, that thinking thing within you, do not deem it strange
that you cannot comprehend the operations of that eternal infinite
Mind, who made and governs all things, and whom the heaven of
heavens cannot contain.
                              Chapter XI
          Of our Knowledge of the Existence of Other Things

  1. Knowledge of the existence of other finite beings is to be had
only by actual sensation. The knowledge of our own being we have by
intuition. The existence of a God, reason clearly makes known to us,
as has been shown.
  The knowledge of the existence of any other thing we can have only
by sensation: for there being no necessary connexion of real existence
with any idea a man hath in his memory; nor of any other existence but
that of God with the existence of any particular man: no particular
man can know the existence of any other being, but only when, by
actual operating upon him, it makes itself perceived by him. For,
the having the idea of anything in our mind, no more proves the
existence of that thing, than the picture of a man evidences his being
in the world, or the visions of a dream make thereby a true history.
  2. Instance: whiteness of this paper. It is therefore the actual
receiving of ideas from without that gives us notice of the
existence of other things, and makes us know, that something doth
exist at that time without us, which causes that idea in us; though
perhaps we neither know nor consider how it does it. For it takes
not from the certainty of our senses, and the ideas we receive by
them, that we know not the manner wherein they are produced: v.g.
whilst I write this, I have, by the paper affecting my eyes, that idea
produced in my mind, which, whatever object causes, I call white; by
which I know that that quality or accident (i.e. whose appearance
before my eyes always causes that idea) doth really exist, and hath
a being without me. And of this, the greatest assurance I can possibly
have, and to which my faculties can attain, is the testimony of my
eyes, which are the proper and sole judges of this thing; whose
testimony I have reason to rely on as so certain, that I can no more
doubt, whilst I write this, that I see white and black, and that
something really exists that causes that sensation in me, than that
I write or move my hand; which is a certainty as great as human nature
is capable of, concerning the existence of anything, but a man's
self alone, and of God.
  3. This notice by our senses, though not so certain as
demonstration, yet may be called knowledge, and proves the existence
of things without us. The notice we have by our senses of the existing
of things without us, though it be not altogether so certain as our
intuitive knowledge, or the deductions of our reason employed about
the clear abstract ideas of our own minds; yet it is an assurance that
deserves the name of knowledge. If we persuade ourselves that our
faculties act and inform us right concerning the existence of those
objects that affect them, it cannot pass for an ill-grounded
confidence: for I think nobody can, in earnest, be so sceptical as
to be uncertain of the existence of those things which he sees and
feels. At least, he that can doubt so far, (whatever he may have
with his own thoughts,) will never have any controversy with me; since
he can never be sure I say anything contrary to his own opinion. As to
myself, I think God has given me assurance enough of the existence
of things without me: since, by their different application, I can
produce in myself both pleasure and pain, which is one great
concernment of my present state. This is certain: the confidence
that our faculties do not herein deceive us, is the greatest assurance
we are capable of concerning the existence of material beings. For
we cannot act anything but by our faculties; nor talk of knowledge
itself, but by the help of those faculties which are fitted to
apprehend even what knowledge is.
  But besides the assurance we have from our senses themselves, that
they do not err in the information they give us of the existence of
things without us, when they are affected by them, we are further
confirmed in this assurance by other concurrent reasons:-
  4. I. Confirmed by concurrent reasons:- First, because we cannot
have ideas of sensation but by the inlet of the senses. It is plain
those perceptions are produced in us by exterior causes affecting
our senses: because those that want the organs of any sense, never can
have the ideas belonging to that sense produced in their minds. This
is too evident to be doubted: and therefore we cannot but be assured
that they come in by the organs of that sense, and no other way. The
organs themselves, it is plain, do not produce them: for then the eyes
of a man in the dark would produce colours, and his nose smell roses
in the winter: but we see nobody gets the relish of a pineapple,
till he goes to the Indies, where it is, and tastes it.
  5. II. Secondly, Because we find that an idea from actual sensation,
and another from memory, are very distinct perceptions. Because
sometimes I find that I cannot avoid the having those ideas produced
in my mind. For though, when my eyes are shut, or windows fast, I
can at pleasure recall to my mind the ideas of light, or the sun,
which former sensations had lodged in my memory; so I can at
pleasure lay by that idea, and take into my view that of the smell
of a rose, or taste of sugar. But, if I turn my eyes at noon towards
the sun, I cannot avoid the ideas which the light or sun then produces
in me. So that there is a manifest difference between the ideas laid
up in my memory, (over which, if they were there only, I should have
constantly the same power to dispose of them, and lay them by at
pleasure,) and those which force themselves upon me, and I cannot
avoid having. And therefore it must needs be some exterior cause,
and the brisk acting of some objects without me, whose efficacy I
cannot resist, that produces those ideas in my mind, whether I will or
no. Besides, there is nobody who doth not perceive the difference in
himself between contemplating the sun, as he hath the idea of it in
his memory, and actually looking upon it: of which two, his perception
is so distinct, that few of his ideas are more distinguishable one
from another. And therefore he hath certain knowledge that they are
not both memory, or the actions of his mind, and fancies only within
him; but that actual seeing hath a cause without.
  6. III. Thirdly, because pleasure or pain, which accompanies
actual sensation, accompanies not the returning of those ideas without
the external objects. Add to this, that many of those ideas are
produced in us with pain, which afterwards we remember without the
least offence. Thus, the pain of heat or cold, when the idea of it
is revived in our minds, gives us no disturbance; which, when felt,
was very troublesome; and is again, when actually repeated: which is
occasioned by the disorder the external object causes in our bodies
when applied to them: and we remember the pains of hunger, thirst,
or the headache, without any pain at all; which would either never
disturb us, or else constantly do it, as often as we thought of it,
were there nothing more but ideas floating in our minds, and
appearances entertaining our fancies, without the real existence of
things affecting us from abroad. The same may be said of pleasure,
accompanying several actual sensations. And though mathematical
demonstration depends not upon sense, yet the examining them by
diagrams gives great credit to the evidence of our sight, and seems to
give it a certainty approaching to that of demonstration itself.
For, it would be very strange, that a man should allow it for an
undeniable truth, that two angles of a figure, which he measures by
lines and angles of a diagram, should be bigger one than the other,
and yet doubt of the existence of those lines and angles, which by
looking on he makes use of to measure that by.
  7. IV. Fourthly, because our senses assist one another's testimony
of the existence of outward things, and enable us to predict. Our
senses in many cases bear witness to the truth of each other's report,
concerning the existence of sensible things without us. He that sees a
fire, may, if he doubt whether it be anything more than a bare
fancy, feel it too; and be convinced, by putting his hand in it. Which
certainly could never be put into such exquisite pain by a bare idea
or phantom, unless that the pain be a fancy too: which yet he
cannot, when the burn is well, by raising the idea of it, bring upon
himself again.
  Thus I see, whilst I write this, I can change the appearance of
the paper; and by designing the letters, tell beforehand what new idea
it shall exhibit the very next moment, by barely drawing my pen over
it: which will neither appear (let me fancy as much as I will) if my
hands stand still; or though I move my pen, if my eyes be shut: nor,
when those characters are once made on the paper, can I choose
afterwards but see them as they are; that is, have the ideas of such
letters as I have made. Whence it is manifest, that they are not
barely the sport and play of my own imagination, when I find that
the characters that were made at the pleasure of my own thoughts, do
not obey them; nor yet cease to be, whenever I shall fancy it, but
continue to affect my senses constantly and regularly, according to
the figures I made them. To which if we will add, that the sight of
those shall, from another man, draw such sounds as I beforehand design
they shall stand for, there will be little reason left to doubt that
those words I write do really exist without me, when they cause a long
series of regular sounds to affect my ears, which could not be the
effect of my imagination, nor could my memory retain them in that
order.
  8. This certainty is as great as our condition needs. But yet, if
after all this any one will be so sceptical as to distrust his senses,
and to affirm that all we see and hear, feel and taste, think and
do, during our whole being, is but the series and deluding appearances
of a long dream, whereof there is no reality; and therefore will
question the existence of all things, or our knowledge of anything:
I must desire him to consider, that, if all be a dream, then he doth
but dream that he makes the question, and so it is not much matter
that a waking man should answer him. But yet, if he pleases, he may
dream that I make him this answer, That the certainty of things
existing in rerum natura when we have the testimony of our senses
for it is not only as great as our frame can attain to, but as our
condition needs. For, our faculties being suited not to the full
extent of being, nor to a perfect, clear, comprehensive knowledge of
things free from all doubt and scruple; but to the preservation of us,
in whom they are; and accommodated to the use of life: they serve to
our purpose wen enough, if they will but give us certain notice of
those things, which are convenient or inconvenient to us. For he
that sees a candle burning, and hath experimented the force of its
flame by putting his finger in it, will little doubt that this is
something existing without him, which does him harm, and puts him to
great pain; which is assurance enough, when no man requires greater
certainty to govern his actions by than what is as certain as his
actions themselves. And if our dreamer pleases to try whether the
glowing heat of a glass furnace be barely a wandering imagination in a
drowsy man's fancy, by putting his hand into it, he may perhaps be
wakened into a certainty greater than he could wish, that it is
something more than bare imagination. So that this evidence is as
great as we can desire, being as certain to us as our pleasure or
pain, i.e. happiness or misery; beyond which we have no concernment,
either of knowing or being. Such an assurance of the existence of
things without us is sufficient to direct us in the attaining the good
and avoiding the evil which is caused by them, which is the
important concernment we have of being made acquainted with them.
  9. But reaches no further than actual sensation. In fine, then, when
our senses do actually convey into our understandings any idea, we
cannot but be satisfied that there doth something at that time
really exist without us, which doth affect our senses, and by them
give notice of itself to our apprehensive faculties, and actually
produce that idea which we then perceive: and we cannot so far
distrust their testimony, as to doubt that such collections of
simple ideas as we have observed by our senses to be united
together, do really exist together. But this knowledge extends as
far as the present testimony of our senses, employed about
particular objects that do then affect them, and no further. For if
I saw such a collection of simple ideas as is wont to be called man,
existing together one minute since, and am now alone, I cannot be
certain that the same man exists now, since there is no necessary
connexion of his existence a minute since with his existence now: by a
thousand ways he may cease to be, since I had the testimony of my
senses for his existence. And if I cannot be certain that the man I
saw last to-day is now in being, I can less be certain that he is so
who hath been longer removed from my senses, and I have not seen since
yesterday, or since the last year: and much less can I be certain of
the existence of men that I never saw. And, therefore, though it be
highly probable that millions of men do now exist, yet, whilst I am
alone, writing this, I have not that certainty of it which we strictly
call knowledge; though the great likelihood of it puts me past
doubt, and it be reasonable for me to do several things upon the
confidence that there are men (and men also of my acquaintance, with
whom I have to do) now in the world: but this is but probability,
not knowledge.
  10. Folly to expect demonstration in everything. Whereby yet we
may observe how foolish and vain a thing it is for a man of a narrow
knowledge, who having reason given him to judge of the different
evidence and probability of things, and to be swayed accordingly;
how vain, I say, it is to expect demonstration and certainty in things
not capable of it; and refuse assent to very rational propositions,
and act contrary to very plain and clear truths, because they cannot
be made out so evident, as to surmount every the least (I will not say
reason, but) pretence of doubting. He that, in the ordinary affairs of
life, would admit of nothing but direct plain demonstration, would
be sure of nothing in this world, but of perishing quickly. The
wholesomeness of his meat or drink would not give him reason to
venture on it: and I would fain know what it is he could do upon
such grounds as are capable of no doubt, no objection.
  11. Past existence of other things is known by memory. As when our
senses are actually employed about any object, we do know that it does
exist; so by our memory we may be assured, that heretofore things that
affected our senses have existed. And thus we have knowledge of the
past existence of several things, whereof our senses having informed
us, our memories still retain the ideas; and of this we are past all
doubt, so long as we remember well. But this knowledge also reaches no
further than our senses have formerly assured us. Thus, seeing water
at this instant, it is an unquestionable truth to me that water doth
exist: and remembering that I saw it yesterday, it will also be always
true, and as long as my memory retains it always an undoubted
proposition to me, that water did exist the 10th of July, 1688; as
it will also be equally true that a certain number of very fine
colours did exist, which at the same time I saw upon a bubble of
that water: but, being now quite out of sight both of the water and
bubbles too, it is no more certainly known to me that the water doth
now exist, than that the bubbles or colours therein do so: it being no
more necessary that water should exist to-day, because it existed
yesterday, than that the colours or bubbles exist to-day, because they
existed yesterday, though it be exceedingly much more probable;
because water hath been observed to continue long in existence, but
bubbles, and the colours on them, quickly cease to be.
  12. The existence of other finite spirits not knowable, and rests on
faith. What ideas we have of spirits, and how we come by them, I
have already shown. But though we have those ideas in our minds, and
know we have them there, the having the ideas of spirits does not make
us know that any such things do exist without us, or that there are
any finite spirits, or any other spiritual beings, but the Eternal
God. We have ground from revelation, and several other reasons, to
believe with assurance that there are such creatures: but our senses
not being able to discover them, we want the means of knowing their
particular existences. For we can no more know that there are finite
spirits really existing, by the idea we have of such beings in our
minds, than by the ideas any one has of fairies or centaurs, he can
come to know that things answering those ideas do really exist.
  And therefore concerning the existence of finite spirits, as well as
several other things, we must content ourselves with the evidence of
faith; but universal, certain propositions concerning this matter
are beyond our reach. For however true it may be, v.g., that all the
intelligent spirits that God ever created do still exist, yet it can
never make a part of our certain knowledge. These and the like
propositions we may assent to, as highly probable, but are not, I
fear, in this state capable of knowing. We are not, then, to put
others upon demonstrating, nor ourselves upon search of universal
certainty in all those matters; wherein we are not capable of any
other knowledge, but what our senses give us in this or that
particular.
  13. Only particular propositions concerning concrete existences
are knowable. By which it appears that there are two sorts of
propositions:- (1) There is one sort of propositions concerning the
existence of anything answerable to such an idea: as having the idea
of an elephant, phoenix, motion, or an angel, in my mind, the first
and natural inquiry is, Whether such a thing does anywhere exist?
And this knowledge is only of particulars. No existence of anything
without us, but only of God, can certainly be known further than our
senses inform us. (2) There is another sort of propositions, wherein
is expressed the agreement or disagreement of our abstract ideas,
and their dependence on one another. Such propositions may be
universal and certain. So, having the idea of God and myself, of
fear and obedience, I cannot but be sure that God is to be feared
and obeyed by me: and this proposition will be certain, concerning man
in general, if I have made an abstract idea of such a species, whereof
I am one particular. But yet this proposition, how certain soever,
that "men ought to fear and obey God" proves not to me the existence
of men in the world; but will be true of all such creatures,
whenever they do exist: which certainty of such general propositions
depends on the agreement or disagreement to be discovered in those
abstract ideas.
  14. And all general propositions that are known to be true concern
abstract ideas. In the former case, our knowledge is the consequence
of the existence of things, producing ideas in our minds by our
senses: in the latter, knowledge is the consequence of the ideas (be
they what they will) that are in our minds, producing there general
certain propositions. Many of these are called aeternae veritates, and
all of them indeed are so; not from being written, all or any of them,
in the minds of all men; or that they were any of them propositions in
any one's mind, till he, having got the abstract ideas, joined or
separated them by affirmation or negation. But wheresoever we can
suppose such a creature as man is, endowed with such faculties, and
thereby furnished with such ideas as we have, we must conclude, he
must needs, when he applies his thoughts to the consideration of his
ideas, know the truth of certain propositions that will arise from the
agreement or disagreement which he will perceive in his own ideas.
Such propositions are therefore called eternal truths, not because
they are eternal propositions actually formed, and antecedent to the
understanding that at any time makes them; nor because they are
imprinted on the mind from any patterns that are anywhere out of the
mind, and existed before: but because, being once made about
abstract ideas, so as to be true, they will, whenever they can be
supposed to be made again at any time, past or to come, by a mind
having those ideas, always actually be true. For names being
supposed to stand perpetually for the same ideas, and the same ideas
having immutably the same habitudes one to another, propositions
concerning any abstract ideas that are once true must needs be eternal
verities.
                             Chapter XII
                 Of the Improvement of our Knowledge

  1. Knowledge is not got from maxims. It having been the common
received opinion amongst men of letters, that maxims were the
foundation of all knowledge; and that the sciences were each of them
built upon certain praecognita from whence the understanding was to
take its rise, and by which it was to conduct itself in its
inquiries into the matters belonging to that science, the beaten
road of the Schools has been, to lay down in the beginning one or more
general propositions, as foundations whereon to build the knowledge
that was to be had of that subject. These doctrines, thus laid down
for foundations of any science, were called principles, as the
beginnings from which we must set out, and look no further backwards
in our inquiries, as we have already observed.
  2. (The occasion of that opinion.) One thing which might probably
give an occasion to this way of proceeding in other sciences, was
(as I suppose) the good success it seemed to have in mathematics,
wherein men, being observed to attain a great certainty of
knowledge, these sciences came by pre-eminence to be called Mathemata,
and Mathesis, learning, or things learned, thoroughly learned, as
having of all others the greatest certainty, clearness, and evidence
in them.
  3. But from comparing clear and distinct ideas. But if any one
will consider, he will (I guess) find, that the great advancement
and certainty of real knowledge which men arrived to in these
sciences, was not owing to the influence of these principles, nor
derived from any peculiar advantage they received from two or three
general maxims, laid down in the beginning; but from the clear,
distinct, complete ideas their thoughts were employed about, and the
relation of equality and excess so clear between some of them, that
they had an intuitive knowledge, and by that a way to discover it in
others; and this without the help of those maxims. For I ask, Is it
not possible for a young lad to know that his whole body is bigger
than his little finger, but by virtue of this axiom, that the whole is
bigger than a part; nor be assured of it, till he has learned that
maxim? Or cannot a country wench know that, having received a shilling
from one that owes her three, and a shilling also from another that
owes her three, the remaining debts in each of their hands are
equal? Cannot she know this, I say, unless she fetch the certainty
of it from this maxim, that if you take equals from equals, the
remainder will be equals, a maxim which possibly she never heard or
thought of? I desire any one to consider, from what has been elsewhere
said, which is known first and clearest by most people, the particular
instance, or the general rule; and which it is that gives life and
birth to the other. These general rules are but the comparing our more
general and abstract ideas, which are the workmanship of the mind,
made, and names given to them for the easier dispatch in its
reasonings, and drawing into comprehensive terms and short rules its
various and multiplied observations. But knowledge began in the
mind, and was founded on particulars; though afterwards, perhaps, no
notice was taken thereof: it being natural for the mind (forward still
to enlarge its knowledge) most attentively to lay up those general
notions, and make the proper use of them, which is to disburden the
memory of the cumbersome load of particulars. For I desire it may be
considered, what more certainty there is to a child, or any one,
that his body, little finger, and all, is bigger than his little
finger alone, after you have given to his body the name whole, and
to his little finger the name part, than he could have had before;
or what new knowledge concerning his body can these two relative terms
give him, which he could not have without them? Could he not know that
his body was bigger than his little finger, if his language were yet
so imperfect that he had no such relative terms as whole and part? I
ask, further, when he has got these names, how is he more certain that
his body is a whole, and his little finger a part, than he was or
might be certain before he learnt those terms, that his body was
bigger than his little finger? Any one may as reasonably doubt or deny
that his little finger is a part of his body, as that it is less
than his body. And he that can doubt whether it be less, will as
certainly doubt whether it be a part. So that the maxim, the whole
is bigger than a part, can never be made use of to prove the little
finger less than the body, but when it is useless, by being brought to
convince one of a truth which he knows already. For he that does not
certainly know that any parcel of matter, with another parcel of
matter joined to it, is bigger than either of them alone, will never
be able to know it by the help of these two relative terms, whole
and part, make of them what maxim you please.
  4. Dangerous to build upon precarious principles. But be it in the
mathematics as it will, whether it be clearer, that, taking an inch
from a black line of two inches, and an inch from a red line of two
inches, the remaining parts of the two lines will be equal, or that if
you take equals from equals, the remainder will be equals: which, I
say, of these two is the clearer and first known, I leave to any one
to determine, it not being material to my present occasion. That which
I have here to do, is to inquire, whether, if it be the readiest way
to knowledge to begin with general maxims, and build upon them, it
be yet a safe way to take the principles which are laid down in any
other science as unquestionable truths; and so receive them without
examination, and adhere to them, without suffering them to be
doubted of, because mathematicians have been so happy, or so fair,
to use none but self-evident and undeniable. If this be so, I know not
what may not pass for truth in morality, what may not be introduced
and proved in natural philosophy.
  Let that principle of some of the old philosophers, That all is
Matter, and that there is nothing else, be received for certain and
indubitable, and it will be easy to be seen by the writings of some
that have revived it again in our days, what consequences it will lead
us into. Let any one, with Polemo, take the world; or with the Stoics,
the aether, or the sun; or with Anaximenes, the air, to be God; and
what a divinity, religion, and worship must we needs have! Nothing can
be so dangerous as principles thus taken up without questioning or
examination; especially if they be such as concern morality, which
influence men's lives, and give a bias to all their actions. Who might
not justly expect another kind of life in Aristippus, who placed
happiness in bodily pleasure; and in Antisthenes, who made virtue
sufficient to felicity? And he who, with Plato, shall place
beatitude in the knowledge of God, will have his thoughts raised to
other contemplations than those who look not beyond this spot of
earth, and those perishing things which are to be had in it. He
that, with Archelaus, shall lay it down as a principle, that right and
wrong, honest and dishonest, are defined only by laws, and not by
nature, will have other measures of moral rectitude and pravity,
than those who take it for granted that we are under obligations
antecedent to all human constitutions.
  5. To do so is no certain way to truth. If, therefore, those that
pass for principles are not certain, (which we must have some way to
know, that we may be able to distinguish them from those that are
doubtful,) but are only made so to us by our blind assent, we are
liable to be misled by them; and instead of being guided into truth,
we shall, by principles, be only confirmed in mistake and error.
  6. But to compare clear, complete ideas, under steady names. But
since the knowledge of the certainty of principles, as well as of
all other truths, depends only upon the perception we have of the
agreement or disagreement of our ideas, the way to improve our
knowledge is not, I am sure, blindly, and with an implicit faith, to
receive and swallow principles; but is, I think, to get and fix in our
minds clear, distinct, and complete ideas, as far as they are to be
had, and annex to them proper and constant names. And thus, perhaps,
without any other principles, but barely considering those perfect
ideas, and by comparing them one with another, finding their agreement
and disagreement, and their several relations and habitudes; we
shall get more true and clear knowledge by the conduct of this one
rule than by taking up principles, and thereby putting our minds
into the disposal of others.
  7. The true method of advancing knowledge is by considering our
abstract ideas. We must, therefore, if we will proceed as reason
advises, adapt our methods of inquiry to the nature of the ideas we
examine, and the truth we search after. General and certain truths are
only founded in the habitudes and relations of abstract ideas. A
sagacious and methodical application of our thoughts. for the
finding out these relations, is the only way to discover all that
can be put with truth and certainty concerning them into general
propositions. By what steps we are to proceed in these, is to be
learned in the schools of the mathematicians, who, from very plain and
easy beginnings, by gentle degrees, and a continued chain of
reasonings, proceed to the discovery and demonstration of truths
that appear at first sight beyond human capacity. The art of finding
proofs, and the admirable methods they have invented for the
singling out and laying in order those intermediate ideas that
demonstratively show the equality or inequality of unapplicable
quantities, is that which has carried them so far, and produced such
wonderful and unexpected discoveries: but whether something like this,
in respect of other ideas, as well as those of magnitude, may not in
time be found out, I will not determine. This, I think, I may say,
that if other ideas that are the real as well as nominal essences of
their species, were pursued in the way familiar to mathematicians,
they would carry our thoughts further, and with greater evidence and
clearness than possibly we are apt to imagine.
  8. By which morality also may he made clearer. This gave me the
confidence to advance that conjecture, which I suggest, (chap. iii.)
viz. that morality is capable of demonstration as well as mathematics.
For the ideas that ethics are conversant about, being all real
essences, and such as I imagine have a discoverable connexion and
agreement one with another; so far as we can find their habitudes
and relations, so far we shall be possessed of certain, real, and
general truths; and I doubt not but, if a right method were taken, a
great part of morality might be made out with that clearness, that
could leave, to a considering man, no more reason to doubt, than he
could have to doubt of the truth of propositions in mathematics, which
have been demonstrated to him.
  9. Our knowledge of substances is to be improved, not by
contemplation of abstract ideas, but only by experience. In our search
after the knowledge of substances, our want of ideas that are suitable
to such a way of proceeding obliges us to a quite different method. We
advance not here, as in the other, (where our abstract ideas are
real as well as nominal essences,) by contemplating our ideas, and
considering their relations and correspondences; that helps us very
little, for the reasons, that in another place we have at large set
down. By which I think it is evident, that substances afford matter of
very little general knowledge; and the bare contemplation of their
abstract ideas will carry us but a very little way in the search of
truth and certainty. What, then, are we to do for the improvement of
our knowledge in substantial beings? Here we are to take a quite
contrary course: the want of ideas of their real essences sends us
from our own thoughts to the things themselves as they exist.
Experience here must teach me what reason cannot: and it is by
trying alone, that I can certainly know, what other qualities co-exist
with those of my complex idea, v.g. whether that yellow, heavy,
fusible body I call gold, be malleable, or no; which experience (which
way ever it prove in that particular body I examine) makes me not
certain, that it is so in all, or any other yellow, heavy, fusible
bodies, but that which I have tried. Because it is no consequence
one way or the other from my complex idea: the necessity or
inconsistence of malleability hath no visible connexion with the
combination of that colour, weight, and fusibility in any body. What I
have said here of the nominal essence of gold, supposed to consist
of a body of such a determinate colour, weight, and fusibility, will
hold true, if malleableness, fixedness, and solubility in aqua regia
be added to it. Our reasonings from these ideas will carry us but a
little way in the certain discovery of the other properties in those
masses of matter wherein all these are to be found. Because the
other properties of such bodies, depending not on these, but on that
unknown real essence on which these also depend, we cannot by them
discover the rest; we can go no further than the simple ideas of our
nominal essence will carry us, which is very little beyond themselves;
and so afford us but very sparingly any certain, universal, and useful
truths. For, upon trial, having found that particular piece (and all
others of that colour, weight, and fusibility, that I ever tried)
malleable, that also makes now, perhaps, a part of my complex idea,
part of my nominal essence of gold: whereby though I make my complex
idea to which I affix the name gold, to consist of more simple ideas
than before; yet still, it not containing the real essence of any
species of bodies, it helps me not certainly to know (I say to know,
perhaps it may be to conjecture) the other remaining properties of
that body, further than they have a visible connexion with some or all
of the simple ideas that make up my nominal essence. For example, I
cannot be certain, from this complex idea, whether gold be fixed or
no; because, as before, there is no necessary connexion or
inconsistence to be discovered betwixt a complex idea of a body
yellow, heavy, fusible, malleable; betwixt these, I say, and
fixedness; so that I may certainly know, that in whatsoever body these
are found, there fixedness is sure to be. Here, again, for
assurance, I must apply myself to experience; as far as that
reaches, I may have certain knowledge, but no further.
  10. Experience may procure us convenience, not science. I deny not
but a man, accustomed to rational and regular experiments, shall be
able to see further into the nature of bodies and guess righter at
their yet unknown properties than one that is a stranger to them:
but yet, as I have said, this is but judgment and opinion, not
knowledge and certainty. This way of getting and improving our
knowledge in substances only by experience and history, which is all
that the weakness of our faculties in this state of mediocrity which
we are in in this world can attain to, makes me suspect that natural
philosophy is not capable of being made a science. We are able, I
imagine, to reach very little general knowledge concerning the species
of bodies and their several properties. Experiments and historical
observations we may have, from which we may draw advantages of ease
and health, and thereby increase our stock of conveniences for this
life; but beyond this I fear our talents reach not, nor are our
faculties, as I guess, able to advance.
  11. We are fitted for moral science, but only for probable
interpretations of external nature. From whence it is obvious to
conclude that, since our faculties are not fitted to penetrate into
the internal fabric and real essences of bodies; but yet plainly
discover to us the being of a God and the knowledge of ourselves,
enough to lead us into a full and clear discovery of our duty and
great concernment; it will become us, as rational creatures, to employ
those faculties we have about what they are most adapted to, and
follow the direction of nature, where it seems to point us out the
way. For it is rational to conclude that our proper employment lies in
those inquiries, and in that sort of knowledge which is most suited to
our natural capacities, and carries in it our greatest interest,
i.e. the condition of our eternal estate. Hence I think I may conclude
that morality is the proper science and business of mankind in
general, (who are both concerned and fitted to search out their summum
bonum;) as several arts, conversant about several parts of nature, are
the lot and private talent of particular men for the common use of
human life and their own particular subsistence in this world. Of what
consequence the discovery of one natural body and its properties may
be to human life the whole great continent of America is a
convincing instance: whose ignorance in useful arts, and want of the
greatest part of the conveniences of life, in a country that
abounded with all sorts of natural plenty, I think may be attributed
to their ignorance of what was to be found in a very ordinary,
despicable stone; I mean the mineral of iron. And whatever we think of
our parts or improvements in this part of the world, where knowledge
and plenty seem to vie with each other; yet to any one that will
seriously reflect on it, I suppose it will appear past doubt, that,
were the use of iron lost among us, we should in a few ages be
unavoidably reduced to the wants and ignorance of the ancient savage
Americans, whose natural endowments and provisions come no way short
of those of the most flourishing and polite nations. So that he who
first made known the use of that contemptible mineral, may be truly
styled the father of arts, and author of plenty.
  12. In the study of nature we must beware of hypotheses and wrong
principles. I would not, therefore, be thought to disesteem or
dissuade the study of nature. I readily agree the contemplation of his
works gives us occasion to admire, revere, and glorify their Author:
and, if rightly directed, may be of greater benefit to mankind than
the monuments of exemplary charity that have at so great charge been
raised by the founders of hospitals and almshouses. He that first
invented printing, discovered the use of the compass, or made public
the virture and right use of kin kina, did more for the propagation of
knowledge, for the supply and increase of useful commodities, and
saved more from the grave, than those who built colleges,
workhouses, and hospitals. All that I would say is, that we should not
be too forwardly possessed with the opinion or expectation of
knowledge, where it is not to be had, or by ways that will not
attain to it: that we should not take doubtful systems for complete
sciences; nor unintelligible notions for scientifical
demonstrations. In the knowledge of bodies, we must be content to
glean what we can from particular experiments: since we cannot, from a
discovery of their real essences, grasp at a time whole sheaves, and
in bundles comprehend the nature and properties of whole species
together. Where our inquiry is concerning co-existence, or
repugnancy to co-exist, which by contemplation of our ideas we
cannot discover; there experience, observation, and natural history,
must give us, by our senses and by retail, an insight into corporeal
substances. The knowledge of bodies we must get by our senses,
warily employed in taking notice of their qualities and operations
on one another: and what we hope to know of separate spirits in this
world, we must, I think, expect only from revelation. He that shall
consider how little general maxims, precarious principles, and
hypotheses laid down at pleasure, have promoted true knowledge, or
helped to satisfy the inquiries of rational men after real
improvements; how little, I say, the setting out at that end has,
for many ages together, advanced men's progress, towards the knowledge
of natural philosophy, will think we have reason to thank those who in
this latter age have taken another course, and have trod out to us,
though not an easier way to learned ignorance, yet a surer way to
profitable knowledge.
  13. The true use of hypotheses. Not that we may not, to explain
any phenomena of nature, make use of any probable hypotheses
whatsoever: hypotheses, if they are well made, are at least great
helps to the memory, and often direct us to new discoveries. But my
meaning is, that we should not take up any one too hastily (which
the mind, that would always penetrate into the causes of things, and
have principles to rest on, is very apt to do,) till we have very well
examined particulars, and made several experiments, in that thing
which we would explain by our hypothesis, and see whether it will
agree to them all; whether our principles will carry us quite through,
and not be as inconsistent with one phenomenon of nature, as they seem
to accommodate and explain another. And at least that we take care
that the name of principles deceive us not, nor impose on us, by
making us receive that for an unquestionable truth, which is really at
best but a very doubtful conjecture; such as are most (I had almost
said all) of the hypotheses in natural philosophy.
  14. Clear and distinct ideas with settled names, and the finding
of those intermediate ideas which show their agreement or
disagreement, are the ways to enlarge our knowledge. But whether
natural philosophy be capable of certainty or no, the ways to
enlarge our knowledge, as far as we are capable, seem to me, in short,
to be these two:-
  First, The first is to get and settle in our minds determined
ideas of those things whereof we have general or specific names; at
least, so many of them as we would consider and improve our
knowledge in, or reason about. And if they be specific ideas of
substances, we should endeavour also to make them as complete as we
can, whereby I mean, that we should put together as many simple
ideas as, being constantly observed to co-exist, may perfectly
determine the species; and each of those simple ideas which are the
ingredients of our complex ones, should be clear and distinct in our
minds. For it being evident that our knowledge cannot exceed our
ideas; as far as they are either imperfect, confused, or obscure, we
cannot expect to have certain, perfect, or clear knowledge.
  Secondly, The other is the art of finding out those intermediate
ideas, which may show us the agreement or repugnancy of other ideas,
which cannot be immediately compared.
  15. Mathematics an instance of this. That these two (and not the
relying on maxims, and drawing consequences from some general
propositions) are the right methods of improving our knowledge in
the ideas of other modes besides those of quantity, the
consideration of mathematical knowledge will easily inform us. Where
first we shall find that he that has not a perfect and clear idea of
those angles or figures of which he desires to know anything, is
utterly thereby incapable of any knowledge about them. Suppose but a
man not to have a perfect exact idea of a right angle, a scalenum,
or trapezium, and there is nothing more certain than that he will in
vain seek any demonstration about them. Further, it is evident that it
was not the influence of those maxims which are taken for principles
in mathematics that hath led the masters of that science into those
wonderful discoveries they have made. Let a man of good parts know all
the maxims generally made use of in mathematics ever so perfectly, and
contemplate their extent and consequences as much as he pleases, he
will, by their assistance, I suppose, scarce ever come to know that
the square of the hypothenuse in a right-angled triangle is equal to
the squares of the two other sides. The knowledge that "the whole is
equal to all its parts," and "if you take equals from equals, the
remainder will be equal," &c., helped him not, I presume, to this
demonstration: and a man may, I think, pore long enough on those
axioms without ever seeing one jot the more of mathematical truths.
They have been discovered by the thoughts otherwise applied: the
mind had other objects, other views before it, far different from
those maxims, when it first got the knowledge of such truths in
mathematics, which men, well enough acquainted with those received
axioms, but ignorant of their method who first made these
demonstrations, can never sufficiently admire. And who knows what
methods to enlarge our knowledge in other parts of science may
hereafter be invented, answering that of algebra in mathematics, which
so readily finds out the ideas of quantities to measure others by;
whose equality or proportion we could otherwise very hardly, or,
perhaps, never come to know?
                             Chapter XIII
         Some Further Considerations Concerning our Knowledge

  1. Our knowledge partly necessary, partly voluntary. Our
knowledge, as in other things, so in this, has so great a conformity
with our sight, that it is neither wholly necessary, nor wholly
voluntary. If our knowledge were altogether necessary, all men's
knowledge would not only be alike, but every man would know all that
is knowable; and if it were wholly voluntary, some men so little
regard or value it that they would have extreme little, or none at
all. Men that have senses cannot choose but receive some ideas by
them; and if they have memory, they cannot but retain some of them;
and if they have memory, they cannot but retain some of them; and if
they have any distinguishing faculty, cannot but perceive the
agreement or disagreement of some of them one with another; as he that
has eyes, if he will open them by day, cannot but see some objects and
perceive a difference in them. But though a man with his eyes open
in the light, cannot but see, yet there be certain objects which he
may choose whether he will turn his eyes to; there may be in his reach
a book containing pictures and discourses, capable to delight or
instruct him, which yet he may never have the will to open, never take
the pains to look into.
  2. The application of our faculties voluntary; but, they being
employed, we know as things are, not as we please. There is also
another thing in a man's power, and that is, though he turns his
eyes sometimes towards an object, yet he may choose whether he will
curiously survey it, and with an intent application endeavour to
observe accurately all that is visible in it. But yet, what he does
see, he cannot see otherwise than he does. It depends not on his
will to see that black which appears yellow; nor to persuade himself
that what actually scalds him, feels cold. The earth will not appear
painted with flowers, nor the fields covered with verdure, whenever he
has a mind to it: in the cold winter, he cannot help seeing it white
and hoary, if he will look abroad. Just thus is it with our
understanding: all that is voluntary in our knowledge is the employing
or withholding any of our faculties from this or that sort of objects,
and a more or less accurate survey of them: but, they being
employed, our will hath no power to determine the knowledge of the
mind one way or another; that is done only by the objects
themselves, as far as they are clearly discovered. And therefore, as
far as men's senses are conversant about external objects, the mind
cannot but receive those ideas which are presented by them, and be
informed of the existence of things without: and so far as men's
thoughts converse with their own determined ideas, they cannot but
in some measure observe the agreement or disagreement that is to be
found amongst some of them, which is so far knowledge: and if they
have names for those ideas which they have thus considered, they
must needs be assured of the truth of those propositions which express
that agreement or disagreement they perceive in them, and be
undoubtedly convinced of those truths. For what a man sees, he
cannot but see; and what he perceives, he cannot but know that he
perceives.
  3. Instance in numbers. Thus he that has got the ideas of numbers,
and hath taken the pains to compare one, two, and three, to six,
cannot choose but know that they are equal: he that hath got the
idea of a triangle, and found the ways to measure its angles and their
magnitudes, is certain that its three angles are equal to two right
ones; and can as little doubt of that, as of this truth, that it is
impossible for the same thing to be, and not to be.
  4. Instance in natural religion. He also that hath the idea of an
intelligent, but frail and weak being, made by and depending on
another, who is eternal, omnipotent, perfectly wise and good, will
as certainly know that man is to honour, fear, and obey God, as that
the sun shines when he sees it. For if he hath but the ideas of two
such beings in his mind, and will turn his thoughts that way, and
consider them, he will as certainly find that the inferior, finite,
and dependent is under an obligation to obey the supreme and infinite,
as he is certain to find that three, four, and seven are less than
fifteen; if he will consider and compute those numbers: nor can he
be surer in a clear morning that the sun is risen; if he will but open
his eyes and turn them that way. But yet these truths, being ever so
certain, ever so clear, he may be ignorant of either, or all of
them, who will never take the pains to employ his faculties, as he
should, to inform himself about them.
                             Chapter XIV
                             Of Judgment

  1. Our knowledge being short, we want something else. The
understanding faculties being given to man, not barely for
speculation, but also for the conduct of his life, man would be at a
great loss if he had nothing to direct him but what has the
certainty of true knowledge. For that being very short and scanty,
as we have seen, he would be often utterly in the dark, and in most of
the actions of his life, perfectly at a stand, had he nothing to guide
him in the absence of clear and certain knowledge. He that will not
eat till he has demonstration that it will nourish him; he that will
not stir till he infallibly knows the business he goes about will
succeed, will have little else to do but to sit still and perish.
  2. What use to be made of this twilight state. Therefore, as God has
set some things in broad daylight; as he has given us some certain
knowledge, though limited to a few things in comparison, probably as a
taste of what intellectual creatures are capable of to excite in us
a desire and endeavour after a better state: so, in the greatest
part of our concernments, he has afforded us only the twilight, as I
may so say, of probability; suitable, I presume, to that state of
mediocrity and probationership he has been pleased to place us in
here; wherein, to check our over-confidence and presumption, we might,
by every day's experience, be made sensible of our short-sightedness
and liableness to error; the sense whereof might be a constant
admonition to us, to spend the days of this our pilgrimage with
industry and care, in the search and following of that way which might
lead us to a state of greater perfection. It being highly rational
to think, even were revelation silent in the case, that, as men employ
those talents God has given them here, they shall accordingly
receive their rewards at the close of the day, when their sun shall
set and night shall put an end to their labours.
  3. Judgment, or assent to probability, supplies our want of
knowledge. The faculty which God has given man to supply the want of
clear and certain knowledge, in cases where that cannot be had, is
judgment: whereby the mind takes its ideas to agree or disagree; or,
which is the same, any proposition to be true or false, without
perceiving a demonstrative evidence in the proofs. The mind
sometimes exercises this judgment out of necessity, where
demonstrative proofs and certain knowledge are not to be had; and
sometimes out of laziness, unskilfulness, or haste, even where
demonstrative and certain proofs are to be had. Men often stay not
warily to examine the agreement or disagreement of two ideas which
they are desirous or concerned to know; but, either incapable of
such attention as is requisite in a long train of gradations, or
impatient of delay, lightly cast their eyes on, or wholly pass by
the proofs; and so, without making out the demonstration, determine of
the agreement or disagreement of two ideas, as it were by a view of
them as they are at a distance, and take it to be the one or the
other, as seems most likely to them upon such a loose survey. This
faculty of the mind, when it is exercised immediately about things, is
called judgment; when about truths delivered in words, is most
commonly called assent or dissent: which being the most usual way,
wherein the mind has occasion to employ this faculty, I shall, under
these terms, treat of it, as least liable in our language to
equivocation.
  4. Judgement is the presuming things to be so, without perceiving
it. Thus the mind has two faculties conversant about truth and
falsehood:-
  First, KNOWLEDGE, whereby it certainly perceives, and is undoubtedly
satisfied of the agreement or disagreement of any ideas.
  Secondly JUDGMENT, which is the putting ideas together, or
separating them from one another in the mind, when their certain
agreement or disagreement is not perceived, but presumed to be so;
which is, as the word imports, taken to be so before it certainly
appears. And if it so unites or separates them as in reality things
are, it is right judgment.
                              Chapter XV
                            Of Probability

  1. Probability is the appearance of agreement upon fallible
proofs. As demonstration is the showing the agreement or
disagreement of two ideas by the intervention of one or more proofs,
which have a constant, immutable, and visible connexion one with
another; so probability is nothing but the appearance of such an
agreement or disagreement by the intervention of proofs, whose
connexion is not constant and immutable, or at least is not
perceived to be so, but is, or appears for the most part to be so, and
is enough to induce the mind to judge the proposition to be true or
false, rather than the contrary. For example: in the demonstration
of it a man perceives the certain, immutable connexion there is of
equality between the three angles of a triangle, and those
intermediate ones which are made use of to show their equality to
two right ones; and so, by an intuitive knowledge of the agreement
or disagreement of the intermediate ideas in each step of the
progress, the whole series is continued with an evidence, which
clearly shows the agreement or disagreement of those three angles in
equality to two right ones: and thus he has certain knowledge that
it is so. But another man, who never took the pains to observe the
demonstration, hearing a mathematician, a man of credit, affirm the
three angles of a triangle to be equal to two right ones, assents to
it, i.e. receives it for true: in which case the foundation of his
assent is the probability of the thing; the proof being such as for
the most part carries truth with it: the man on whose testimony he
receives it, not being wont to affirm anything contrary to or
besides his knowledge, especially in matters of this kind: so that
that which causes his assent to this proposition, that the three
angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones, that which makes him
take these ideas to agree, without knowing them to do so, is the
wonted veracity of the speaker in other cases, or his supposed
veracity in this.
  2. It is to supply our want of knowledge. Our knowledge, as has been
shown, being very narrow, and we not happy enough to find certain
truth in everything which we have occasion to consider; most of the
propositions we think, reason, discourse- nay, act upon, are such as
we cannot have undoubted knowledge of their truth: yet some of them
border so near upon certainty, that we make no doubt at all about
them; but assent to them as firmly, and act, according to that assent,
as resolutely as if they were infallibly demonstrated, and that our
knowledge of them was perfect and certain. But there being degrees
herein, from the very neighbourhood of certainty and demonstration,
quite down to improbability and unlikeness, even to the confines of
impossibility; and also degrees of assent from full assurance and
confidence, quite down to conjecture, doubt, and distrust: I shall
come now, (having, as I think, found out the bounds of human knowledge
and certainty,) in the next place, to consider the several degrees and
grounds of probability, and assent or faith.
  3. Being that which makes us presume things to be true, before we
know them to be so. Probability is likeliness to be true, the very
notation of the word signifying such a proposition, for which there be
arguments or proofs to make it pass, or be received for true. The
entertainment the mind gives this sort of propositions is called
belief, assent, or opinion, which is the admitting or receiving any
proposition for true, upon arguments or proofs that are found to
persuade us to receive it as true, without certain knowledge that it
is so. And herein lies the difference between probability and
certainty, faith, and knowledge, that in all the parts of knowledge
there is intuition; each immediate idea, each step has its visible and
certain connexion: in belief, not so. That which makes me believe,
is something extraneous to the thing I believe; something not
evidently joined on both sides to, and so not manifestly showing the
agreement or disagreement of those ideas that are under consideration.
  4. The grounds of probability are two: conformity with our own
experience, or the testimony of others' experience. Probability
then, being to supply the defect of our knowledge and to guide us
where that fails, is always conversant about propositions whereof we
have no certainty, but only some inducements to receive them for true.
The grounds of it are, in short, these two following:-
  First, The conformity of anything with our own knowledge,
observation, and experience.
  Secondly, The testimony of others, vouching their observation and
experience. In the testimony of others is to be considered: 1. The
number. 2. The integrity. 3. The skill of the witnesses. 4. The design
of the author, where it is a testimony out of a book cited. 5. The
consistency of the parts, and circumstances of the relation. 6.
Contrary testimonies.
  5. In this, all the arguments pro and con ought to be examined,
before we come to a judgment. Probability wanting that intuitive
evidence which infallibly determines the understanding and produces
certain knowledge, the mind, if it will proceed rationally, ought to
examine all the grounds of probability, and see how they make more
or less for or against any proposition, before it assents to or
dissents from it; and, upon a due balancing the whole, reject or
receive it, with a more or less firm assent, proportionably to the
preponderancy of the greater grounds of probability on one side or the
other. For example:-
  If I myself see a man walk on the ice, it is past probability; it is
knowledge. But if another tells me he saw a man in England, in the
midst of a sharp winter, walk upon water hardened with cold, this
has so great conformity with what is usually observed to happen that I
am disposed by the nature of the thing itself to assent to it;
unless some manifest suspicion attend the relation of that matter of
fact. But if the same thing be told to one born between the tropics,
who never saw nor heard of any such thing before, there the whole
probability relies on testimony: and as the relators are more in
number, and of more credit, and have no interest to speak contrary
to the truth, so that matter of fact is like to find more or less
belief. Though to a man whose experience has always been quite
contrary, and who has never heard of anything like it, the most
untainted credit of a witness will scarce be able to find belief.
  The king of Siam. As it happened to a Dutch ambassador, who
entertaining the king of Siam with the particularities of Holland,
which he was inquisitive after, amongst other things told him that the
water in his country would sometimes, in cold weather, be so hard that
men walked upon it, and that it would bear an elephant, if he were
there. To which the king replied, Hitherto I have believed the strange
things you have told me, because I look upon you as a sober fair
man, but now I am sure you lie.
  6. Probable arguments capable of great variety. Upon these grounds
depends the probability of any proposition: and as the conformity of
our knowledge, as the certainty of observations, as the frequency
and constancy of experience and the number and credibility of
testimonies do more or less agree or disagree with it, so is any
proposition in itself more or less probable. There is another, I
confess, which, though by itself it be no true ground of
probability, yet is often made use of for one, by which men most
commonly regulate their assent, and upon which they pin their faith
more than anything else, and that is, the opinion of others; though
there cannot be a more dangerous thing to rely on, nor more likely
to mislead one; since there is much more falsehood and error among men
than truth and knowledge. And if the opinions and persuasions of
others, whom we know and think well of, be a ground of assent, men
have reason to be Heathens in Japan, Mahometans in Turkey, Papists
in Spain, Protestants in England, and Lutherans in Sweden. But of this
wrong ground of assent I shall have occasion to speak more at large in
another place.
                             Chapter XVI
                       Of the Degrees of Assent

  1. Our assent ought to be regulated by the grounds of probability.
The grounds of probability we have laid down in the foregoing chapter:
as they are the foundations on which our assent is built, so are
they also the measure whereby its several degrees are, or ought to
be regulated: only we are to take notice that, whatever grounds of
probability there may be, they yet operate no further on the mind
which searches after truth, and endeavours to judge right, than they
appear; at least, in the first judgment or search that the mind makes.
I confess, in the opinions men have, and firmly stick to in the world,
their assent is not always from an actual view of the reasons that
at first prevailed with them: it being in many cases almost
impossible, and in most, very hard, even for those who have very
admirable memories, to retain all the proofs which, upon a due
examination, made them embrace that side of the question. It
suffices that they have once with care and fairness sifted the
matter as far as they could; and that they have searched into all
the particulars, that they could imagine to give any light to the
question; and, with the best of their skill, cast up the account
upon the whole evidence: and thus, having once found on which side the
probability appeared to them, after as full and exact an inquiry as
they can make, they lay up the conclusion in their memories as a truth
they have discovered; and for the future they remain satisfied with
the testimony of their memories that this is the opinion that, by
the proofs they have once seen of it, deserves such a degree of
their assent as they afford it.
  2. These cannot always be actually in view; and then we must content
ourselves with the remembrance that we once saw ground for such a
degree of assent. This is all that the greatest part of men are
capable of doing, in regulating their opinions and judgments; unless a
man will exact of them, either to retain distinctly in their
memories all the proofs concerning any probable truth, and that too,
in the same order, and regular deduction of consequences in which they
have formerly placed or seen them; which sometimes is enough to fill a
large volume on one single question: or else they must require a
man, for every opinion that he embraces, every day to examine the
proofs: both which are impossible. It is unavoidable, therefore,
that the memory be relied on in the case, and that men be persuaded of
several opinions, whereof the proofs are not actually in their
thoughts; nay, which perhaps they are not able actually to recall.
Without this, the greatest part of men must be either very sceptic; or
change every moment, and yield themselves up to whoever, having lately
studied the question, offers them arguments, which, for want of
memory, they are not able presently to answer.
  3. The ill consequence of this, if our former judgments were not
rightly made. I cannot but own, that men's sticking to their past
judgment, and adhering firmly to conclusions formerly made, is often
the cause of great obstinacy in error and mistake. But the fault is
not that they rely on their memories for what they have before well
judged, but because they judged before they had well examined. May
we not find a great number (not to say the greatest part) of men
that think they have formed right judgments of several matters; and
that for no other reason, but because they never thought otherwise?
that imagine themselves to have judged right, only because they
never questioned, never examined, their own opinions? Which is
indeed to think they judged right, because they never judged at all.
And yet these, of all men, hold their opinions with the greatest
stiffness; those being generally the most fierce and firm in their
tenets, who have least examined them. What we once know, we are
certain is so: and we may be secure, that there are no latent proofs
undiscovered, which may overturn our knowledge, or bring it in
doubt. But, in matters of probability, it is not in every case we
can be sure that we have all the particulars before us, that any way
concern the question; and that there is no evidence behind, and yet
unseen, which may cast the probability on the other side, and outweigh
all that at present seems to preponderate with us. Who almost is there
that hath the leisure, patience, and means to collect together all the
proofs concerning most of the opinions he has, so as safely to
conclude that he hath a clear and full view; and that there is no more
to be alleged for his better information? And yet we are forced to
determine ourselves on the one side or other. The conduct of our
lives, and the management of our great concerns, will not bear
delay: for those depend, for the most part, on the determination of
our judgment in points wherein we are not capable of certain and
demonstrative knowledge, and wherein it is necessary for us to embrace
the one side or the other.
  4. The right use of it, mutual charity and forbearance, in a
necessary diversity of opinions. Since, therefore, it is unavoidable
to the greatest part of men, if not all, to have several opinions,
without certain and indubitable proofs of their truth; and it
carries too great an imputation of ignorance, lightness, or folly
for men to quit and renounce their former tenets presently upon the
offer of an argument which they cannot immediately answer, and show
the insufficiency of: it would, methinks, become all men to maintain
peace, and the common offices of humanity, and friendship, in the
diversity of opinions; since we cannot reasonably expect that any
one should readily and obsequiously quit his own opinion, and
embrace ours, with a blind resignation to an authority which the
understanding of man acknowledges not. For however it may often
mistake, it can own no other guide but reason, nor blindly submit to
the will and dictates of another. If he you would bring over to your
sentiments be one that examines before he assents, you must give him
leave at his leisure to go over the account again, and, recalling what
is out of his mind, examine all the particulars, to see on which
side the advantage lies: and if he will not think our arguments of
weight enough to engage him anew in so much pains, it is but what we
often do ourselves in the like case; and we should take it amiss if
others should prescribe to us what points we should study. And if he
be one who takes his opinions upon trust, how can we imagine that he
should renounce those tenets which time and custom have so settled
in his mind, that he thinks them self-evident, and of an
unquestionable certainty; or which he takes to be impressions he has
received from God himself, or from men sent by him? How can we expect,
I say, that opinions thus settled should be given up to the
arguments or authority of a stranger or adversary, especially if there
be any suspicion of interest or design, as there never fails to be,
where men find themselves ill treated? We should do well to
commiserate our mutual ignorance, and endeavour to remove it in all
the gentle and fair ways of information; and not instantly treat
others ill, as obstinate and perverse, because they will not
renounce their own, and receive our opinions, or at least those we
would force upon them, when it is more than probable that we are no
less obstinate in not embracing some of theirs. For where is the man
that has incontestable evidence of the truth of all that he holds,
or of the falsehood of all he condemns; or can say that he has
examined to the bottom all his own, or other men's opinions? The
necessity of believing without knowledge, nay often upon very slight
grounds, in this fleeting state of action and blindness we are in,
should make us more busy and careful to inform ourselves than
constrain others. At least, those who have not thoroughly examined
to the bottom all their own tenets, must confess they are unfit to
prescribe to others; and are unreasonable in imposing that as truth on
other men's belief, which they themselves have not searched into,
nor weighed the arguments of probability, on which they should receive
or reject it. Those who have fairly and truly examined, and are
thereby got past doubt in all the doctrines they profess and govern
themselves by, would have a juster pretence to require others to
follow them: but these are so few in number, and find so little reason
to be magisterial in their opinions, that nothing insolent and
imperious is to be expected from them: and there is reason to think,
that, if men were better instructed themselves, they would be less
imposing on others.
  5. Probability is either of sensible matter of fact, capable of
human testimony, or of what is beyond the evidence of our senses.
But to return to the grounds of assent, and the several degrees of it,
we are to take notice, that the propositions we receive upon
inducements of probability are of two sorts: either concerning some
particular existence, or, as it is usually termed, matter of fact,
which, falling under observation, is capable of human testimony; or
else concerning things, which, being beyond the discovery of our
senses, are not capable of any such testimony.
  6. The concurrent experience of all other men with ours, produces
assurance approaching to knowledge. Concerning the first of these,
viz. Particular matter of fact.
  I. Where any particular thing, consonant to the constant observation
of ourselves and others in the like case, comes attested by the
concurrent reports of all that mention it, we receive it as easily,
and build as firmly upon it, as if it were certain knowledge; and we
reason and act thereupon with as little doubt as if it were perfect
demonstration. Thus, if all Englishmen, who have occasion to mention
it, should affirm that it froze in England the last winter, or that
there were swallows seen there in the summer, I think a man could
almost as little doubt of it as that seven and four are eleven. The
first, therefore, and highest degree of probability, is, when the
general consent of all men, in all ages, as far as it can be known,
concurs with a man's constant and never-failing experience in like
cases, to confirm the truth of any particular matter of fact
attested by fair witnesses: such are all the stated constitutions
and properties of bodies, and the regular proceedings of causes and
effects in the ordinary course of nature. This we call an argument
from the nature of things themselves. For what our own and other men's
constant observation has found always to be after the same manner,
that we with reason conclude to be the effect of steady and regular
causes; though they come not within the reach of our knowledge.
Thus, That fire warmed a man, made lead fluid, and changes the
colour or consistency in wood or charcoal; that iron sunk in water,
and swam in quicksilver: these and the like propositions about
particular facts, being agreeable to our constant experience, as often
as we have to do with these matters; and being generally spoke of
(when mentioned by others) as things found constantly to be so, and
therefore not so much as controverted by anybody- we are put past
doubt that a relation affirming any such thing to have been, or any
prediction that it will happen again in the same manner, is very true.
These probabilities rise so near to certainty, that they govern our
thoughts as absolutely, and influence all our actions as fully, as the
most evident demonstration; and in what concerns us we make little
or no difference between them and certain knowledge. Our belief,
thus grounded, rises to assurance.
  7. II. Unquestionable testimony, and our own experience that a thing
is for the most part so, produce confidence. The next degree of
probability is, when I find by my own experience, and the agreement of
all others that mention it, a thing to be for the most part so, and
that the particular instance of it is attested by many and undoubted
witnesses: v.g. history giving us such an account of men in all
ages, and my own experience, as far as I had an opportunity to
observe, confirming it, that most men prefer their private advantage
to the public: if all historians that write of Tiberius, say that
Tiberius did so, it is extremely probable. And in this case, our
assent has a sufficient foundation to raise itself to a degree which
we may call confidence.
  8. III. Fair testimony, and the nature of the thing indifferent,
produce unavoidable assent. In things that happen indifferently, as
that a bird should fly this or that way; that it should thunder on a
man's right or left hand, &c., when any particular matter of fact is
vouched by the concurrent testimony of unsuspected witnesses, there
our assent is also unavoidable. Thus: that there is such a city in
Italy as Rome: that about one thousand seven hundred years ago,
there lived in it a man, called Julius Caesar; that he was a
general, and that he won a battle against another, called Pompey.
This, though in the nature of the thing there be nothing for nor
against it, yet being related by historians of credit, and
contradicted by no one writer, a man cannot avoid believing it, and
can as little doubt of it as he does of the being and actions of his
own acquaintance, whereof he himself is a witness.
  9. Experience and testimonies clashing infinitely vary the degrees
of probability. Thus far the matter goes easy enough. Probability upon
such grounds carries so much evidence with it, that it naturally
determines the judgment, and leaves us as little liberty to believe or
disbelieve, as a demonstration does, whether we will know, or be
ignorant. The difficulty is, when testimonies contradict common
experience, and the reports of history and witnesses clash with the
ordinary course of nature, or with one another; there it is, where
diligence, attention, and exactness are required, to form a right
judgment, and to proportion the assent to the different evidence and
probability of the thing: which rises and falls, according as those
two foundations of credibility, viz. common observation in like cases,
and particular testimonies in that particular instance, favour or
contradict it. These are liable to so great variety of contrary
observations, circumstances, reports, different qualifications,
tempers, designs, oversights, &c., of the reporters, that it is
impossible to reduce to precise rules the various degrees wherein
men give their assent. This only may be said in general, That as the
arguments and proofs pro and con, upon due examination, nicely
weighing every particular circumstance, shall to any one appear,
upon the whole matter, in a greater or less degree to preponderate
on either side; so they are fitted to produce in the mind such
different entertainments, as we call belief, conjecture, guess, doubt,
wavering, distrust, disbelief, &c.
  10. Traditional testimonies, the further removed the less their
proof becomes. This is what concerns assent in matters wherein
testimony is made use of: concerning which, I think, it may not be
amiss to take notice of a rule observed in the law of England; which
is, That though the attested copy of a record be good proof, yet the
copy of a copy, ever so well attested, and by ever so credible
witnesses, will not be admitted as a proof in judicature. This is so
generally approved as reasonable, and suited to the wisdom and caution
to be used in our inquiry after material truths, that I never yet
heard of any one that blamed it. This practice, if it be allowable
in the decisions of right and wrong, carries this observation along
with it, viz. That any testimony, the further off it is from the
original truth, the less force and proof it has. The being and
existence of the thing itself, is what I call the original truth. A
credible man vouching his knowledge of it is a good proof; but if
another equally credible do witness it from his report, the
testimony is weaker: and a third that attests the hearsay of an
hearsay is yet less considerable. So that in traditional truths,
each remove weakens the force of the proof: and the more hands the
tradition has successively passed through, the less strength and
evidence does it receive from them. This I thought necessary to be
taken notice of: because I find amongst some men the quite contrary
commonly practised, who look on opinions to gain force by growing
older; and what a thousand years since would not, to a rational man
contemporary with the first voucher, have appeared at all probable, is
now urged as certain beyond all question, only because several have
since, from him, said it one after another. Upon this ground
propositions, evidently false or doubtful enough in their first
beginning, come, by an inverted rule of probability, to pass for
authentic truths; and those which found or deserved little credit from
the mouths of their first authors, are thought to grow venerable by
age, are urged as undeniable.
  11. Yet history is of great use. I would not be thought here to
lessen the credit and use of history: it is all the light we have in
many cases, and we have in many cases, and we receive from it a
great part of the useful truths we have, with a convincing evidence. I
think nothing more valuable than the records of antiquity: I wish we
had more of them, and more uncorrupted. But this truth itself forces
me to say, That no probability can rise higher than its first
original. What has no other evidence than the single testimony of
one only witness must stand or fall by his only testimony, whether
good, bad, or indifferent; and though cited afterwards by hundreds
of others, one after another, is so far from receiving any strength
thereby, that it is only the weaker. Passion, interest,
inadvertency, mistake of his meaning, and a thousand odd reasons, or
capricios, men's minds are acted by, (impossible to be discovered,)
may make one man quote another man's words or meaning wrong. He that
has but ever so little examined the citations of writers, cannot doubt
how little credit the quotations deserve, where the originals are
wanting; and consequently how much less quotations of quotations can
be relied on. This is certain, that what in one age was affirmed
upon slight grounds, can never after come to be more valid in future
ages by being often repeated. But the further still it is from the
original, the less valid it is, and has always less force in the mouth
or writing of him that last made use of it than in his from whom he
received it.
  12. In things which sense cannot discover, analogy is the great rule
of probability. [Secondly], The probabilities we have hitherto
mentioned are only such as concern matter of fact, and such things
as are capable of observation and testimony. There remains that
other sort, concerning which men entertain opinions with variety of
assent, though the things be such, that falling not under the reach of
our senses, they are not capable of testimony. Such are, 1. The
existence, nature and operations of finite immaterial beings without
us; as spirits, angels, devils, &c. Or the existence of material
beings which, either for their smallness in themselves or remoteness
from us, our senses cannot take notice of- as, whether there be any
plants, animals, and intelligent inhabitants in the planets, and other
mansions of the vast universe. 2. Concerning the manner of operation
in most parts of the works of nature: wherein, though we see the
sensible effects, yet their causes are unknown, and we perceive not
the ways and manner how they are produced. We see animals are
generated, nourished, and move; the loadstone draws iron; and the
parts of a candle, successively melting, turn into flame, and give
us both light and heat. These and the like effects we see and know:
but the causes that operate, and the manner they are produced in, we
can only guess and probably conjecture. For these and the like, coming
not within the scrutiny of human senses, cannot be examined by them,
or be attested by anybody; and therefore can appear more or less
probable, only as they more or less agree to truths that are
established in our minds, and as they hold proportion to other parts
of our knowledge and observation. Analogy in these matters is the only
help we have, and it is from that alone we draw all our grounds of
probability. Thus, observing that the bare rubbing of two bodies
violently one upon another, produces heat, and very often fire itself,
we have reason to think, that what we call heat and fire consists in a
violent agitation of the imperceptible minute parts of the burning
matter. Observing likewise that the different refractions of
pellucid bodies produce in our eyes the different appearances of
several colours; and also, that the different ranging and laying the
superficial parts of several bodies, as of velvet, watered silk,
&c., does the like, we think it probable that the colour and shining
of bodies is in them nothing but the different arrangement and
refraction of their minute and insensible parts. Thus, finding in
all parts of the creation, that fall under human observation, that
there is a gradual connexion of one with another, without any great or
discernible gaps between, in all that great variety of things we see
in the world, which are so closely linked together, that, in the
several ranks of beings, it is not easy to discover the bounds betwixt
them; we have reason to be persuaded that, by such gentle steps,
things ascend upwards in degrees of perfection. It is a hard matter to
say where sensible and rational begin, and where insensible and
irrational end: and who is there quick-sighted enough to determine
precisely which is the lowest species of living things, and which
the first of those which have no life? Things, as far as we can
observe, lessen and augment, as the quantity does in a regular cone;
where, though there be a manifest odds betwixt the bigness of the
diameter at a remote distance, yet the difference between the upper
and under, where they touch one another, is hardly discernible. The
difference is exceeding great between some men and some animals: but
if we will compare the understanding and abilities of some men and
some brutes, we shall find so little difference, that it will be
hard to say, that that of the man is either clearer or larger.
Observing, I say, such gradual and gentle descents downwards in
those parts of the creation that are beneath man, the rule of
analogy may make it probable, that it is so also in things above us
and our observation; and that there are several ranks of intelligent
beings, excelling us in several degrees of perfection, ascending
upwards towards the infinite perfection of the Creator, by gentle
steps and differences, that are every one at no great distance from
the next to it. This sort of probability, which is the best conduct of
rational experiments, and the rise of hypothesis, has also its use and
influence; and a wary reasoning from analogy leads us often into the
discovery of truths and useful productions, which would otherwise
lie concealed.
  13. One case where contrary experience lessens not the testimony.
Though the common experience and the ordinary course of things have
justly a mighty influence on the minds of men, to make them give or
refuse credit to anything proposed to their belief; yet there is one
case, wherein the strangeness of the fact lessens not the assent to
a fair testimony given of it. For where such supernatural events are
suitable to ends aimed at by Him who has the power to change the
course of nature, there, under such circumstances, that may be the
fitter to procure belief, by how much the more they are beyond or
contrary to ordinary observation. This is the proper case of miracles,
which, well attested, do not only find credit themselves, but give
it also to other truths, which need such confirmation.
  14. The bare testimony of divine revelation is the highest
certainty. Besides those we have hitherto mentioned, there is one sort
of propositions that challenge the highest degree of our assent,
upon bare testimony, whether the thing proposed agree or disagree with
common experience, and the ordinary course of things, or no. The
reason whereof is, because the testimony is of such an one as cannot
deceive nor be deceived: and that is of God himself. This carries with
it an assurance beyond doubt, evidence beyond exception. This is
called by a peculiar name, revelation, and our assent to it, faith,
which as absolutely determines our minds, and as perfectly excludes
all wavering, as our knowledge itself; and we may as well doubt of our
own being, as we can whether any revelation from God be true. So
that faith is a settled and sure principle of assent and assurance,
and leaves no manner of room for doubt or hesitation. Only we must
be sure that it be a divine revelation, and that we understand it
right: else we shall expose ourselves to all the extravagancy of
enthusiasm, and all the error of wrong principles, if we have faith
and assurance in what is not divine revelation. And therefore, in
those cases, our assent can be rationally no higher than the
evidence of its being a revelation, and that this is the meaning of
the expressions it is delivered in. If the evidence of its being a
revelation, or that this is its true sense, be only on probable
proofs, our assent can reach no higher than an assurance or
diffidence, arising from the more or less apparent probability of
the proofs. But of faith, and the precedency it ought to have before
other arguments of persuasion, I shall speak more hereafter; where I
treat of it as it is ordinarily placed, in contradistinction to
reason; though in truth it be nothing else but an assent founded on
the highest reason.
                             Chapter XVII
                              Of Reason

  1. Various significations of the word "reason". The word reason in
the English language has different significations: sometimes it is
taken for true and clear principles: sometimes for clear and fair
deductions from those principles: and sometimes for the cause, and
particularly the final cause. But the consideration I shall have of it
here is in a signification different from all these; and that is, as
it stands for a faculty in man, that faculty whereby man is supposed
to be distinguished from beasts, and wherein it is evident he much
surpasses them.
  2. Wherein reasoning consists. If general knowledge, as has been
shown, consists in a perception of the agreement or disagreement of
our own ideas, and the knowledge of the existence of all things
without us (except only of a God, whose existence every man may
certainly know and demonstrate to himself from his own existence),
be had only by our senses, what room is there for the exercise of
any other faculty, but outward sense and inward perception? What
need it there of reason? Very much: both for the enlargement of our
knowledge, and regulating our assent. For it hath to do both in
knowledge and opinion, and is necessary and assisting to all our other
intellectual faculties, and indeed contains two of them, viz. sagacity
and illation. By the one, it finds out; and by the other, it so orders
the intermediate ideas as to discover what connexion there is in
each link of the chain, whereby the extremes are held together; and
thereby, as it were, to draw into view the truth sought for, which
is that which we call illation or inference, and consists in nothing
but the perception of the connexion there is between the ideas, in
each step of the deduction; whereby the mind comes to see, either
the certain agreement or disagreement of any two ideas, as in
demonstration, in which it arrives at knowledge; or their probable
connexion, on which it gives or withholds its assent, as in opinion.
Sense and intuition reach but a very little way. The greatest part
of our knowledge depends upon deductions and intermediate ideas: and
in those cases where we are fain to substitute assent instead of
knowledge, and take propositions for true, without being certain
they are so, we have need to find out, examine, and compare the
grounds of their probability. In both these cases, the faculty which
finds out the means, and rightly applies them, to discover certainty
in the one, and probability in the other, is that which we call
reason. For, as reason perceives the necessary and indubitable
connexion of all the ideas or proofs one to another, in each step of
any demonstration that produces knowledge; so it likewise perceives
the probable connexion of all the ideas or proofs one to another, in
every step of a discourse, to which it will think assent due. This
is the lowest degree of that which can be truly called reason. For
where the mind does not perceive this probable connexion, where it
does not discern whether there be any such connexion or no; there
men's opinions are not the product of judgment, or the consequence
of reason, but the effects of chance and hazard, of a mind floating at
all adventures, without choice and without direction.
  3. Reason in its four degrees. So that we may in reason consider
these degrees: four the first and highest is the discovering and
finding out of truths; the second, the regular and methodical
disposition of them, and laying them in a clear and fit order, to make
their connexion and force be plainly and easily perceived; the third
is the perceiving their connexion; and the fourth, a making a right
conclusion. These several degrees may be observed in any
mathematical demonstration; it being one thing to perceive the
connexion of each part, as the demonstration is made by another;
another to perceive the dependence of the conclusion on all the parts;
a third, to make out a demonstration clearly and neatly one's self;
and something different from all these, to have first found out
these intermediate ideas or proofs by which it is made.
  4. Whether syllogism is the great instrument of reason: first
cause to doubt this. There is one thing more which I shall desire to
be considered concerning reason; and that is, whether syllogism, as is
generally thought, be the proper instrument of it, and the
usefullest way of exercising this faculty. The causes I have to
doubt are these:-
  First, Because syllogism serves our reason but in one only of the
forementioned parts of it; and that is, to show the connexion of the
proofs in any one instance, and no more; but in this it is of no great
use, since the mind can perceive such connexion, where it really is,
as easily, nay, perhaps better, without it.
  Men can reason well who cannot make a syllogism. If we will
observe the actings of our own minds, we shall find that we reason
best and clearest, when we only observe the connexion of the proof,
without reducing our thoughts to any rule of syllogism. And
therefore we may take notice, that there are many men that reason
exceeding clear and rightly, who know not how to make a syllogism.
He that will look into many parts of Asia and America, will find men
reason there perhaps as acutely as himself, who yet never heard of a
syllogism, nor can reduce any one argument to those forms: and I
believe scarce any one makes syllogisms in reasoning within himself.
Indeed syllogism is made use of, on occasion, to discover a fallacy
hid in a rhetorical flourish, or cunningly wrapt up in a smooth
period; and, stripping an absurdity of the cover of wit and good
language, show it in its naked deformity. But the weakness or
fallacy of such a loose discourse it shows, by the artificial form
it is put into, only to those who have thoroughly studied mode and
figure, and have so examined the many ways that three propositions may
be put together, as to know which of them does certainly conclude
right, and which not, and upon what grounds it is that they do so. All
who have so far considered syllogism, as to see the reason why in
three propositions laid together in one form, the conclusion will be
certainly right, but in another not certainly so, I grant are
certain of the conclusion they draw from the premises in the allowed
modes and figures. But they who have not so far looked into those
forms, are not sure by virtue of syllogism, that the conclusion
certainly follows from the premises; they only take it to be so by
an implicit faith in their teachers and a confidence in those forms of
argumentation; but this is still but believing, not being certain.
Now, if, of all mankind those who can make syllogisms are extremely
few in comparison of those who cannot; and if, of those few who have
been taught logic, there is but a very small number who do any more
than believe that syllogisms, in the allowed modes and figures do
conclude right, without knowing certainly that they do so: if
syllogisms must be taken for the only proper instrument of reason
and means of knowledge, it will follow, that, before Aristotle,
there was not one man that did or could know anything by reason; and
that, since the invention of syllogisms, there is not one of ten
thousand that doth.
  Aristotle. But God has not been so sparing to men to make them
barely two-legged creatures, and left it to Aristotle to make them
rational, i.e. those few of them that he could get so to examine the
grounds of syllogisms, as to see that, in above three score ways
that three propositions may be laid together, there are but about
fourteen wherein one may be sure that the conclusion is right; and
upon what grounds it is, that, in these few, the conclusion is
certain, and in the other not. God has been more bountiful to
mankind than so. He has given them a mind that can reason, without
being instructed in methods of syllogizing: the understanding is not
taught to reason by these rules; it has a native faculty to perceive
the coherence or incoherence of its ideas, and can range them right,
without any such perplexing repetitions. I say not this any way to
lessen Aristotle, whom I look on as one of the greatest men amongst
the ancients; whose large views, acuteness, and penetration of thought
and strength of judgment, few have equalled; and who, in this very
invention of forms of argumentation, wherein the conclusion may be
shown to be rightly inferred, did great service against those who were
not ashamed to deny anything. And I readily own, that all right
reasoning may be reduced to his forms of syllogism. But yet I think,
without any diminution to him, I may truly say, that they are not
the only nor the best way of reasoning, for the leading of those
into truth who are willing to find it, and desire to make the best use
they may of their reason, for the attainment of knowledge. And he
himself, it is plain, found out some forms to be conclusive, and
others not, not by the forms themselves, but by the original way of
knowledge, i.e. by the visible agreement of ideas. Tell a country
gentlewoman that the wind is south-west, and the weather lowering, and
like to rain, and she will easily understand it is not safe for her to
go abroad thin clad in such a day, after a fever: she clearly sees the
probable connexion of all these, viz. south-west wind, and clouds,
rain, wetting, taking cold, relapse, and danger of death, without
tying them together in those artificial and cumbersome fetters of
several syllogisms, that clog and hinder the mind, which proceeds from
one part to another quicker and clearer without them: and the
probability which she easily perceives in things thus in their
native state would be quite lost, if this argument were managed
learnedly, and proposed in mode and figure. For it very often
confounds the connexion; and, I think, every one will perceive in
mathematical demonstrations, that the knowledge gained thereby comes
shortest and clearest without syllogism.
  Inference is looked on as the great act of the rational faculty, and
so it is when it is rightly made: but the mind, either very desirous
to enlarge its knowledge, or very apt to favour the sentiments it
has once imbibed, is very forward to make inferences; and therefore
often makes too much haste, before it perceives the connexion of the
ideas that must hold the extremes together.
  Syllogism does not discover ideas, or their connexions. To infer, is
nothing but by virtue of one proposition laid down as true, to draw in
another as true, i.e. to see or suppose such a connexion of the two
ideas of the inferred proposition. V.g. Let this be the proposition
laid down, "Men shall be punished in another world," and from thence
be inferred this other, "Then men can determine themselves." The
question now is, to know whether the mind has made this inference
right or no: if it has made it by finding out the intermediate
ideas, and taking a view of the connexion of them, placed in a due
order, it has proceeded rationally, and made a right inference: if
it has done it without such a view, it has not so much made an
inference that will hold, or an inference of right reason, as shown
a willingness to have it be, or be taken for such. But in neither case
is it syllogism that discovered those ideas, or showed the connexion
of them; for they must be both found out, and the connexion everywhere
perceived, before they can rationally be made use of in syllogism:
unless it can be said, that any idea, without considering what
connexion it hath with the two other, whose agreement should be
shown by it, will do well enough in a syllogism, and may be taken at a
venture for the medius terminus, to prove any conclusion. But this
nobody will say; because it is by virtue of the perceived agreement of
the intermediate idea with the extremes, that the extremes are
concluded to agree; and therefore each intermediate idea must be
such as in the whole chain hath a visible connexion with those two
it has been placed between, or else thereby the conclusion cannot be
inferred or drawn in: for wherever any link of the chain is loose
and without connexion, there the whole strength of it is lost, and
it hath no force to infer or draw in anything. In the instance above
mentioned, what is it shows the force of the inference, and
consequently the reasonableness of it, but a view of the connexion
of all the intermediate ideas that draw in the conclusion, or
proposition inferred? V.g. "Men shall be punished"; "God the
punisher"; "Just punishment"; "The punished guilty"; "Could have
done otherwise"; "Freedom"; "Self-determination"; by which chain of
ideas thus visibly linked together in train, i.e. each intermediate
idea agreeing on each side with those two it is immediately placed
between, the ideas of men and self-determination appear to be
connected, i.e. this proposition "men can determine themselves" is
drawn in or inferred from this, "that they shall be punished in the
other world." For here the mind, seeing the connexion there is between
the idea of men's punishment in the other world and the idea of God
punishing; between God punishing and the justice of the punishment;
between justice of punishment and guilt; between guilt and a power
to do otherwise; between a power to do otherwise and freedom; and
between freedom and self-determination, sees the connexion between men
and self-determination.
  The connexion must be discovered before it can be put into
syllogisms. Now I ask, whether the connexion of the extremes be not
more clearly seen in this simple and natural disposition, than in
the perplexed repetitions, and jumble of five or six syllogisms. I
must beg pardon for calling it jumble, till somebody shall put these
ideas into so many syllogisms, and then say that they are less
jumbled, and their connexion more visible, when they are transposed
and repeated, and spun out to a greater length in artificial forms,
than in that short and natural plain order they are laid down in here,
wherein everyone may see it, and wherein they must be seen before they
can be put into a train of syllogisms. For the natural order of the
connecting ideas must direct the order of the syllogisms, and a man
must see the connexion of each intermediate idea with those that it
connects, before he can with reason make use of it in a syllogism. And
when all those syllogisms are made, neither those that are nor those
that are not logicians will see the force of the argumentation,
i.e., the connexion of the extremes, one jot the better. [For those
that are not men of art, not knowing the true forms of syllogism,
nor the reasons of them, cannot know whether they are made in right
and conclusive modes and figures or no, and so are not at all helped
by the forms they are put into; though by them the natural order,
wherein the mind could judge of their respective connexion, being
disturbed, renders the illation much more uncertain than without
them.] And as for the logicians themselves, they see the connexion
of each intermediate idea with those it stands between, (on which
the force of the inference depends,) as well before as after the
syllogism is made, or else they do not see it at all. For a
syllogism neither shows nor strengthens the connexion of any two ideas
immediately put together, but only by the connexion seen in them shows
what connexion the extremes have one with another. But what
connexion the intermediate has with either of the extremes in the
syllogism, that no syllogism does or can show. That the mind only doth
or can perceive as they stand there in that juxta-position by its
own view, to which the syllogistical form it happens to be in gives no
help or light at all: it only shows that if the intermediate idea
agrees with those it is on both sides immediately applied to; then
those two remote ones, or, as they are called, extremes, do
certainly agree; and therefore the immediate connexion of each idea to
that which it is applied to on each side, on which the force of the
reasoning depends, is as well seen before as after the syllogism is
made, or else he that makes the syllogism could never see it at all.
This, as has been already observed, is seen only by the eye, or the
perceptive faculty, of the mind, taking a view of them laid
together, in a juxta-position; which view of any two it has equally,
whenever they are laid together in any proposition, whether that
proposition be placed as a major or a minor, in a syllogism or no.
  Use of syllogism. Of what use, then are syllogisms? I answer,
their chief and main use is in the Schools, where men are allowed
without shame to deny the agreement of ideas that do manifestly agree;
or out of the Schools, to those who from thence have learned without
shame to deny the connexion of ideas, which even to themselves is
visible. But to an ingenuous searcher after truth, who has no other
aim but to find it, there is no need of any such form to force the
allowing of the inference: the truth and reasonableness of it is
better seen in ranging of the ideas in a simple and plain order: and
hence it is that men, in their own inquiries after truth, never use
syllogisms to convince themselves or in teaching others to instruct
willing learners. Because, before they can put them into a
syllogism, they must see the connexion that is between the
intermediate idea and the two other ideas it is set between and
applied to, to show their agreement; and when they see that, they
see whether the inference be good or no; and so syllogism comes too
late to settle it. For to make use again of the former instance, I ask
whether the mind, considering the idea of justice, placed as an
intermediate idea between the punishment of men and the guilt of the
punished, (and till it does so consider it, the mind cannot make use
of it as a medius terminus,) does not as plainly see the force and
strength of the inference as when it is formed into a syllogism. To
show it in a very plain and easy example; let animal be the
intermediate idea or medius terminus that the mind makes use of to
show the connexion of homo and vivens; I ask whether the mind does not
more readily and plainly see that connexion in the simple and proper
position of the connecting idea in the middle thus:

                 Homo- Animal- Vivens,

than in this perplexed one,

              Animal- Vivens- Homo- Animal:

which is the position these ideas have in a syllogism, to show the
connexion between homo and vivens by the intervention of animal.
  Not the only way to detect fallacies. Indeed syllogism is thought to
be of necessary use, even to the lovers of truth, to show them the
fallacies that are often concealed in florid, witty, or involved
discourses. But that this is a mistake will appear, if we consider,
that the reason why sometimes men who sincerely aim at truth are
imposed upon by such loose, and, as they are called, rhetorical
discourses, is, that their fancies being struck with some lively
metaphorical representations, they neglect to observe, or do not
easily perceive, what are the true ideas upon which the inference
depends. Now, to show such men the weakness of such an
argumentation, there needs no more but to strip if of the
superfluous ideas, which, blended and confounded with those on which
the inference depends, seem to show a connexion where there is none;
or at least to hinder the discovery of the want of it; and then to lay
the naked ideas on which the force of the argumentation depends in
their due order; in which position the mind, taking a view of them,
sees what connexion they have, and so is able to judge of the
inference without any need of a syllogism at all.
  I grant that mode and figure is commonly made use of in such
cases, as if the detection of the incoherence of such loose discourses
were wholly owing to the syllogistical form; and so I myself
formerly thought, till, upon a stricter examination, I now find,
that laying the intermediate ideas naked in their due order, shows the
incoherence of the argumentation better than syllogism; not only as
subjecting each link of the chain to the immediate view of the mind in
its proper place, whereby its connexion is best observed; but also
because syllogism shows the incoherence only to those (who are not one
of ten thousand) who perfectly understand mode and figure, and the
reason upon which those forms are established; whereas a due and
orderly placing of the ideas upon which the inference is made, makes
every one, whether logician or not logician, who understands the
terms, and hath the faculty to perceive the agreement or
disagreement of such ideas, (without which, in or out of syllogism, he
cannot perceive the strength or weakness, coherence or incoherence
of the discourse) see the want of connexion in the argumentation,
and the absurdity of the inference.
  And thus I have known a man unskilful in syllogism, who at first
hearing could perceive the weakness and inconclusiveness of a long
artificial and plausible discourse, wherewith others better skilled in
syllogism have been misled: and I believe there are few of my
readers who do not know such. And indeed, if it were not so, the
debates of most princes' councils, and the business of assemblies,
would be in danger to be mismanaged, since those who are relied
upon, and have usually a great stroke in them, are not always such who
have the good luck to be perfectly knowing in the forms of
syllogism, or expert in mode and figure. And if syllogism were the
only, or so much as the surest way to detect the fallacies of
artificial discourses; I do not think that all mankind, even princes
in matters that concern their crowns and dignities, are so much in
love with falsehood and mistake, that they would everywhere have
neglected to bring syllogism into the debates of moment; or thought it
ridiculous so much as to offer them in affairs of consequence; a plain
evidence to me, that men of parts and penetration, who were not idly
to dispute at their ease, but were to act according to the result of
their debates, and often pay for their mistakes with their heads or
fortunes, found those scholastic forms were of little use to
discover truth or fallacy, whilst both the one and the other might
be shown, and better shown without them, to those who would not refuse
to see what was visibly shown them.
  Another cause to doubt whether syllogism be the only proper
instrument of reason, in the discovery of truth. Secondly, Another
reason that makes me doubt whether syllogism be the only proper
instrument of reason, in the discovery of truth, is, that of
whatever use mode and figure is pretended to be in the laying open
of fallacy, (which has been above considered,) those scholastic
forms of discourse are not less liable to fallacies than the plainer
ways of argumentation; and for this I appeal to common observation,
which has always found these artificial methods of reasoning more
adapted to catch and entangle the mind, than to instruct and inform
the understanding. And hence it is that men, even when they are
baffled and silenced in this scholastic way, are seldom or never
convinced, and so brought over to the conquering side: they perhaps
acknowledge their adversary to be the more skilful disputant, but rest
nevertheless persuaded of the truth on their side, and go away,
worsted as they are, with the same opinion they brought with them:
which they could not do if this way of argumentation carried light and
conviction with it, and made men see where the truth lay; and
therefore syllogism has been thought more proper for the attaining
victory in dispute, than for the discovery or confirmation of truth in
fair inquiries. And if it be certain, that fallacies can be couched in
syllogism, as it cannot be denied; it must be something else, and
not syllogism, that must discover them.
  I have had experience how ready some men are, when all the use which
they have been wont to ascribe to anything is not allowed, to cry out,
that I am for laying it wholly aside. But to prevent such unjust and
groundless imputations, I tell them, that I am not for taking away any
helps to the understanding in the attainment of knowledge. And if
men skilled in and used to syllogisms, find them assisting to their
reason in the discovery of truth, I think they ought to make use of
them. All that I aim at, is, that they should not ascribe more to
these forms than belongs to them, and think that men have no use, or
not so full an use, of their reasoning faculties without them. Some
eyes want spectacles to see things clearly and distinctly; but let not
those that use them therefore say nobody can see clearly without them:
those who do so will be thought, in favour of art (which, perhaps,
they are beholden to,) a little too much to depress and discredit
nature. Reason, by its own penetration, where it is strong and
exercised, usually sees quicker and clearer without syllogism. If
use of those spectacles has so dimmed its sight, that it cannot
without them see consequences or inconsequences in argumentation, I am
not so unreasonable as to be against the using them. Every one knows
what best fits his own sight; but let him not thence conclude all in
the dark, who use not just the same helps that he finds a need of.
  5. Syllogism helps little in demonstration, less in probability. But
however it be in knowledge, I think I may truly say, it is of far
less, or no use at all in probabilities. For the assent there being to
be determined by the preponderancy, after due weighing of all the
proofs, with all circumstances on both sides, nothing is so unfit to
assist the mind in that as syllogism; which running away with one
assumed probability, or one topical argument, pursues that till it has
led the mind quite out of sight of the thing under consideration; and,
forcing it upon some remote difficulty, holds it fast there; entangled
perhaps, and, as it were, manacled, in the chain of syllogisms,
without allowing it the liberty, much less affording it the helps,
requisite to show on which side, all things considered, is the greater
probability.
  6. Serves not to increase our knowledge, but to fence with the
knowledge we suppose we have. But let it help us (as perhaps may be
said) in convincing men of their errors and mistakes: (and yet I would
fain see the man that was forced out of his opinion by dint of
syllogism,) yet still it fails our reason in that part, which, if
not its highest perfection, is yet certainly its hardest task, and
that which we most need its help in; and that is the finding out of
proofs, and making new discoveries. The rules of syllogism serve not
to furnish the mind with those intermediate ideas that may show the
connexion of remote ones. This way of reasoning discovers no new
proofs, but is the art of marshalling and ranging the old ones we have
already. The forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid
is very true; but the discovery of it, I think, not owing to any rules
of common logic. A man knows first, and then he is able to prove
syllogistically. So that syllogism comes after knowledge, and then a
man has little or no need of it. But it is chiefly by the finding
out those ideas that show the connexion of distant ones, that our
stock of knowledge is increased, and that useful arts and sciences are
advanced. Syllogism, at best, is but the art of fencing with the
little knowledge we have, without making any addition to it. And if
a man should employ his reason all this way, he will not do much
otherwise than he who, having got some iron out of the bowels of the
earth, should have it beaten up all into swords, and put it into his
servants' hands to fence with and bang one another. Had the King of
Spain employed the hands of his people, and his Spanish iron so, he
had brought to light but little of that treasure that lay so long
hid in the dark entrails of America. And I am apt to think, that he
who shall employ all the force of his reason only in brandishing of
syllogisms, will discover very little of that mass of knowledge
which lies yet concealed in the secret recesses of nature; and
which, I am apt to think, native rustic reason (as it formerly has
done) is likelier to open a way to, and add to the common stock of
mankind, rather than any scholastic proceeding by the strict rules
of mod, and figure.
  7. Other helps to reason than syllogism should be sought. I doubt
not, nevertheless, but there are ways to be found to assist our reason
in this most useful part; and this the judicious Hooker encourages
me to say, who in his Eccl. Pol. 1. i. SS 6, speaks thus: "If there
might be added the right helps of true art and learning, (which helps,
I must plainly confess, this age of the world, carrying the name of
a learned age, doth neither much know nor generally regard,) there
would undoubtedly be almost as much difference in maturity of judgment
between men therewith inured, and that which men now are, as between
men that are now, and innocents." I do not pretend to have found or
discovered here any of those "right helps of art," this great man of
deep thought mentions: but that is plain, that syllogism, and the
logic now in use, which were as well known in his days, can be none of
those he means. It is sufficient for me, if by a Discourse, perhaps
something out of the way, I am sure, as to me, wholly new and
unborrowed, I shall have given occasion to others to cast about for
new discoveries, and to seek in their own thoughts for those right
helps of art, which will scarce be found, I fear, by those who
servilely confine themselves to the rules and dictates of others.
For beaten tracks lead this sort of cattle, (as an observing Roman
calls them,) whose thoughts reach only to imitation, Non quo eundum
est, sed quo itur. But I can be bold to say, that this age is
adorned with some men of that strength of judgment and largeness of
comprehension, that, if they would employ their thoughts on this
subject, could open new and undiscovered ways to the advancement of
knowledge.
  8. We can reason about particulars; and the immediate object of
all our reasonings is nothing but particular ideas. Having here had
occasion to speak of syllogism in general, and the use of it in
reasoning, and the improvement of our knowledge, it is fit, before I
leave this subject, to take notice of one manifest mistake in the
rules of syllogism: viz. that no syllogistical reasoning can be
right and conclusive, but what has at least one general proposition in
it. As if we could not reason, and have knowledge about particulars:
whereas, in truth, the matter rightly considered, the immediate object
of all our reasoning and knowledge, is nothing but particulars.
Every man's reasoning and knowledge is only about the ideas existing
in his own mind; which are truly, every one of them, particular
existences: and our knowledge and reason about other things is only as
they correspond with those particular ideas. So that the perception of
the agreement or disagreement of our particular ideas is the whole and
utmost of all our knowledge. Universality is but accidental to it, and
consists only in this, that the particular ideas about which it is are
such as more than one particular thing can correspond with and be
represented by. But the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
any two ideas, and consequently our knowledge, is equally clear and
certain, whether either, or both, or neither of those ideas, be
capable of representing more real beings than one, or no. One thing
more I crave leave to offer about syllogism, before I leave it, viz.
May one not upon just ground inquire whether the form syllogism now
has, is that which in reason it ought to have? For the medius terminus
being to join the extremes, i.e. the intermediate ideas, by its
intervention, to show the agreement or disagreement of the two in
question, would not the position of the medius terminus be more
natural, and show the agreement or disagreement of the extremes
clearer and better, if it were placed in the middle between them?
Which might be easily done by transposing the propositions, and making
the medius terminus the predicate of the first, and the subject of the
second. As thus:

      Omnis homo est animal.
      Omne animal est vivens.
      Ergo, omnis homo est vivens.

      Omne corpus est extensum et solidum.
      Nullum extensum et solidum est pura extensio.
      Ergo, corpus non est pura extensio.

  I need not trouble my reader with instances in syllogisms whose
conclusions are particular. The same reason hold for the same form
in them, as well as in the general.
  9. Our reason often fails us. Reason, though it penetrates into
the depths of the sea and earth, elevates our thoughts as high as
the stars, and leads us through the vast spaces and large rooms of
this mighty fabric, yet it comes far short of the real extent of
even corporeal being. And there are many instances wherein it fails
us: as,
  I. In cases when we have no ideas. It perfectly fails us where our
ideas fail. It neither does nor can extend itself further than they
do. And therefore, wherever we have no ideas, our reasoning stops, and
we are at an end of our reckoning: and if at any time we reason
about words which do not stand for any ideas, it is only about those
sounds, and nothing else.
  10. II. Because our ideas are often obscure or imperfect. Our reason
is often puzzled and at a loss because of the obscurity, confusion, or
imperfection of the ideas it is employed about; and there we are
involved in difficulties and contradictions. Thus, not having any
perfect idea of the least extension of matter, nor of infinity, we are
at a loss about the divisibility of matter; but having perfect, clear,
and distinct ideas of number, our reason meets with none of those
inextricable difficulties in numbers, nor finds itself involved in any
contradictions about them. Thus, we having but imperfect ideas of
the operations of out minds, and of the beginning of motion, or
thought how the mind produces either of them in us, and much
imperfecter yet of the operation of God, run into great difficulties
about free created agents, which reason cannot well extricate itself
out of.
  11. III. Because we perceive not intermediate ideas to show
conclusions. Our reason is often at a stand because it perceives not
those ideas, which could serve to show the certain or probable
agreement or disagreement of any other two ideas: and in this some
men's faculties far outgo others. Till algebra, that great
instrument and instance of human sagacity, was discovered, men with
amazement looked on several of the demonstrations of ancient
mathematicians, and could scarce forbear to think the finding
several of those proofs to be something more than human.
  12. IV. Because we often proceed upon wrong principles. The mind, by
proceeding upon false principles, is often engaged in absurdities
and difficulties, brought into straits and contradictions, without
knowing how to free itself: and in that case it is in vain to
implore the help of reason, unless it be to discover the falsehood and
reject the influence of those wrong principles. Reason is so far
from clearing the difficulties which the building upon false
foundations brings a man into, that if he will pursue it, it entangles
him the more, and engages him deeper in perplexities.
  13. V. Because we often employ doubtful terms. As obscure and
imperfect ideas often involve our reason, so, upon the same ground, do
dubious words and uncertain signs, often, in discourses and
arguings, when not warily attended to, puzzle men's reason, and
bring them to a nonplus. But these two latter are our fault, and not
the fault of reason. But yet the consequences of them are nevertheless
obvious; and the perplexities or errors they fill men's minds with are
everywhere observable.
  14. Our highest degree of knowledge is intuitive, without reasoning.
Some of the ideas that are in the mind, are so there, that they can be
by themselves immediately compared one with another: and in these
the mind is able to perceive that they agree or disagree as clearly as
that it has them. Thus the mind perceives, that an arch of a circle is
less than the whole circle, as clearly as it does the idea of a
circle: and this, therefore, as has been said, I call intuitive
knowledge; which is certain, beyond all doubt, and needs no probation,
nor can have any; this being the highest of all human certainty. In
this consists the evidence of all those maxims which nobody has any
doubt about, but every man (does not, as is said, only assent to, but)
knows to be true, as soon as ever they are proposed to his
understanding. In the discovery of and assent to these truths, there
is no use of the discursive faculty, no need of reasoning, but they
are known by a superior and higher degree of evidence. And such, if
I may guess at things unknown, I am apt to think that angels have now,
and the spirits of just men made perfect shall have, in a future
state, of thousands of things which now either wholly escape our
apprehensions, or which our short-sighted reason having got some faint
glimpse of, we, in the dark, grope after.
  15. The next is got by reasoning. But though we have, here and
there, a little of this clear light, some sparks of bright
knowledge, yet the greatest part of our ideas are such, that we cannot
discern their agreement or disagreement by an immediate comparing
them. And in all these we have need of reasoning, and must, by
discourse and inference, make our discoveries. Now of these there
are two sorts, which I shall take the liberty to mention here again:-
  Through reasonings that are demonstrative. First, Those whose
agreement or disagreement, though it cannot be seen by an immediate
putting them together, yet may be examined by the intervention of
other ideas which can be compared with them. In this case, when the
agreement or disagreement of the intermediate idea, on both sides,
with those which we would compare, is plainly discerned: there it
amounts to demonstration whereby knowledge is produced, which,
though it be certain, yet it is not so easy, nor altogether so clear
as intuitive knowledge. Because in that there is barely one simple
intuition, wherein there is no room for any the least mistake or
doubt: the truth is seen all perfectly at once. In demonstration, it
is true, there is intuition too, but not altogether at once; for there
must be a remembrance of the intuition of the agreement of the medium,
or intermediate idea, with that we compared it with before, when we
compare it with the other: and where there be many mediums, there
the danger of the mistake is the greater. For each agreement or
disagreement of the ideas must be observed and seen in each step of
the whole train, and retained in the memory, just as it is; and the
mind must be sure that no part of what is necessary to make up the
demonstration is omitted or overlooked. This makes some demonstrations
long and perplexed, and too hard for those who have not strength of
parts distinctly to perceive, and exactly carry so many particulars
orderly in their heads. And even those who are able to master such
intricate speculations, are fain sometimes to go over them again,
and there is need of more than one review before they can arrive at
certainty. But yet where the mind clearly retains the intuition it had
of the agreement of any idea with another, and that with a third,
and that with a fourth, &c., there the agreement of the first and
the fourth is a demonstration, and produces certain knowledge; which
may be called rational knowledge, as the other is intuitive.
  16. To supply the narrowness of demonstrative and intuitive
knowledge we have nothing but judgment upon probable reasoning.
Secondly, There are other ideas, whose agreement or disagreement can
no otherwise be judged of but by the intervention of others which have
not a certain agreement with the extremes, but an usual or likely one:
and in these it is that the judgment is properly exercised; which is
the acquiescing of the mind, that any ideas do agree, by comparing
them with such probable mediums. This, though it never amounts to
knowledge, no, not to that which is the lowest degree of it; yet
sometimes the intermediate ideas tie the extremes so firmly
together, and the probability is so clear and strong, that assent as
necessarily follows it, as knowledge does demonstration. The great
excellency and use of the judgment is to observe right, and take a
true estimate of the force and weight of each probability; and then
casting them up all right together, choose that side which has the
overbalance.
  17. Intuitive knowledge is the perception of the certain agreement
or disagreement of two ideas immediately compared together.
  Rational knowledge is the perception of the certain agreement or
disagreement of any two ideas, by the intervention of one or more
other ideas.
  Judgment is the thinking or taking two ideas to agree or disagree,
by the intervention of one or more ideas, whose certain agreement or
disagreement with them it does not perceive, but hath observed to be
frequent and usual.
  18. Consequences of words, and consequences of ideas. Though the
deducing one proposition from another, or making inferences in
words, be a great part of reason, and that which it is usually
employed about; yet the principal act of ratiocination is the
finding the agreement or disagreement of two ideas one with another,
by the intervention of a third. As a man, by a yard, finds two
houses to be of the same length, to measure their equality by
juxta-position. Words have their consequences, as the signs of such
ideas: and things agree or disagree, as really they are; but we
observe it only by our ideas.
  19. Four sorts of arguments. Before we quit this subject, it may
be worth our while a little to reflect on four sorts of arguments,
that men, in their reasonings with others, do ordinarily make use of
to prevail on their assent; or at least to awe them as to silence
their opposition.
  I. Argumentum ad verecundiam. The first is, to allege the opinions
of men, whose parts, learning, eminency, power, or some other cause
has gained a name, and settled their reputation in the common esteem
with some kind of authority. When men are established in any kind of
dignity, it is thought a breach of modesty for others to derogate
any way from it, and question the authority of men who are in
possession of it. This is apt to be censured, as carrying with it
too much pride, when a man does not readily yield to the determination
of approved authors, which is wont to be received with respect and
submission by others: and it is looked upon as insolence, for a man to
set up and adhere to his own opinion against the current stream of
antiquity; or to put it in the balance against that of some learned
doctor, or otherwise approved writer. Whoever backs his tenets with
such authorities, thinks he ought thereby to carry the cause, and is
ready to style it impudence in any one who shall stand out against
them. This I think may be called argumentum ad verecundiam.
  20. II. Argumentum ad ignorantiam. Secondly, Another way that men
ordinarily use to drive others and force them to submit to their
judgments, and receive their opinion in debate, is to require the
adversary to admit what they allege as a proof, or to assign a better.
And this I call argumentum ad ignorantiam.
  21. III. Argumentum ad hominem. Thirdly, a third way is to press a
man with consequences drawn from his own principles or concessions.
This is already known under the name of argumentum ad hominem.
  22. IV. Argumentum adjudicium. The fourth alone advances us in
knowledge and judgment. The fourth is the using of proofs drawn from
any of the foundations of knowledge or probability. This I call
argumentum adjudicium. This alone, of all the four, brings true
instruction with it, and advances us in our way to knowledge. For,
1. It argues not another man's opinion to be right, because I, out
of respect, or any other consideration but that of conviction, will
not contradict him. 2. It proves not another man to be in the right
way, nor that I ought to take the same with him, because I know not
a better. 3. Nor does it follow that another man is in the right way
because he has shown me that I am in the wrong. I may be modest, and
therefore not oppose another man's persuasion: I may be ignorant,
and not be able to produce a better: I may be in an error, and another
may show me that I am so. This may dispose me, perhaps, for the
reception of truth, but helps me not to it: that must come from proofs
and arguments, and light arising from the nature of things themselves,
and not from my shamefacedness, ignorance, or error.
  23. Above, contrary, and according to reason. By what has been
before said of reason, we may be able to make some guess at the
distinction of things into those that are according to, above, and
contrary to reason. 1. According to reason are such propositions whose
truth we can discover by examining and tracing those ideas we have
from sensation and reflection; and by natural deduction find to be
true or probable. 2. Above reason are such propositions whose truth or
probability we cannot by reason derive from those principles. 3.
Contrary to reason are such propositions as are inconsistent with or
irreconcilable to our clear and distinct ideas. Thus the existence
of one God is according to reason; the existence of more than one God,
contrary to reason; the resurrection of the dead, above reason.
Above reason also may be taken in a double sense, viz. either as
signifying above probability, or above certainty: and in that large
sense also, contrary to reason, is, I suppose, sometimes taken.
  24. Reason and faith not opposite, for faith must be regulated by
reason. There is another use of the word reason, wherein it is opposed
to faith: which, though it be in itself a very improper way of
speaking, yet common use has so authorized it, that it would be
folly either to oppose or hope to remedy it. Only I think it may not
be amiss to take notice that, however faith be opposed to reason,
faith is nothing but a firm assent of the mind: which, if it be
regulated, as is our duty, cannot be afforded to anything but upon
good reason; and so cannot be opposite to it. He that believes without
having any reason for believing, may be in love with his own
fancies; but neither seeks truth as he ought, nor pays the obedience
due to his Maker, who would have him use those discerning faculties he
has given him, to keep him out of mistake and error. He that does
not this to the best of his power, however he sometimes lights on
truth, is in the right but by chance; and I know not whether the
luckiness of the accident will excuse the irregularity of his
proceeding. This at least is certain, that he must be accountable
for whatever mistakes he runs into: whereas he that makes use of the
light and faculties God has given him, and seeks sincerely to discover
truth by those helps and abilities he has, may have this
satisfaction in doing his duty as a rational creature, that, though he
should miss truth, he will not miss the reward of it. For he governs
his assent right, and places it as he should, who, in any case or
matter whatsoever, believes or disbelieves according as reason directs
him. He that doth otherwise, transgresses against his own light, and
misuses those faculties which were given him to no other end, but to
search and follow the clearer evidence and greater probability. But
since reason and faith are by some men opposed, we will so consider
them in the following chapter.
                            Chapter XVIII
          Of Faith and Reason, and their Distinct Provinces

 1. Necessary to know their boundaries. It has been above shown, 1.
That we are of necessity ignorant, and want knowledge of all sorts,
where we want ideas. 2. That we are ignorant, and want rational
knowledge, where we want proofs. 3. That we want certain knowledge and
certainty, as far as we want clear and determined specific ideas. 4.
That we want probability to direct our assent in matters where we have
neither knowledge of our own nor testimony of other men to bottom
our reason upon.
  From these things thus premised, I think we may come to lay down the
measures and boundaries between faith and reason: the want whereof may
possibly have been the cause, if not of great disorders, yet at
least of great disputes, and perhaps mistakes in the world. For till
it be resolved how far we are to be guided by reason, and how far by
faith, we shall in vain dispute, and endeavour to convince one another
in matters of religion.
  2. Faith and reason, what, as contradistinguished. I find every
sect, as far as reason will help them, make use of it gladly: and
where it fails them, they cry out, It is matter of faith, and above
reason. And I do not see how they can argue with any one, or ever
convince a gainsayer who makes use of the same plea, without setting
down strict boundaries between faith and reason; which ought to be the
first point established in all questions where faith has anything to
do.
  Reason, therefore, here, as contradistinguished to faith, I take
to be the discovery of the certainty or probability of such
propositions or truths which the mind arrives at by deduction made
from such ideas, which it has got by the use of its natural faculties;
viz. by sensation or reflection.
  Faith, on the other side, is the assent to any proposition, not thus
made out by the deductions of reason, but upon the credit of the
proposer, as coming from God, in some extraordinary way of
communication. This way of discovering truths to men, we call
revelation.
  3. No new simple idea can be conveyed by traditional revelation.
First, Then I say, that no man inspired by God can by any revelation
communicate to others any new simple ideas which they had not before
from sensation or reflection. For, whatsoever impressions he himself
may have from the immediate hand of God, this revelation, if it be
of new simple ideas, cannot be conveyed to another, either by words or
any other signs. Because words, by their immediate operation on us,
cause no other ideas but of their natural sounds: and it is by the
custom of using them for signs, that they excite and revive in our
minds latent ideas; but yet only such ideas as were there before.
For words, seen or heard, recall to our thoughts those ideas only
which to us they have been wont to be signs of, but cannot introduce
any perfectly new and formerly unknown simple ideas. The same holds in
all other signs; which cannot signify to us things of which we have
before never had any idea at all.
  Thus whatever things were discovered to St. Paul, when he was rapt
up into the third heaven; whatever new ideas his mind there
received, all the description he can make to others of that place,
is only this, That there are such things, "as eye hath not seen, nor
ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive." And
supposing God should discover to any one, supernaturally, a species of
creatures inhabiting, for example, Jupiter or Saturn, (for that it
is possible there may be such, nobody can deny,) which had six senses;
and imprint on his mind the ideas conveyed to theirs by that sixth
sense: he could no more, by words, produce in the minds of other men
those ideas imprinted by that sixth sense, than one of us could convey
the idea of any colour, by the sound of words, into a man who,
having the other four senses perfect, had always totally wanted the
fifth, of seeing. For our simple ideas, then, which are the
foundation, and sole matter of all our notions and knowledge, we
must depend wholly on our reason; I mean our natural faculties; and
can by no means receive them, or any of them, from traditional
revelation. I say, traditional revelation, in distinction to
original revelation. By the one, I mean that first impression which is
made immediately by God on the mind of any man, to which we cannot set
any bounds; and by the other, those impressions delivered over to
others in words, and the ordinary ways of conveying our conceptions
one to another.
  4. Traditional revelation may make us know propositions knowable
also by reason, but not with the same certainty that reason doth.
Secondly, I say that the same truths may be discovered, and conveyed
down from revelation, which are discoverable to us by reason, and by
those ideas we naturally may have. So God might, by revelation,
discover the truth of any proposition in Euclid; as well as men, by
the natural use of their faculties, come to make the discovery
themselves. In all things of this kind there is little need or use
of revelation, God having furnished us with natural and surer means to
arrive at the knowledge of them. For whatsoever truth we come to the
clear discovery of, from the knowledge and contemplation of our own
ideas, will always be certainer to us than those which are conveyed to
us by traditional revelation. For the knowledge we have that this
revelation came at first from God can never be so sure as the
knowledge we have from the clear and distinct perception of the
agreement or disagreement of our own ideas: v.g. if it were revealed
some ages since, that the three angles of a triangle were equal to two
right ones, I might assent to the truth of that proposition, upon
the credit of that tradition, that it was revealed: but that would
never amount to so great a certainty as the knowledge of it, upon
the comparing and measuring my own ideas of two right angles, and
the three angles of a triangle. The like holds in matter of fact
knowable by our senses; v.g. the history of the deluge is conveyed
to us by writings which had their original from revelation: and yet
nobody, I think, will say he has as certain and clear a knowledge of
the flood as Noah, that saw it; or that he himself would have had, had
he then been alive and seen it. For he has no greater an assurance
than that of his senses, that it is writ in the book supposed writ
by Moses inspired: but he has not so great an assurance that Moses
wrote that book as if he had seen Moses write it. So that the
assurance of its being a revelation is less still than the assurance
of his senses.
  5. Even original revelation cannot be admitted against the clear
evidence of reason. In propositions, then, whose certainty is built
upon the clear perception of the agreement or disagreement of our
ideas, attained either by immediate intuition, as in self-evident
propositions, or by evident deductions of reason in demonstrations
we need not the assistance of revelation, as necessary to gain our
assent, and introduce them into our minds. Because the natural ways of
knowledge could settle them there, or had done it already; which is
the greatest assurance we can possibly have of anything, unless
where God immediately reveals it to us: and there too our assurance
can be no greater than our knowledge is, that it is a revelation
from God. But yet nothing, I think, can, under that title, shake or
overrule plain knowledge; or rationally prevail with any man to
admit it for true, in a direct contradiction to the clear evidence
of his own understanding. For, since no evidence of our faculties,
by which we receive such revelations, can exceed, if equal, the
certainty of our intuitive knowledge, we can never receive for a truth
anything that is directly contrary to our clear and distinct
knowledge; v.g. the ideas of one body and one place do so clearly
agree, and the mind has so evident a perception of their agreement,
that we can never assent to a proposition that affirms the same body
to be in two distant places at once, however it should pretend to
the authority of a divine revelation: since the evidence, first,
that we deceive not ourselves, in ascribing it to God; secondly,
that we understand it right; can never be so great as the evidence
of our own intuitive knowledge, whereby we discern it impossible for
the same body to be in two places at once. And therefore no
proposition can be received for divine revelation, or obtain the
assent due to all such, if it be contradictory to our clear
intuitive knowledge. Because this would be to subvert the principles
and foundations of all knowledge, evidence, and assent whatsoever: and
there would be left no difference between truth and falsehood, no
measures of credible and incredible in the world, if doubtful
propositions shall take place before self-evident; and what we
certainly know give way to what we may possibly be mistaken in. In
propositions therefore contrary to the clear perception of the
agreement or disagreement of any of our ideas, it will be in vain to
urge them as matters of faith. They cannot move our assent under
that or any other title whatsoever. For faith can never convince us of
anything that contradicts our knowledge. Because, though faith be
founded on the testimony of God (who cannot lie) revealing any
proposition to us: yet we cannot have an assurance of the truth of its
being a divine revelation greater than our own knowledge. Since the
whole strength of the certainty depends upon our knowledge that God
revealed it; which, in this case, where the proposition supposed
revealed contradicts our knowledge or reason, will always have this
objection hanging to it, viz. that we cannot tell how to conceive that
to come from God, the bountiful Author of our being, which, if
received for true, must overturn all the principles and foundations of
knowledge he has given us; render all our faculties useless; wholly
destroy the most excellent part of his workmanship, our
understandings; and put a man in a condition wherein he will have less
light, less conduct than the beast that perisheth. For if the mind
of man can never have a clearer (and perhaps not so clear) evidence of
anything to be a divine revelation, as it has of the principles of its
own reason, it can never have a ground to quit the clear evidence of
its reason, to give a place to a proposition, whose revelation has not
a greater evidence than those principles have.
  6. Traditional revelation much less. Thus far a man has use of
reason, and ought to hearken to it, even in immediate and original
revelation, where it is supposed to be made to himself. But to all
those who pretend not to immediate revelation, but are required to pay
obedience, and to receive the truths revealed to others, which, by the
tradition of writings, or word of mouth, are conveyed down to them,
reason has a great deal more to do, and is that only which can
induce us to receive them. For matter of faith being only divine
revelation, and nothing else, faith, as we use the word, (called
commonly divine faith), has to do with no propositions, but those
which are supposed to be divinely revealed. So that I do not see how
those who make revelation alone the sole object of faith can say
that it is a matter of faith, and not of reason, to believe that
such or such a proposition, to be found in such or such a book, is
of divine inspiration; unless it be revealed that that proposition, or
all in that book, was communicated by divine inspiration. Without such
a revelation, the believing, or not believing, that proposition, or
book, to be of divine authority, can never be matter of faith, but
matter of reason; and such as I must come to an assent to only by
the use of my reason, which can never require or enable me to
believe that which is contrary to itself: it being impossible for
reason ever to procure any assent to that which to itself appears
unreasonable.
  In all things, therefore, where we have clear evidence from our
ideas, and those principles of knowledge I have above mentioned,
reason is the proper judge; and revelation, though it may, in
consenting with it, confirm its dictates, yet cannot in such cases
invalidate its decrees: nor can we be obliged, where we have the clear
and evident sentience of reason, to quit it for the contrary
opinion, under a pretence that it is matter of faith: which can have
no authority against the plain and clear dictates of reason.
  7. Things above reason are, when revealed, the proper matter of
faith. But, Thirdly, There being many things wherein we have very
imperfect notions, or none at all; and other things, of whose past,
present, or future existence, by the natural use of our faculties,
we can have no knowledge at all; these, as being beyond the
discovery of our natural faculties, and above reason, are, when
revealed, the proper matter of faith. Thus, that part of the angels
rebelled against God, and thereby lost their first happy state: and
that the dead shall rise, and live again: these and the like, being
beyond the discovery of reason, are purely matters of faith, with
which reason has directly nothing to do.
  8. Or not contrary to reason, if revealed, are matter of faith;
and must carry it against probable conjectures of reason. But since
God, in giving us the light of reason, has not thereby tied up his own
hands from affording us, when he thinks fit, the light of revelation
in any of those matters wherein our natural faculties are able to give
a probable determination; revelation, where God has been pleased to
give it, must carry it against the probable conjectures of reason.
Because the mind not being certain of the truth of that it does not
evidently know, but only yielding to the probability that appears in
it, is bound to give up its assent to such a testimony which, it is
satisfied, comes from one who cannot err, and will not deceive. But
yet, it still belongs to reason to judge of the truth of its being a
revelation, and of the signification of the words wherein it is
delivered. Indeed, if anything shall be thought revelation which is
contrary to the plain principles of reason, and the evident
knowledge the mind has of its own clear and distinct ideas; there
reason must be hearkened to, as to a matter within its province. Since
a man can never have so certain a knowledge that a proposition which
contradicts the clear principles and evidence of his own knowledge was
divinely revealed, or that he understands the words rightly wherein it
is delivered, as he has that the contrary is true, and so is bound
to consider and judge of it as a matter of reason, and not swallow it,
without examination, as a matter of faith.
  9. Revelation in matters where reason cannot judge, or but probably,
ought to be hearkened to. First, Whatever proposition is revealed,
of whose truth our mind, by its natural faculties and notions,
cannot judge, that is purely matter of faith, and above reason.
  Secondly, All propositions whereof the mind, by the use of its
natural faculties, can come to determine and judge, from naturally
acquired ideas, are matter of reason; with this difference still,
that, in those concerning which it has but an uncertain evidence,
and so is persuaded of their truth only upon probable grounds, which
still admit a possibility of the contrary to be true, without doing
violence to the certain evidence of its own knowledge, and overturning
the principles of all reason; in such probable propositions, I say, an
evident revelation ought to determine our assent, even against
probability. For where the principles of reason have not evidenced a
proposition to be certainly true or false, there clear revelation,
as another principle of truth and ground of assent, may determine; and
so it may be matter of faith, and be also above reason. Because
reason, in that particular matter, being able to reach no higher
than probability, faith gave the determination where reason came
short; and revelation discovered on which side the truth lay.
  10. In matters where reason can afford certain knowledge, that is to
be hearkened to. Thus far the dominion of faith reaches, and that
without any violence or hindrance to reason; which is not injured or
disturbed, but assisted and improved by new discoveries of truth,
coming from the eternal fountain of all knowledge. Whatever God hath
revealed is certainly true: no doubt can be made of it. This is the
proper object of faith: but whether it be a divine revelation or no,
reason must judge; which can never permit the mind to reject a greater
evidence to embrace what is less evident, nor allow it to entertain
probability in opposition to knowledge and certainty. There can be
no evidence that any traditional revelation is of divine original,
in the words we receive it, and in the sense we understand it, so
clear and so certain as that of the principles of reason: and
therefore Nothing that is contrary to, and inconsistent with, the
clear and self-evident dictates of reason, has a right to he urged
or assented to as a matter of faith, wherein reason hath nothing to
do. Whatsoever is divine revelation, ought to overrule all our
opinions, prejudices, and interest, and hath a right to be received
with full assent. Such a submission as this, of our reason to faith,
takes not away the landmarks of knowledge: this shakes not the
foundations of reason, but leaves us that use of our faculties for
which they were given us.
  11. If the boundaries be not set between faith and reason, no
enthusiasm or extravagancy in religion can be contradicted. If the
provinces of faith and reason are not kept distinct by these
boundaries, there will, in matters of religion, be no room for
reason at all; and those extravagant opinions and ceremonies that
are to be found in the several religions of the world will not deserve
to be blamed. For, to this crying up of faith in opposition to reason,
we may, I think, in good measure ascribe those absurdities that fill
almost all the religions which possess and divide mankind. For men
having been principled with an opinion that they must not consult
reason in the things of religion, however apparently contradictory
to common sense and the very principles of all their knowledge, have
let loose their fancies and natural superstition; and have been by
them led into so strange opinions, and extravagant practices in
religion, that a considerate man cannot but stand amazed at their
follies, and judge them so far from being acceptable to the great
and wise God, that he cannot avoid thinking them ridiculous and
offensive to a sober good man. So that, in effect, religion, which
should most distinguish us from beasts, and ought most peculiarly to
elevate us, as rational creatures, above brutes, is that wherein men
often appear most irrational, and more senseless than beasts
themselves. Credo, quia impossibile est: I believe, because it is
impossible, might, in a good man, pass for a sally of zeal; but
would prove a very ill rule for men to choose their opinions or
religion by.
                             Chapter XIX
                            Of Enthusiasm

  1. Love of truth necessary. He that would seriously set upon the
search of truth ought in the first place to prepare his mind with a
love of it. For he that loves it not will not take much pains to get
it; nor be much concerned when he misses it. There is nobody in the
commonwealth of learning who does not profess himself a lover of
truth: and there is not a rational creature that would not take it
amiss to be thought otherwise of. And yet, for all this, one may truly
say, that there are very few lovers of truth, for truth's sake, even
amongst those who persuade themselves that they are so. How a man
may know whether he be so in earnest, is worth inquiry: and I think
there is one unerring mark of it, viz. The not entertaining any
proposition with greater assurance than the proofs it is built upon
will warrant. Whoever goes beyond this measure of assent, it is plain,
receives not the truth in the love of it; loves not truth for
truth's sake, but for some other bye-end. For the evidence that any
proposition is true (except such as are self-evident) lying only in
the proofs a man has of it, whatsoever degrees of assent he affords it
beyond the degrees of that evidence, it is plain that all the
surplusage of assurance is owing to some other affection, and not to
the love of truth: it being as impossible that the love of truth
should carry my assent above the evidence there is to me that it is
true, as that the love of truth should make me assent to any
proposition for the sake of that evidence which it has not, that it is
true: which is in effect to love it as a truth, because it is possible
or probable that it may not be true. In any truth that gets not
possession of our minds by the irresistible light of self-evidence, or
by the force of demonstration, the arguments that gain it assent are
the vouchers and gage of its probability to us; and we can receive
it for no other than such as they deliver it to our understandings.
Whatsoever credit or authority we give to any proposition more than it
receives from the principles and proofs it supports itself upon, is
owing to our inclinations that way, and is so far a derogation from
the love of truth as such: which, as it can receive no evidence from
our passions or interests, so it should receive no tincture from them.
  2. A forwardness to dictate another's beliefs, from whence. The
assuming an authority of dictating to others, and a forwardness to
prescribe to their opinions, is a constant concomitant of this bias
and corruption of our judgments. For how almost can it be otherwise,
but that he should be ready to impose on another's belief, who has
already imposed on his own? Who can reasonably expect arguments and
conviction from him in dealing with others, whose understanding is not
accustomed to them in his dealing with himself? Who does violence to
his own faculties, tyrannizes over his own mind, and usurps the
prerogative that belongs to truth alone, which is to command assent by
only its own authority, i.e. by and in proportion to that evidence
which it carries with it.
  3. Force of enthusiasm, in which reason is taken away. Upon this
occasion I shall take the liberty to consider a third ground of
assent, which with some men has the same authority, and is as
confidently relied on as either faith or reason; I mean enthusiasm:
which, laying by reason, would set up revelation without it. Whereby
in effect it takes away both reason and revelation, and substitutes in
the room of them the ungrounded fancies of a man's own brain, and
assumes them for a foundation both of opinion and conduct.
  4. Reason and revelation. Reason is natural revelation, whereby
the eternal Father of light and fountain of all knowledge,
communicates to mankind that portion of truth which he has laid within
the reach of their natural faculties: revelation is natural reason
enlarged by a new set of discoveries communicated by God
immediately; which reason vouches the truth of, by the testimony and
proofs it gives that they come from God. So that he that takes away
reason to make way for revelation, puts out the light of both, and
does much what the same as if he would persuade a man to put out his
eyes, the better to receive the remote light of an invisible star by a
telescope.
  5. Rise of enthusiasm. Immediate revelation being a much easier
way for men to establish their opinions and regulate their conduct
than the tedious and not always successful labour of strict reasoning,
it is no wonder that some have been very apt to pretend to revelation,
and to persuade themselves that they are under the peculiar guidance
of heaven in their actions and opinions, especially in those of them
which they cannot account for by the ordinary methods of knowledge and
principles of reason. Hence we see that, in all ages, men in whom
melancholy has mixed with devotion, or whose conceit of themselves has
raised them into an opinion of a greater familiarity with God, and a
nearer admittance to his favour than is afforded to others, have often
flattered themselves with a persuasion of an immediate intercourse
with the Deity, and frequent communications from the Divine Spirit.
God, I own, cannot be denied to be able to enlighten the understanding
by a ray darted into the mind immediately from the fountain of
light: this they understand he has promised to do, and who then has so
good a title to expect it as those who are his peculiar people, chosen
by him, and depending on him?
  6. Enthusiastic impulse. Their minds being thus prepared, whatever
groundless opinion comes to settle itself strongly upon their
fancies is an illumination from the Spirit of God, and presently of
divine authority: and whatsoever odd action they find in themselves
a strong inclination to do, that impulse is concluded to be a call
or direction from heaven, and must be obeyed: it is a commission
from above, and they cannot err in executing it.
  7. What is meant by enthusiasm. This I take to be properly
enthusiasm, which, though founded neither on reason nor divine
revelation, but rising from the conceits of a warmed or overweening
brain, works yet, where it once gets footing, more powerfully on the
persuasions and actions of men than either of those two, or both
together: men being most forwardly obedient to the impulses they
receive from themselves; and the whole man is sure to act more
vigorously where the whole man is carried by a natural motion. For
strong conceit, like a new principle, carries all easily with it, when
got above common sense, and freed from all restraint of reason and
check of reflection, it is heightened into a divine authority, in
concurrence with our own temper and inclination.
  8. Enthusiasm accepts its supposed illumination without search and
proof. Though the odd opinions and extravagant actions enthusiasm
has run men into were enough to warn them against this wrong
principle, so apt to misguide them both in their belief and conduct:
yet the love of something extraordinary, the ease and glory it is to
be inspired, and be above the common and natural ways of knowledge, so
flatters many men's laziness, ignorance, and vanity, that, when once
they are got into this way of immediate revelation, of illumination
without search, and of certainty without proof and without
examination, it is a hard matter to get them out of it. Reason is lost
upon them, they are above it: they see the light infused into their
understandings, and cannot be mistaken; it is clear and visible there,
like the light of bright sunshine; shows itself, and needs no other
proof but its own evidence: they feel the hand of God moving them
within, and the impulses of the Spirit, and cannot be mistaken in what
they feel. Thus they support themselves, and are sure reasoning hath
nothing to do with what they see and feel in themselves: what they
have a sensible experience of admits no doubt, needs no probation.
Would he not be ridiculous, who should require to have it proved to
him that the light shines, and that he sees it? It is its own proof,
and can have no other. When the Spirit brings light into our minds, it
dispels darkness. We see it as we do that of the sun at noon, and need
not the twilight of reason to show it us. This light from heaven is
strong, clear, and pure; carries its own demonstration with it: and we
may as naturally take a glow-worm to assist us to discover the sun, as
to examine the celestial ray by our dim candle, reason.
  9. Enthusiasm how to be discovered. This is the way of talking of
these men: they are sure, because they are sure: and their persuasions
are right, because they are strong in them. For, when what they say is
stripped of the metaphor of seeing and feeling, this is all it amounts
to: and yet these similes so impose on them, that they serve them
for certainty in themselves, and demonstration to others.
  10. The supposed internal light examined. But to examine a little
soberly this internal light, and this feeling on which they build so
much. These men have, they say, clear light, and they see; they have
awakened sense, and they feel: this cannot, they are sure, be disputed
them. For when a man says he sees or feels, nobody can deny him that
he does so. But here let me ask: This seeing, is it the perception
of the truth of the proposition, or of this, that it is a revelation
from God? This feeling, is it a perception of an inclination or
fancy to do something, or of the Spirit of God moving that
inclination? These are two very different perceptions, and must be
carefully distinguished, if we would not impose upon ourselves. I
may perceive the truth of a proposition, and yet not perceive that
it is an immediate revelation from God. I may perceive the truth of
a proposition in Euclid, without its being, or my perceiving it to be,
a revelation: nay, I may perceive I came not by this knowledge in a
natural way, and so may conclude it revealed, without perceiving
that it is a revelation of God. Because there be spirits which,
without being divinely commissioned, may excite those ideas in me, and
lay them in such order before my mind, that I may perceive their
connexion. So that the knowledge of any proposition coming into my
mind, I know not how, is not a perception that it is from God. Much
less is a strong persuasion that it is true, a perception that it is
from God, or so much as true. But however it be called light and
seeing, I suppose it is at most but belief and assurance: and the
proposition taken for a revelation is not such as they know to be
true, but take to be true. For where a proposition is known to be
true, revelation is needless: and it is hard to conceive how there can
be a revelation to any one of what he knows already. If therefore it
be a proposition which they are persuaded, but do not know, to be
true, whatever they may call it, it is not seeing, but believing.
For these are two ways whereby truth comes into the mind, wholly
distinct, so that one is not the other. What I see, I know to be so,
by the evidence of the thing itself: what I believe, I take to be so
upon the testimony of another. But this testimony I must know to be
given, or else what ground have I of believing? I must see that it
is God that reveals this to me, or else I see nothing. The question
then here is: How do I know that God is the revealer of this to me;
that this impression is made upon my mind by his Holy Spirit; and that
therefore I ought to obey it? If I know not this, how great soever the
assurance is that I am possessed with, it is groundless; whatever
light I pretend to, it is but enthusiasm. For, whether the proposition
supposed to be revealed be in itself evidently true, or visibly
probable, or, by the natural ways of knowledge, uncertain, the
proposition that must be well grounded and manifested to be true, is
this, That God is the revealer of it, and that what I take to be a
revelation is certainly put into my mind by Him, and is not an
illusion dropped in by some other spirit, or raised by my own fancy.
For, if I mistake not, these men receive it for true, because they
presume God revealed it. Does it not, then, stand them upon to examine
upon what grounds they presume it to be a revelation from God? or else
all their confidence is mere presumption: and this light they are so
dazzled with is nothing but an ignis fatuus, that leads them
constantly round in this circle; It is a revelation, because they
firmly believe it; and they believe it, because it is a revelation.
  11. Enthusiasm fails of evidence, that the proposition is from
God. In all that is of divine revelation, there is need of no other
proof but that it is an inspiration from God: for he can neither
deceive nor be deceived. But how shall it be known that any
proposition in our minds is a truth infused by God; a truth that is
revealed to us by him, which he declares to us, and therefore we ought
to believe? Here it is that enthusiasm fails of the evidence it
pretends to. For men thus possessed, boast of a light whereby they say
they are enlightened, and brought into the knowledge of this or that
truth. But if they know it to be a truth, they must know it to be
so, either by its own self-evidence to natural reason, or by the
rational proofs that make it out to be so. If they see and know it
to be a truth, either of these two ways, they in vain suppose it to be
a revelation. For they know it to be true the same way that any
other man naturally may know that it is so, without the help of
revelation. For thus, all the truths, of what kind soever, that men
uninspired are enlightened with, came into their minds, and are
established there. If they say they know it to be true, because it
is a revelation from God, the reason is good: but then it will be
demanded how they know it to be a revelation from God. If they say, by
the light it brings with it, which shines bright in their minds, and
they cannot resist: I beseech them to consider whether this be any
more than what we have taken notice of already, viz. that it is a
revelation, because they strongly believe it to be true. For all the
light they speak of is but a strong, though ungrounded persuasion of
their own minds, that it is a truth. For rational grounds from
proofs that it is a truth, they must acknowledge to have none; for
then it is not received as a revelation, but upon the ordinary grounds
that other truths are received: and if they believe it to be true
because it is a revelation, and have no other reason for its being a
revelation, but because they are fully persuaded, without any other
reason, that it is true, then they believe it to be a revelation
only because they strongly believe it to be a revelation; which is a
very unsafe ground to proceed on, either in our tenets or actions. And
what readier way can there be to run ourselves into the most
extravagant errors and miscarriages, than thus to set up fancy for our
supreme and sole guide, and to believe any proposition to be true, any
action to be right, only because we believe it to be so? The
strength of our persuasions is no evidence at all of their own
rectitude: crooked things may be as stiff and inflexible as
straight: and men may be as positive and peremptory in error as in
truth. How come else the untractable zealots in different and opposite
parties? For if the light, which every one thinks he has in his
mind, which in this case is nothing but the strength of his own
persuasion, be an evidence that it is from God, contrary opinions have
the same title to be inspirations; and God will be not only the Father
of lights, but of opposite and contradictory lights, leading men
contrary ways; and contradictory propositions will be divine truths,
if an ungrounded strength of assurance be an evidence that any
proposition is a Divine Revelation.
  12. Firmness of persuasion no Proof that any proposition is from
God. This cannot be otherwise, whilst firmness of persuasion is made
the cause of believing, and confidence of being in the right is made
an argument of truth. St. Paul himself believed he did well, and
that he had a call to it, when he persecuted the Christians, whom he
confidently thought in the wrong: but yet it was he, and not they, who
were mistaken. Good men are men still liable to mistakes, and are
sometimes warmly engaged in errors, which they take for divine truths,
shining in their minds with the clearest light.
  13. Light in the mind, what. Light, true light, in the mind is, or
can be, nothing else but the evidence of the truth of any proposition;
and if it be not a self-evident proposition, all the light it has,
or can have, is from the clearness and validity of those proofs upon
which it is received. To talk of any other light in the
understanding is to put ourselves in the dark, or in the power of
the Prince of Darkness, and, by our own consent, to give ourselves
up to delusion to believe a lie. For, if strength of persuasion be the
light which must guide us; I ask how shall any one distinguish between
the delusions of Satan, and the inspirations of the Holy Ghost? He can
transform himself into an angel of light. And they who are led by this
Son of the Morning are as fully satisfied of the illumination, i.e.
are as strongly persuaded that they are enlightened by the Spirit of
God as any one who is so: they acquiesce and rejoice in it, are
actuated by it: and nobody can be more sure, nor more in the right (if
their own belief may be judge) than they.
  14. Revelation must be judged of by reason. He, therefore, that will
not give himself up to all the extravagances of delusion and error
must bring this guide of his light within to the trial. God when he
makes the prophet does not unmake the man. He leaves all his faculties
in the natural state, to enable him to judge of his inspirations,
whether they be of divine original or no. When he illuminates the mind
with supernatural light, he does not extinguish that which is natural.
If he would have us assent to the truth of any proposition, he
either evidences that truth by the usual methods of natural reason, or
else makes it known to be a truth which he would have us assent to
by his authority, and convinces us that it is from him, by some
marks which reason cannot be mistaken in. Reason must be our last
judge and guide in everything. I do not mean that we must consult
reason, and examine whether a proposition revealed from God can be
made out by natural principles, and if it cannot, that then we may
reject it: but consult it we must, and by it examine whether it be a
revelation from God or no: and if reason finds it to be revealed
from God, reason then declares for it as much as for any other
truth, and makes it one of her dictates. Every conceit that thoroughly
warms our fancies must pass for an inspiration, if there be nothing
but the strength of our persuasions, whereby to judge of our
persuasions: if reason must not examine their truth by something
extrinsical to the persuasions themselves, inspirations and delusions,
truth and falsehood, will have the same measure, and will not be
possible to be distinguished.
  15. Belief no proof of revelation. If this internal light, or any
proposition which under that title we take for inspired, be
conformable to the principles of reason, or to the word of God,
which is attested revelation, reason warrants it, and we may safely
receive it for true, and be guided by it in our belief and actions: if
it receive no testimony nor evidence from either of these rules, we
cannot take it for a revelation, or so much as for true, till we
have some other mark that it is a revelation, besides our believing
that it is so. Thus we see the holy men of old, who had revelations
from God, had something else besides that internal light of
assurance in their own minds, to testify to them that it was from God.
They were not left to their own persuasions alone, that those
persuasions were from God, but had outward signs to convince them of
the Author of those revelations. And when they were to convince
others, they had a power given them to justify the truth of their
commission from heaven, and by visible signs to assert the divine
authority of a message they were sent with. Moses saw the bush burn
without being consumed, and heard a voice out of it: this was
something besides finding an impulse upon his mind to go to Pharaoh,
that he might bring his brethren out of Egypt: and yet he thought
not this enough to authorize him to go with that message, till God, by
another miracle of his rod turned into a serpent, had assured him of a
power to testify his mission, by the same miracle repeated before them
whom he was sent to. Gideon was sent by an angel to deliver Israel
from the Midianites, and yet he desired a sign to convince him that
this commission was from God. These, and several the like instances to
be found among the prophets of old, are enough to show that they
thought not an inward seeing or persuasion of their own minds, without
any other proof, a sufficient evidence that it was from God; though
the Scripture does not everywhere mention their demanding or having
such proofs.
  16. Criteria of a divine revelation. In what I have said I am far
from denying, that God can, or doth sometimes enlighten men's minds in
the apprehending of certain truths or excite them to good actions,
by the immediate influence and assistance of the Holy Spirit,
without any extraordinary signs accompanying it. But in such cases too
we have reason and Scripture; unerring rules to know whether it be
from God or no. Where the truth embraced is consonant to the
revelation in the written word of God, or the action conformable to
the dictates of right reason or holy writ, we may be assured that we
run no risk in entertaining it as such: because, though perhaps it
be not an immediate revelation from God, extraordinarily operating
on our minds, yet we are sure it is warranted by that revelation which
he has given us of truth. But it is not the strength of our private
persuasion within ourselves, that can warrant it to be a light or
motion from heaven: nothing can do that but the written Word of God
without us, or that standard of reason which is common to us with
all men. Where reason or Scripture is express for any opinion or
action, we may receive it as of divine authority: but it is not the
strength of our own persuasions which can by itself give it that
stamp. The bent of our own minds may favour it as much as we please:
that may show it to be a fondling of our own, but will by no means
prove it to be an offspring of heaven, and of divine original.
                              Chapter XX
                      Of Wrong Assent, or Error

  1. Causes of error, or how men come to give assent contrary to
probability. Knowledge being to be had only of visible and certain
truth, error is not a fault of our knowledge, but a mistake of our
judgment giving assent to that which is not true.
  But if assent be grounded on likelihood, if the proper object and
motive of our assent be probability, and that probability consists
in what is laid down in the foregoing chapters, it will be demanded
how men come to give their assents contrary to probability. For
there is nothing more common than contrariety of opinions; nothing
more obvious than that one man wholly disbelieves what another only
doubts of, and a third stedfastly believes and firmly adheres to.
  The reasons whereof, though they may be very various, yet, I suppose
may all be reduced to these four:

                 I. Want of proofs.
                II. Want of ability to use them.
               III. Want of will to see them.
                IV. Wrong measures of probability.

  2. First cause of error, want of proofs. First, By want of proofs, I
do not mean only the want of those proofs which are nowhere extant,
and so are nowhere to be had; but the want even of those proofs
which are in being, or might be procured. And thus men want proofs,
who have not the convenience or opportunity to make experiments and
observations themselves, tending to the proof of any proposition;
nor likewise the convenience to inquire into and collect the
testimonies of others: and in this state are the greatest part of
mankind, who are given up to labour, and enslaved to the necessity
of their mean condition, whose lives are worn out only in the
provisions for living. These men's opportunities of knowledge and
inquiry are commonly as narrow as their fortunes; and their
understandings are but little instructed, when all their whole time
and pains are laid out to still the croaking of their own bellies,
or the cries of their children. It is not to be expected that a man
who drudges on all his life in a laborious trade, should be more
knowing in the variety of things done in the world than a packhorse,
who is driven constantly forwards and backwards in a narrow lane and
dirty road, only to market, should be skilled in the geography of
the country. Nor is it at all more possible that he who wants leisure,
books, and languages, and the opportunity of conversing with variety
of men, should be in a condition to collect those testimonies and
observations which are in being, and are necessary to make out many,
nay most, of the propositions that, in the societies of men, are
judged of the greatest moment; or to find out grounds of assurance
so great as the belief of the points he would build on them is thought
necessary. So that a great part of mankind are, by the natural and
unalterable state of things in this world, and the constitution of
human affairs, unavoidably given over to invincible ignorance of those
proofs on which others build, and which are necessary to establish
those opinions: the greatest part of men, having much to do to get the
means of living, are not in a condition to look after those of learned
and laborious inquiries.
  3. Objection. "What shall become of those who want proofs?"
Answered. What shall we say, then? Are the greatest part of mankind,
by the necessity of their condition, subjected to unavoidable
ignorance in those things which are of greatest importance to them?
(for of those it is obvious to inquire). Have the bulk of mankind no
other guide but accident and blind chance to conduct them to their
happiness or misery? Are the current opinions, and licensed guides
of every country sufficient evidence and security to every man to
venture his great concernments on; nay, his everlasting happiness or
misery? Or can those be the certain and infallible oracles and
standards of truth, which teach one thing in Christendom and another
in Turkey? Or shall a poor countryman be eternally happy, for having
the chance to be born in Italy; or a day-labourer be unavoidably lost,
because he had the ill-luck to be born in England? How ready some
men may be to say some of these things, I will not here examine: but
this I am sure, that men must allow one or other of these to be
true, (let them choose which they please,) or else grant that God
has furnished men with faculties sufficient to direct them in the
way they should take, if they will but seriously employ them that way,
when their ordinary vocations allow them the leisure. No man is so
wholly taken up with the attendance on the means of living, as to have
no spare time at all to think of his soul, and inform himself in
matters of religion. Were men as intent upon this as they are on
things of lower concernment, there are none so enslaved to the
necessities of life who might not find many vacancies that might be
husbanded to this advantage of their knowledge.
  4. People hindered from inquiry. Besides those whose improvements
and informations are straitened by the narrowness of their fortunes,
there are others whose largeness of fortune would plentifully enough
supply books, and other requisites for clearing of doubts, and
discovering of truth: but they are cooped in close, by the laws of
their countries, and the strict guards of those whose interest it is
to keep them ignorant, lest, knowing more, they should believe the
less in them. These are as far, nay further, from the liberty and
opportunities of a fair inquiry, than these poor and wretched
labourers we before spoke of: and however they may seem high and
great, are confined to narrowness of thought, and enslaved in that
which should be the freest part of man, their understandings. This
is generally the case of all those who live in places where care is
taken to propagate truth without knowledge; where men are forced, at a
venture, to be of the religion of the country; and must therefore
swallow down opinions, as silly people do empiric's pills, without
knowing what they are made of, or how they will work, and having
nothing to do but believe that they will do the cure: but in this
are much more miserable than they, in that they are not at liberty
to refuse swallowing what perhaps they had rather let alone; or to
choose the physician, to whose conduct they would trust themselves.
  5. Second cause of error, want of skill to use proofs. Secondly,
Those who want skill to use those evidences they have of
probabilities; who cannot carry a train of consequences in their
heads; nor weigh exactly the preponderancy of contrary proofs and
testimonies, making every circumstance its due allowance; may be
easily misled to assent to positions that are not probable. There
are some men of one, some but of two syllogisms, and no more; and
others that can but advance one step further. These cannot always
discern that side on which the strongest proofs lie; cannot constantly
follow that which in itself is the more probable opinion. Now that
there is such a difference between men, in respect of their
understandings, I think nobody, who has had any conversation with
his neighbours, will question: though he never was at Westminster-Hall
or the Exchange on the one hand, nor at Alms-houses or Bedlam on the
other. Which great difference in men's intellectuals, whether it rises
from any defect in the organs of the body particularly adapted to
thinking; or in the dullness or untractableness of those faculties for
want of use; or, as some think, in the natural differences of men's
souls themselves; or some, or all of these together; it matters not
here to examine: only this is evident, that there is a difference of
degrees in men's understandings, apprehensions, and reasonings, to
so great a latitude, that one may, without doing injury to mankind,
affirm that there is a greater distance between some men and others in
this respect than between some men and some beasts. But how this comes
about is a speculation, though of great consequence, yet not necessary
to our present purpose.
  6. Third cause of error, want of will to use them. Thirdly, There
are another sort of people that want proofs, not because they are
out of their reach, but because they will not use them: who though
they have riches and leisure enough and want neither parts nor other
helps, are yet never the better for them. Their hot pursuit of
pleasure, or constant drudgery in business, engages some men's
thoughts elsewhere: laziness and oscitancy in general, or a particular
aversion for books, study, and meditation, keep others from any
serious thoughts at all; and some out of fear that an impartial
inquiry would not favour those opinions which best suit their
prejudices, lives, and designs, content themselves, without
examination, to take upon trust what they find convenient and in
fashion. Thus, most men, even of those that might do otherwise, pass
their lives without an acquaintance with, much less a rational
assent to, probabilities they are concerned to know, though they lie
so much within their view that, to be convinced of them, they need but
turn their eyes that way. We know some men will not read a letter
which is supposed to bring ill news; and many men forbear to cast up
their accounts, or so much as think upon their estates, who have
reason to fear their affairs are in no very good posture. How men,
whose plentiful fortunes allow them leisure to improve their
understandings, can satisfy themselves with a lazy ignorance, I cannot
tell: but methinks they have a low opinion of their souls, who lay out
all their incomes in provisions for the body, and employ none of it to
procure the means and helps of knowledge; who take great care to
appear always in a neat and splendid outside, and would think
themselves miserable in coarse clothes, or a patched coat, and yet
contentedly suffer their minds to appear abroad in a piebald livery of
coarse patches and borrowed shreds, such as it has pleased chance,
or their country tailor (I mean the common opinion of those they
have conversed with) to clothe them in. I will not here mention how
unreasonable this is for men that ever think of a future state, and
their concernment in it, which no rational man can avoid to do
sometimes: nor shall I take notice what a shame and confusion it is to
the greatest contemners of knowledge, to be found ignorant in things
they are concerned to know. But this at least is worth the
consideration of those who call themselves gentlemen, That, however
they may think credit, respect, power, and authority the
concomitants of their birth and fortune, yet they will find all
these still carried away from them by men of lower condition, who
surpass them in knowledge. They who are blind will always be led by
those that see, or else fall into the ditch: and he is certainly the
most subjected, the most enslaved, who is so in his understanding.
  In the foregoing instances some of the causes have been shown of
wrong assent, and how it comes to pass that probable doctrines are not
always received with an assent proportionable to the reasons which are
to be had for their probability: but hitherto we have considered
only such probabilities whose proofs do exist, but do not appear to
him who embraces the error.
  7. Fourth cause of error, wrong measures of Probability. Fourthly,
There remains yet the last sort, who, even where the real
probabilities appear, and are plainly laid before them, do not admit
of the conviction, nor yield unto manifest reasons, but do either
epechein, suspend their assent, or give it to the less probable
opinion. And to this danger are those exposed who have taken up
wrong measures of probability, which are:
    I. Propositions that are not in themselves certain and evident,
but doubtful and false, taken up for principles.
   II. Received hypotheses.
  III. Predominant passions or inclinations.
   IV. Authority.
  8. I. Doubtful propositions taken for principles. The first and
firmest ground of probability is the conformity anything has to our
own knowledge; especially that part of our knowledge which we have
embraced, and continue to look on as principles. These have so great
an influence upon our opinions, that it is usually by them we judge of
truth, and measure probability; to that degree, that what is
inconsistent with our principles, is so far from passing for
probable with us, that it will not be allowed possible. The
reverence borne to these principles is so great, and their authority
so paramount to all other, that the testimony, not only of other
men, but the evidence of our own senses are often rejected, when
they offer to vouch anything contrary to these established rules.
How much the doctrine of innate principles, and that principles are
not to be proved or questioned, has contributed to this, I will not
here examine. This I readily grant, that one truth cannot contradict
another: but withal I take leave also to say, that every one ought
very carefully to beware what he admits for a principle, to examine it
strictly, and see whether he certainly knows it to be true of
itself, by its own evidence, or whether he does only with assurance
believe it to be so upon the authority of others. For he hath a strong
bias put into his understanding, which will unavoidably misguide his
assent, who hath imbibed wrong principles, and has blindly given
himself up to the authority of any opinion in itself not evidently
true.
  9. Instilled in childhood. There is nothing more ordinary than
children's receiving into their minds propositions (especially about
matters of religion) from their parents, nurses, or those about
them: which being insinuated into their unwary as well as unbiassed
understandings, and fastened by degrees, are at last (equally
whether true or false) riveted there by long custom and education,
beyond all possibility of being pulled out again. For men, when they
are grown up, reflecting upon their opinions, and finding those of
this sort to be as ancient in their minds as their very memories,
not having observed their early insinuation, nor by what means they
got them, they are apt to reverence them as sacred things, and not
to suffer them to be profaned, touched, or questioned: they look on
them as the Urim and Thummim set up in their minds immediately by
God himself, to be the great and unerring deciders of truth and
falsehood, and the judges to which they are to appeal in all manner of
controversies.
  10. Of irresistible efficacy. This opinion of his principles (let
them be what they will) being once established in any one's mind, it
is easy to be imagined what reception any proposition shall find,
how clearly soever proved, that shall invalidate their authority, or
at all thwart these internal oracles; whereas the grossest absurdities
and improbabilities, being but agreeable to such principles, go down
glibly, and are easily digested. The great obstinacy that is to be
found in men firmly believing quite contrary opinions, though many
times equally absurd, in the various religions of mankind, are as
evident a proof as they are an unavoidable consequence of this way
of reasoning from received traditional principles. So that men will
disbelieve their own eyes, renounce the evidence of their senses,
and give their own experience the lie, rather than admit of anything
disagreeing with these sacred tenets. Take an intelligent Romanist
that, from the first dawning of any notions in his understanding, hath
had this principle constantly inculcated, viz. that he must believe as
the church (i.e. those of his communion) believes, or that the pope is
infallible, and this he never so much as heard questioned, till at
forty or fifty years old he met with one of other principles: how is
he prepared easily to swallow, not only against all probability, but
even the clear evidence of his senses, the doctrine of
transubstantiation? This principle has such an influence on his
mind, that he will believe that to be flesh which he sees to be bread.
And what way will you take to convince a man of any improbable opinion
he holds, who, with some philosophers, hath laid down this as a
foundation of reasoning, That he must believe his reason (for so men
improperly call arguments drawn from their principles) against his
senses? Let an enthusiast be principled that he or his teacher is
inspired, and acted by an immediate communication of the Divine
Spirit, and you in vain bring the evidence of clear reasons against
his doctrine. Whoever, therefore, have imbibed wrong principles, are
not, in things inconsistent with these principles, to be moved by
the most apparent and convincing probabilities, till they are so
candid and ingenuous to themselves, as to be persuaded to examine even
those very principles, which many never suffer themselves to do.
  11. II. Received hypotheses. Next to these are men whose
understandings are cast into a mould, and fashioned just to the size
of a received hypothesis. The difference between these and the former,
is, that they will admit of matter of fact, and agree with
dissenters in that; but differ only in assigning of reasons and
explaining the manner of operation. These are not at that open
defiance with their senses, with the former: they can endure to
hearken to their information a little more patiently; but will by no
means admit of their reports in the explanation of things; nor be
prevailed on by probabilities, which would convince them that things
are not brought about just after the same manner that they have
decreed within themselves that they are. Would it not be an
insufferable thing for a learned professor, and that which his scarlet
would blush at, to have his authority of forty years, standing,
wrought out of hard rock, Greek and Latin, with no small expense of
time and candle, and confirmed by general tradition and a reverend
beard, in an instant overturned by an upstart novelist? Can any one
expect that he should be made to confess, that what he taught his
scholars thirty years ago was all error and mistake; and that he
sold them hard words and ignorance at a very dear rate. What
probabilities, I say, are sufficient to prevail in such a case? And
who ever, by the most cogent arguments, will be prevailed with to
disrobe himself at once of all his old opinions, and pretences to
knowledge and learning, which with hard study he hath all this time
been labouring for; and turn himself out stark naked, in quest
afresh of new notions? All the arguments that can be used will be as
little able to prevail, as the wind did with the traveller to part
with his cloak, which he held only the faster. To this of wrong
hypothesis may be reduced the errors that may be occasioned by a
true hypothesis, or right principles, but not rightly understood.
There is nothing more familiar than this. The instances of men
contending for different opinions, which they all derive from the
infallible truth of the Scripture, are an undeniable proof of it.
All that call themselves Christians, allow the text that says,
metanoeite, to carry in it the obligation to a very weighty duty.
But yet how very erroneous will one of their practices be, who,
understanding nothing but the French, take this rule with one
translation to be, Repentez-vous, repent; or with the other, Fatiez
penitence, do penance.
  12. III. Predominant passions. Probabilities which cross men's
appetites and prevailing passions run the same fate. Let ever so
much probability hang on one side of a covetous man's reasoning, and
money on the other; it is easy to foresee which will outweigh. Earthly
minds, like mud walls, resist the strongest batteries: and though,
perhaps, sometimes the force of a clear argument may make some
impression, yet they nevertheless stand firm, and keep out the
enemy, truth, that would captivate or disturb them. Tell a man
passionately in love that he is jilted; bring a score of witnesses
of the falsehood of his mistress, it is ten to one but three kind
words of hers shall invalidate all their testimonies. Quod volumus,
facile credimus; what suits our wishes, is forwardly believed, is, I
suppose, what every one hath more than once experimented: and though
men cannot always openly gainsay or resist the force of manifest
probabilities that make against them, yet yield they not to the
argument. Not but that it is the nature of the understanding
constantly to close with the more probable side; but yet a man hath
a power to suspend and restrain its inquiries, and not permit a full
and satisfactory examination, as far as the matter in question is
capable, and will bear it to be made. Until that be done, there will
be always these two ways left of evading the most apparent
probabilities:
  13. Two means of evading probabilities: I. Supposed fallacy latent
in the words employed. First, That the arguments being (as for the
most part they are) brought in words, there may be a fallacy latent in
them: and the consequences being, perhaps, many in train, they may
be some of them incoherent. There are very few discourses so short,
clear, and consistent, to which most men may not, with satisfaction
enough to themselves, raise this doubt; and from whose conviction they
may not, without reproach of disingenuity or unreasonableness, set
themselves free with the old reply, Non persuadebis, etiamsi
persuaseris; though I cannot answer, I will not yield.
  14. Supposed unknown arguments for the contrary. Secondly,
Manifest probabilities may be evaded, and the assent withheld, upon
this suggestion, That I know not yet all that may he said on the
contrary side. And therefore, though I be beaten, it is not
necessary I should yield, not knowing what forces there are in reserve
behind. This is a refuge against conviction so open and so wide,
that it is hard to determine when a man is quite out of the verge of
it.
 15. What probabilities naturally determine the assent. But yet
there is some end of it; and a man having carefully inquired into
all the grounds of probability and unlikeliness; done his utmost to
inform himself in all particulars fairly, and cast up the sum total on
both sides; may, in most cases, come to acknowledge, upon the whole
matter, on which side the probability rests: wherein some proofs in
matter of reason, being suppositions upon universal experience, are so
cogent and clear, and some testimonies in matter of fact so universal,
that he cannot refuse his assent. So that I think we may conclude,
that, in propositions, where though the proofs in view are of most
moment, yet there are sufficient grounds to suspect that there is
either fallacy in words, or certain proofs as considerable to be
produced on the contrary side; there assent, suspense, or dissent, are
often voluntary actions. But where the proofs are such as make it
highly probable, and there is not sufficient ground to suspect that
there is either fallacy of words (which sober and serious
consideration may discover) nor equally valid proofs yet undiscovered,
latent on the other side (which also the nature of the thing may, in
some cases, make plain to a considerate man); there, I think, a man
who has weighed them can scarce refuse his assent to the side on which
the greater probability appears. Whether it be probable that a
promiscuous jumble of printing letters should often fall into a method
and order, which should stamp on paper a coherent discourse; or that a
blind fortuitous concourse of atoms, not guided by an understanding
agent, should frequently constitute the bodies of any species of
animals: in these and the like cases, I think, nobody that considers
them can be one jot at a stand which side to take, nor at all waver in
his assent. Lastly, when there can be no supposition (the thing in its
own nature indifferent, and wholly depending upon the testimony of
witnesses) that there is as fair testimony against, as for the
matter of fact attested; which by inquiry is to be learned, v.g.
whether there was one thousand seven hundred years ago such a man at
Rome as Julius Caesar: in all such cases, I say, I think it is not
in any rational man's power to refuse his assent; but that it
necessarily follows, and closes with such probabilities. In other less
clear cases, I think it is in man's power to suspend his assent; and
perhaps content himself with the proofs he has, if they favour the
opinion that suits with his inclination or interest, and so stop
from further search. But that a man should afford his assent to that
side on which the less probability appears to him, seems to me utterly
impracticable, and as impossible as it is to believe the same thing
probable and improbable at the same time.
  16. Where it is in our power to suspend our judgment. As knowledge
is no more arbitrary than perception; so, I think, assent is no more
in our power than knowledge. When the agreement of any two ideas
appears to our minds, whether immediately or by the assistance of
reason, I can no more refuse to perceive, no more avoid knowing it,
than I can avoid seeing those objects which I turn my eyes to, and
look on in daylight; and what upon full examination I find the most
probable, I cannot deny my assent to. But, though we cannot hinder our
knowledge, where the agreement is once perceived; nor our assent,
where the probability manifestly appears upon due consideration of all
the measures of it: yet we can hinder both knowledge and assent, by
stopping our inquiry, and not employing our faculties in the search of
any truth. If it were not so, ignorance, error, or infidelity, could
not in any case be a fault. Thus, in some cases we can prevent or
suspend our assent: but can a man versed in modern or ancient
history doubt whether there is such a place as Rome, or whether
there was such a man as Julius Caesar? Indeed, there are millions of
truths that a man is not, or may not think himself concerned to
know; as whether our king Richard the Third was crooked or no; or
whether Roger Bacon was a mathematician or a magician. In these and
such like cases, where the assent one way or other is of no importance
to the interest of any one; no action, no concernment of his following
or depending thereon, there it is not strange that the mind should
give itself up to the common opinion, or render itself to the first
comer. These and the like opinions are of so little weight and moment,
that, like motes in the sun, their tendencies are very rarely taken
notice of. They are there, as it were, by chance, and the mind lets
them float at liberty. But where the mind judges that the
proposition has concernment in it: where the assent or not assenting
is thought to draw consequences of moment after it, and good and
evil to depend on choosing or refusing the right side, and the mind
sets itself seriously to inquire and examine the probability: there
I think it is not in our choice to take which side we please, if
manifest odds appear on either. The greater probability, I think, in
that case will determine the assent: and a man can no more avoid
assenting, or taking it to be true, where he perceives the greater
probability, than he can avoid knowing it to be true, where he
perceives the agreement or disagreement of any two ideas.
  If this be so, the foundation of error will lie in wrong measures of
probability; as the foundation of vice in wrong measures of good.
  17. IV. Authority. The fourth and last wrong measure of
probability I shall take notice of, and which keeps in ignorance or
error more people than all the other together, is that which I have
mentioned in the foregoing chapter: I mean the giving up our assent to
the common received opinions, either of our friends or party,
neighbourhood or country. How many men have no other ground for
their tenets, than the supposed honesty, or learning, or number of
those of the same profession? As if honest or bookish men could not
err; or truth were to be established by the vote of the multitude: yet
this with most men serves the turn. The tenet has had the
attestation of reverend antiquity; it comes to me with the passport of
former ages, and therefore I am secure in the reception I give it:
other men have been and are of the same opinion, (for that is all is
said,) and therefore it is reasonable for me to embrace it. A man
may more justifiably throw up cross and pile for his opinions, than
take them up by such measures. All men are liable to error, and most
men are in many points, by passion or interest, under temptation to
it. If we could but see the secret motives that influenced the men
of name and learning in the world, and the leaders of parties, we
should not always find that it was the embracing of truth for its
own sake, that made them espouse the doctrines they owned and
maintained. This at least is certain, there is not an opinion so
absurd, which a man may not receive upon this ground. There is no
error to be named, which has not had its professors: and a man shall
never want crooked paths to walk in, if he thinks that he is in the
right way, wherever he has the footsteps of others to follow.
  18. Not so many men in errors as is commonly supposed. But,
notwithstanding the great noise is made in the world about errors
and opinions, I must do mankind that right as to say, There are not so
many men in errors and wrong opinions as is commonly supposed. Not
that I think they embrace the truth; but indeed, because concerning
those doctrines they keep such a stir about, they have no thought,
no opinion at all. For if any one should a little catechise the
greatest part of the partizans of most of the sects in the world, he
would not find, concerning those matters they are so zealous for, that
they have any opinions of their own: much less would he have reason to
think that they took them upon the examination of arguments and
appearance of probability. They are resolved to stick to a party
that education or interest has engaged them in; and there, like the
common soldiers of an army, show their courage and warmth as their
leaders direct, without ever examining, or so much as knowing, the
cause they contend for. If a man's life shows that he has no serious
regard for religion; for what reason should we think that he beats his
head about the opinions of his church, and troubles himself to examine
the grounds of this or that doctrine? It is enough for him to obey his
leaders, to have his hand and his tongue ready for the support of
the common cause, and thereby approve himself to those who can give
him credit, preferment, or protection in that society. Thus men become
professors of, and combatants for, those opinions they were never
convinced of nor proselytes to; no, nor ever had so much as floating
in their heads: and though one cannot say there are fewer improbable
or erroneous opinions in the world than there are, yet this is
certain; there are fewer that actually assent to them, and mistake
them for truths, than is imagined.
                             Chapter XXI
                   Of the Division of the Sciences

  1. Science may be divided into three sorts. All that can fall within
the compass of human understanding, being either, First, the nature of
things, as they are in themselves, their relations, and their manner
of operation: or, Secondly, that which man himself ought to do, as a
rational and voluntary agent, for the attainment of any end,
especially happiness: or, Thirdly, the ways and means whereby the
knowledge of both the one and the other of these is attained and
communicated; I think science may be divided properly into these three
sorts:-
  2. Physica. First, The knowledge of things, as they are in their own
proper beings, their constitution, properties, and operations; whereby
I mean not only matter and body, but spirits also, which have their
proper natures, constitutions, and operations, as well as bodies.
This, in a little more enlarged sense of the word, I call Phusike,
or natural philosophy. The end of this is bare speculative truth:
and whatsoever can afford the mind of man any such, falls under this
branch, whether it be God himself, angels, spirits, bodies; or any
of their affections, as number, and figure, &c.
  3. Practica. Secondly, Praktike, The skill of right applying our own
powers and actions, for the attainment of things good and useful.
The most considerable under this head is ethics, which is the
seeking out those rules and measures of human actions, which lead to
happiness, and the means to practise them. The end of this is not bare
speculation and the knowledge of truth; but right, and a conduct
suitable to it.
  4. Semeiotike. Thirdly, the third branch may be called Semeiotike,
or the doctrine of signs; the most usual whereof being words, it is
aptly enough termed also Logike, logic: the business whereof is to
consider the nature of signs, the mind makes use of for the
understanding of things, or conveying its knowledge to others. For,
since the things the mind contemplates are none of them, besides
itself, present to the understanding, it is necessary that something
else, as a sign or representation of the thing it considers, should be
present to it: and these are ideas. And because the scene of ideas
that makes one man's thoughts cannot be laid open to the immediate
view of another, nor laid up anywhere but in the memory, a no very
sure repository: therefore to communicate our thoughts to one another,
as well as record them for our own use, signs of our ideas are also
necessary: those which men have found most convenient, and therefore
generally make use of, are articulate sounds. The consideration, then,
of ideas and words as the great instruments of knowledge, makes no
despicable part of their contemplation who would take a view of
human knowledge in the whole extent of it. And perhaps if they were
distinctly weighed, and duly considered, they would afford us
another sort of logic and critic, than what we have been hitherto
acquainted with.
  5. This is the first and most general division of the objects of our
understanding. This seems to me the first and most general, as well as
natural division of the objects of our understanding. For a man can
employ his thoughts about nothing, but either, the contemplation of
things themselves, for the discovery of truth; or about the things
in his own power, which are his own actions, for the attainment of his
own ends; or the signs the mind makes use of both in the one and the
other, and the right ordering of them, for its clearer information.
All which three, viz, things, as they are in themselves knowable;
actions as they depend on us, in order to happiness; and the right use
of signs in order to knowledge, being toto coelo different, they
seemed to me to be the three great provinces of the intellectual
world, wholly separate and distinct one from another.


                               THE END
.
