

Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia

by Maxime Kovalevsky

Lecture 6



The Origin, Growth, and Abolition of Personal Servitude in Russia

    An account of the origin, growth, and abolition of serfdom in
Russia might easily be made to fill volumes, so vast and so
various are the materials on which the study of it is based. But
for the purpose now in view, that of bringing before your notice
the general conclusion to which Russian historians and legists
have come as to the social development of their country, perhaps
a single lecture will suffice. In it I cannot pretend to do more
than present to you those aspects of the subject on which the
minds of Russian scholars have been specially fixed of late
years.
    Among the first to be considered is the origin of that system
of personal servitude and bondage to the land in which the
Russian peasant lived for centuries. An opinion long prevailed
that this system was due solely to the action of the State,
which, at the end of the sixteenth century, abolished the freedom
of migration previously enjoyed by the Russian peasant and bound
him for ever to the soil. This opinion, which would have made
Russian serfdom an institution quite apart from that of the
serfdom of the Western States of Europe, has been happily
abandoned, and consequently its development becomes the more
interesting, in so far as it discloses the action of those
economic and social forces which produced the personal and real
servitude of the so-called villein all over Europe.
    Whilst stating the most important facts in the history of
Russian serfdom, I shall constantly keep in view their analogy
with those presented by the history of English or French
villenage. By so doing I hope to render the natural evolution of
Russian serfdom the more easily understood.
    The first point to which I desire to call your attention is
the social freedom enjoyed by the Russian peasant in the earlier
portion of medieval history. The peasant, then known by the name
of smerd -- from the verb smerdet, to have a bad smell -- was as
free to dispose of his person and property, as was the
Anglo-Saxon ceorl, or the old German markgenosse. He had the
right to appear as a witness in Courts of Justice, both in civil
and in criminal actions; he enjoyed the right of inheriting -- a
right, however, which was somewhat limited by the prevalence of
family communism -- and no one could prevent him from engaging
his services to any landlord for as many years as he liked, and
on terms settled by contract. Lack of means to buy a plough and
the cattle which he needed for tilling the ground very often led
the free peasant to get them from his landlord on condition that
every year he ploughed and harrowed the fields of his creditor.
It is in this way that an economic dependence was first
established between two persons equally free, equally in
possession of the soil, but disposing the one of a larger, the
other of a smaller capital. The name under which the voluntary
serf is known to the Pravda, the first legal code of Russia, is
that of roleini zakoup; this term signifies a person who has
borrowed money on condition of performing the work of ploughing
(ralo means the plough) so long as his debt remains unpaid.
    The frequent want of the simplest agricultural implements,
which Magna Charta designates as con tenementum, was also
probably the chief cause, which induced more than one Russian
peasant to prefer the condition of a sort of French metayer or
petty farmer, whose rent, paid in kind, amounts to a fixed
proportion of the yearly produce, to that of a free shareholder
in the open fields and village common. The almost universal
existence of metayage, or farming on the system of half-profits,
is now generally recognised. Thorold Rogers has proved its
existence in medieval England, and in France and Italy this
system is still found. In saying this, I have particularly in
view the French champart and the mezzeria of Tuscany.
    The prevalence in ancient Russia of the same rude and
elementary mode of farming is established by numerous charters
and contracts, some of which are as late as the end of the
seventeenth century, whilst others go back to the beginning of
the sixteenth. It would appear that previous to that date such
contracts were not put into writing, apparently on account of the
small diffusion of knowledge. We are therefore reduced to the
necessity of presuming the existence of these contracts solely
because the intrinsic causes which brought them into existence in
the sixteenth century had been in operation for hundreds of years
before. The peasant, on entering into such a contract, took upon
himself the obligation of paying back in the course of time the
money which had been lent to him -- the "serebro," silver,
according to the expression used in contemporary documents. From
the name of the capital intrusted to them (the serebro) arose the
surname of serebrenik, which may be translated silver-men, under
which peasants settled on a manor were generally known; their
other being polovnik, or men paying half of their yearly produce
to the lord, although as a rule their payments did not amount to
more than a quarter. So long as his debt remained unpaid the
metayer was obliged to remunerate the landlord by villein service
performed on the demesne lands of the manor. According to the
German writer Herberstein, who visited Russia in the seventeenth
century, the agricultural labour which the serebrenik performed
for the lord very often amounted each week to a sixdays' service,
at any rate in summer. Contracts still preserved also speak of
other obligations of the serebrenik, very like those of the
medieval English socman. Such, for instance, were the obligations
of cutting wood and of forwarding it on their own carts to the
manor-house, and of paying certain dues on the occasion of the
marriage of the peasant's daughter. I need not insist on the
similarity which this last custom presents to the medieval
English and French maritagium, or formariage, so evident is the
likeness between them. Custom also required the peasant to make
certain presents to his lord at Christmas and Easter, or at some
other yearly festival, such for instance as that of the
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin.
    The peasant who chose to settle on the land of a manorial
lord got the grant of a homestead in addition to that of land,
and this was the origin of a sort of house-rent called the
projivnoe, which as a rule amounted yearly to the fourth part of
the value of the homestead.
    As to the land ceded by the landlord to the settler who
wished to live on his manor, its use became the origin of another
special payment, the obrok, which represented a definite amount
of agricultural produce. The obrok was often replied by the
obligation of doing certain fixed agricultural labour on the
demesne land of the manor.
    As soon as the peasant had repaid the money borrowed from the
manorial lord, and had discharged all the payments required from
him for the use of his land and homestead, he was authorised by
custom to remove wherever he liked, of course giving up to the
squire his house and his share in the open fields of the manor.
At first this right of removal could be exercised at any period
of the year, but this being found prejudicial to the agricultural
interests of the country certain fixed periods were soon
established, at which alone such a removal was allowed. Usually
the end of harvest was fixed as the time when new arrangements
could be entered into with regard to future agricultural labour
without causing any loss to the interests of the landlord. Not
only in autumn, however, but also in spring, soon after Easter,
manorial lords were in the habit of permitting the establishment
of new settlers on their estates, and the withdrawal of those
peasants who expressed a desire to leave.
    The first Soudebnik, the legal code published by Ivan III in
1497, speaks of the festival of Saint George, which according to
the Russian calendar falls on the 26th of November, as a period
at which all removals ought to take place. Those peasants who had
not been fortunate enough to free themselves from all obligations
to the manor by this period were obliged to remain another year
on its lands. He who, was unable to repay the lord the sum
borrowed was reduced to the same condition as that of the
insolvent farmers of the Roman ager publicus, who, according to
Fustel de Coulanges, saw their arrears of debt changed into a
perpetual rent called the canon, and their liberty of migration
superseded by a state of continual bondage to the land they
cultivated. No Russian historian has shown the analogy existing
between the origin of the Roman colonatus and that of Russian
serfdom so clearly as Mr Kluchevsky, the eminent professor of
Russian history in the University of Moscow. It is to him that we
are indebted for the discovery of the fact that centuries before
the legal and general abolition of the right of free migration a
considerable number of peasants had thus ceased to enjoy that
liberty. Such was the case of those so-called "silver-men from
the oldest times," viz., starinnii serebrenniki, who during the
sixteenth century were already deprived of the right of free
removal from no other cause but the want of money, so that the
only condition on which they could withdraw from the manor on
which they were was that of finding some other landlord willing
to pay the money they owed, and thereby acquiring the right to
remove them to his own manor.
    So long as the Russian power was geographically limited to
the possession of the central provinces in the immediate
neighbourhood of Moscow, and so long as the shores of the Volga
and Dnieper suffered from almost periodical invasions of the
Tartars, the Russian peasant who might wish to leave a manor
could not easily have procured the land he required; but when the
conquests of Ivan III and Ivan the Terrible had reduced to naught
the power of the Tartars, and had extended the Russian
possessions both to the East and to the South, the peasants were
seized with a spirit of migration, and legislation was required
to put a stop to the economic insecurity created by their
continual withdrawal from the manors of Inner Russia to the
Southern and Eastern steppes. It is, therefore, easy to
understand why laws to prevent the possibility of a return of
peasant migration were first passed, at least on a general scale,
at this period. It is no doubt true that, even at the end of the
fifteenth century, to certain monasteries were granted, among
other privileges, that of being free from the liability of having
their peasants removed to the estates of other landlords. A
charter of the year 1478 recognises such a privilege as belonging
to the monks of the monastery of Troitzko-Sergievsk, which is,
according to popular belief, one of the most sacred places in
Russia. The financial interests of the State also contributed
greatly to the change. The fact that the taxpayer was tied to the
soil rendered the collection of taxes both speedier and more
exact. These two causes sufficiently explain why, by the end of
the sixteenth century, the removal of peasants from manor to
manor had become very rare.
    The system of land endowments in favour of the higher clergy
and monasteries, and also of persons belonging to the knightly
class, had increased to such an extent that, according to modern
calculation, two-thirds of the cultivated area was already the
property either of ecclesiastics or of secular grandees. It is
therefore easy to understand why, during the sixteenth century,
the migratory state of the Russian agricultural population came
to be considered as a real danger to the State by the higher
classes of Russian society. The most powerful of the nobles and
gentry did their best to retain the peasants on their lands. Some
went even farther, and, by alleviating the burdens of
villein-service, and securing a more efficient protection for
them from administrative oppression, induced the peasants who
inhabited the lands of smaller squires to leave their old homes
and settle on their manors. It was in order to protect the small
landowners from this sort of oppression that Boris Goudonov, the
all-powerful ruler of Russia in the reign of Theodor Ivanovitch,
promulgated a law, according to which every one was authorised to
insist on the return of a peasant who left his abode, and that
during the five years next following his departure. This law was
promulgated in 1597. As no mention is made in it of the right
previously enjoyed by the peasants of removing from one manor to
another on St. George's Day, this law of 1597 has been considered
by historians as the direct cause of the introduction of the
so-called "bondage to the soil" (krepostnoie pravo). Such was
certainly not its object. The right of migration on the Day of
St. George was openly acknowledged by the laws of 1601 and 1602.
The bondage of the peasant to the soil became an established fact
only in the year 1648, when the new code of law, the so-called
Oulogienie (chap. xi), refused to any one the right to receive on
his lands the peasant who should run away from a manor, and
abolished that limit of time beyond which the landlord lost the
right to reclaim the peasant who had removed from his ancient
dwelling.
    The number of serfs rapidly increased during the second half
of the seventeenth and the eighteenth centuries, owing to the
prodigality with which the Czars and Emperors endowed the members
of the official class with lands, in disregard often of their
previous occupation by free village communities, the members of
which were forced to become the serfs of the persons who received
the grant. It is in this way that Catherine II, for instance,
during the thirty-four years of her reign, increased the number
of serfs by 800,000 new ones, and that Paul I, in a period of
four years, added 600,000 to the number, which was already
enormous.
    Before the reign of Catherine, serfdom was almost unknown in
Little Russia, where it had been abolished by Bogdan Chmelnitzky,
soon after the separation of Little Russia from Poland, and in
the Ukraine (the modern Government of Kharkov), where it had
never before existed. In 1788 she revoked the right hitherto
enjoyed by the peasants of these two provinces to remove from one
manor to another. The same right of free removal was abolished a
few years later in the "Land of the Don Kossacks" and among the
peasants of the Southern Governments, called New Russia
(Novorossia).
    But if the second part of the eighteenth century saw the
territorial extension of serfdom over almost all the Empire, it
was also the period in which first began the movement which led
to emancipation. From France came the first appeals for the
liberation of the serfs. In 1766 the Society of Political
Economists founded in Petersburg on the model of the agricultural
societies of France was asked by the impress to answer the
question: "Whether the State would be benefited by the serf
becoming the free owner of his land?" Marmontel and Voltaire
considered it to be their duty to express opinions in favour of a
partial abolition of serfdom. Marmontel thought that the time was
come to supersede villein-service by a sort of hereditary
copyhold. Voltaire went a step farther, inviting the impress to
liberate immediately the serfs on the Church lands. As to the
rest, free contract alone ought to settle the question of their
emancipation. Another Frenchman much less known, the legist
Bearde de l'Abaye, gave it as his opinion that the Government
should maintain a strict neutrality towards the question of
serfdom. It ought to be abolished only by free contract between
landlords and serfs, the former endowing the latter with small
parcels of land. In this way the serf would become a private
owner, so that in case he should rent any land from the squire,
the squire would be able to seize the peasant's plot in case of
non-payment of his rent. Diderot was the only Frenchman who
acknowledged the necessity of an immediate abolition of personal
servitude; but in his letters to the Empress he does not say a
single word about the necessity for securing to the liberated
serf at least a small portion of the manorial land.
    Although Catherine II was willing to be advised by the
Encyclopedists as to the way in which serfdom might be abolished,
she took effectual means to prevent the expression of Russian
public opinion on the same subject. A memorial presented to the
Petersburg Society of Political Economists by a young Russian
author called Pelenev was not allowed to appear in print, for no
other reason than that it contained a criticism on the existing
system of serfdom.(1*) The author of the memorial did not demand
the immediate abolition of this old wrong; he only wanted to see
it replaced by a sort of perpetual copyhold. The Government was
more severe towards another Russian writer, Radischev, who was
the first to advocate not only the personal liberty of the serf,
but also his endowment with land. The work of Radischev (2*)
appeared in 1789, several years after the suppression of the
insurrectionary movement of Pougachev, but it was regarded as a
sort of commentary on the demand for "liberty and land," which
the Russian peasant had addressed to that leader, who had
answered it by a solemn promise that he would make the serf free
and prosperous. Catherine not only ordered the immediate
suppression of the work of Radischev, but brought the author
before the Courts of Justice, accusing him of being a traitor to
his country. Radischev was condemned to death; but this penalty
was commuted to perpetual banishment to Siberia.
    It was not till the reign of Alexander the First that the
Russian Government began to take effectual measures to ameliorate
the social condition of the serf. According to the account given
by those immediately around him, and especially by Adam
Czartorysky, Alexander was an avowed friend of peasant
emancipation. He gave his firm support to the proposed law giving
the landlords the right to liberate their serfs, and even to
endow them with shares in the open fields if they paid for them.
In 1803 this law was passed, and 47,000 serfs were soon after
enfranchised, and became a separate class under the name of the
"free agriculturists." Sixteen years later (in 1819) the
enfranchisement of the serf became an accomplished fact in the
three Baltic provinces, the peasant obtaining the free disposal
of his person on condition of abandoning to his landlord the
parcels of ground previously in his possession. This reform was
accomplished in the same manner as that carried out in 1812 by
Napoleon in the Kingdom of Poland. In the thoroughly Russian
provinces no direct measures were at this time taken to abolish
the legal servitude of the peasant, but the question was more
than once debated in private circles and by learned bodies. In
the year 1812, for instance, the Petersburg Society of Political
Economists declared that it would give 2000 roubles to the author
of the best treatise on the question of the relative advantages
of free and servile labour in agriculture. This question by
itself shows the influence which Adam Smith's "Wealth of
Nations," which had been translated into Russian in 1803, was
beginning to exercise on Russian thought. Nine treatises were
forwarded to the Society, of which three only were in favour of
the further maintenance of servile labour. But the greater number
expressed the opinion that the enfranchisement of the serf,
provided that he was allowed to keep the land he occupied, would
be of great advantage to the landlord himself. This idea, in
conformity to which serfdom had been abolished in the Baltic
provinces, was the expression of a fact quite familiar to the
student of economic history. The work of an enslaved labourer is
never so productive as that of a free labourer. So long as rent
is low, as certainly was the case in Russia in past centuries,
the work of the serf is by no means fairly recompensed by the
land he owns. But in the first quarter of the nineteenth century,
when Russia began to be considered as the granary of Europe, on
account of the vast exports of wheat from her ports, rent rapidly
rose, and this rise produced a complete change in the relative
value of servile work and the land which was in the possession of
the peasant.
    The question put by the Society of Political Economists could
not, therefore, possibly have received any other answer than that
given to it by the majority of the authors who sent in papers to
the Society. Serfdom was rapidly becoming a burden on the
manorial lords themselves, as many of them began to be conscious.
The barons of the Baltic shore were the first to understand the
advantage which the liberation of the serf, followed by a
resumption of the ground he owned, would have on their class
interests. The nobility of Toula and Riasan, as well as that of
Dinabourg, Petersburg, and Czarskoie Selo, seemed also to become
conscious of this fact, for they petitioned the Emperor Nicholas
to establish local committees who might prepare the outlines of a
new emancipation act. Among the nobles immediately surrounding
the Czar, Prince Mentchikov expressed his opinion of the
desirability and advantage of freeing the peasant and at the same
time of enriching the landlord by leaving in his hands all those
shares in the common ground which had been held by the peasants.
The interests of the nobility certainly required the
establishment of a class similar to that of the English
labourers, but the peasants were naturally averse to any change
which would lessen their hold on the soil. In 1812 a peasant
rising took place in the Government of Pensa, the revolted serfs
expressing their wants by the old motto "liberty and Land." In
1826 again the same motto was the watchword of another rising,
this time provoked by a rumour that land and liberty would
shortly be secured to the serfs.
    Under the influence of this clear expression of the people's
wants, the Government of Nicholas abandoned all idea of
emancipation which was not to be followed by the endowment of the
peasant with land. Not daring, as he openly acknowledged to lay
hands on the sacred rights of private property by liberating the
serfs and making them free owners of the soil, Nicholas proposed
to alter the existing condition of the serf by making him a sort
of copyholder or perpetual tenant of small parcels of manorial
ground, on condition of the payment of perpetual rent. In the
Polish provinces, such copyhold tenures, very like the French
censives, were already in existence. The Government, therefore,
only extended a system which already existed when, in 1842, they
ordered the preparation in each manor of a sort of registry,
called "inventory," in which the amount of payments in kind and
money, made by the serfs to the landlord, were to be inscribed,
in order that in future no other levies might be made.
    Neither of these two schemes for amending the untenable
position of the serf was good enough to obtain the approbation of
those to whom, at this time, actually belonged the guidance of
pubic opinion. It will be to the eternal honour of the Russian
press that it constantly preached in favour of a reform which
would at once liberate the serf and make him legal owner of the
shares of manorial ground which were already in his possession.
Among the persons directly implicated in the insurrectionary
movement of the 24th of December 1825, two, Pestel and
Jakoushkine, had already declared themselves to be supporters of
such a scheme.
    The diffusion of socialist ideas greatly contributed to
strengthen among the literary class the persuasion that it would
be impossible to liberate the serf otherwise than by endowing him
with land. The well-known plot which was organised by
Petroschevsky, among its other aims, had that of allotting
parcels of ground to the liberated serf. The great exile Herzen,
in a Russian newspaper then published in London, openly expressed
his opinion that the common ownership of the land should be
retained in the hands of the enfranchised peasant; and among the
many schemes of emancipation, which circulated in the form of
manuscript during the latter part of Nicholas's reign, more than
one advocated the necessity of retaining the ancient ties which
bound the peasant to the soil by making him the legal owner of
his share in the open fields.
    The "providential mission" of the Czar Alexander the Second
was therefore disclosed in a state of society which was already
prepared to accept the general outlines of a social reform, the
end of which would be not only to liberate, but also to enrich,
the peasant. As soon as Alexander ascended the throne rumours
began to be circulated as to the approaching abolition of
serfdom. The unexpected death of his father placed him on the
throne at a moment of great and general depression, occasioned by
the defeat of the Russian military forces under the walls of
Sebastopol. The young Emperor made an eloquent appeal to the
patriotism of his subjects, inviting them to increase the means
of defence by a voluntary levy of a kind of militia, known under
the name of Opolchenie. This measure strengthened the belief in
the nearness of social and political reforms. The peasants,
enrolled in the self-raised regiments of the militia, began to
think that their more or less voluntary sacrifice of life and
fortune would he rewarded by a complete liberation from the
ignominious bonds of personal servitude. Crowds of serfs asked to
be admitted into the militia, expecting to attain freedom in this
way.
    When the Peace of Paris was signed, and the peasants of the
militia were ordered to return to their daily tasks, they openly
expressed their belief that the charters by which the Emperor had
liberated them from bondage were concealed by their landlords.
These rumours produced great excitement. The years 1854 and 1855
are notorious for a series of local rebellions. These
insurrections took place partly on the shores of the Volga, which
had already felt, in the time of Catherine the Second, the
horrors of a jacquerie, partly in some Central and South-western
Governments, such as Vladimir, Riasan, Tambov, Pensa, Voronej,
and Kiev. These revolutionary movements, directed exclusively
against the feudal aristocracy, produced a great impression on
the Czar Alexander. Addressing the chiefs of the Moscovite
nobility (the so-called marshals), the Czar showed his
appreciation of the wants of the time by the following words:
"Gentlemen, you surely understand yourselves the impossibility of
retaining, without alteration and change, the existing mode of
owning souls [a usual expression, the meaning of which is the
right to the unpaid work of the serfs]. It is better to abolish
personal servitude by legislative measures than to see it
abolished by a movement from below. I ask you to consider such
measures as might forward this end." These promising words,
although followed by a direct declaration that serfdom was not to
be abolished at once, strengthened the expectations of those who
thought that the new reign would inaugurate an era of wide social
and political reform. Although the Governor-General of Moscow,
Zakrevsky, did his best to persuade the nobility that all
projects concerning the abolition of serfdom were laid aside, it
very soon appeared that such was by no means the intention of
the Czar; for during the coronation the Home Secretary, Lanskoy,
by the direct command of Alexander, entered into communication
with those noblemen who were present in Moscow, in order to
ascertain what were their opinions as to the best means of
bringing about an amelioration in the actual condition of the
serfs. These negotiations left no doubt as to the animosity with
which the nobility of Great Russia considered every plan tending
to the emancipation of the peasant. This induced the Minister to
turn his eyes to those provinces in which the idea of liberating
the serfs had taken root at the time when personal servitude had
been abolished by Napoleon I in the neighbouring districts of
Poland, particularly the Governments of Vilna, Kovno, and Grodno.
The Lithuanian nobles were already favourable to the idea, and
were easily induced by the Governor General Nasimov to present to
the Czar an address asking for the abolition of bondage, but at
the same time demanding exclusive possession of the land for the
nobility. You therefore see that the conditions on which the
Lithuanian nobles wanted to see the enfranchisement carried out
were the same as those on which it had been already carried out
in Poland and the Baltic provinces. Seeing the difficulty of
preserving for their own profit the unpaid services of the
peasant, they were anxious to secure to themselves the monopoly
of the soil. The serf was to be allowed to become a free person
only on condition of remaining a proletarian, living exclusively
on the wages he earned. Carried out on such conditions, the
emancipation would hardly have met with the approval of those who
were most directly concerned. As far back as the reign of the
Empress Catherine the peasant had plainly declared that he wanted
not only liberty, but land. He was mindful of his ancient state,
previous to that of bondage, which, as we have already shown, was
the state of an owner in common of the ground he made fruitful by
his work. No power on earth would have been strong enough to
break the ties, centuries old, which united him to the soil. It
was no doubt in the interests of the nobility to see these ties
broken, for who could be the gainers in a scheme which promised
enhancement of the mercantile value of the soil and cheap labour,
if not those who had secured to themselves the monopoly of the
property in land? What, on the other hand, was the liberated
proletarian to become if not a labourer, given up to eternal toil
on the estates of a land-monopolising nobility, and bound to
receive from their hands those bare wages which would cover the
expense of his existence? The Emperor and some persons in his
confidence, were conscious of the social evils which the
execution of such a plan would produce. It will be to the eternal
glory of Alexander to have answered the request of the Lithuanian
nobility by a decree by which, whilst allowing the establishment
of local committees for the elaboration of measures which might
achieve the emancipation in view, he plainly declared that the
liberated serfs ought to be secured at least in the possession of
their homesteads and of the land belonging to these homesteads
(the so-called homestead-land -- ousadebnaiia zemlia). This
expression was obscure and ambiguous, for it was not easy to
establish the limits of the so-called homestead-land. Was it to
be considered as a compound of all the various communal
privileges of which the peasant was possessed, or to mean only
the ground directly surrounding his habitation? This question
remained unsettled.
    In the winter of 1851 the nobility of Petersburg, not wishing
to remain behind that of Lithuania, presented to the Emperor an
address very like the one just mentioned. This address and the
decree it provoked deserve to be mentioned, for they show, on one
hand, the desire of the aristocracy to preserve not only all the
advantages of a land-owning class, but also to a certain extent
the social dependence under which the peasant had lived towards
them during the preceding centuries; and, on the other hand, the
firm decision of the Government to secure to the peasant at least
his property in the homestead he occupied, and in the land which
surrounded it. The decree is curious too as a precise statement
of the conditions on which the Government intended at first to
accomplish the difficult task of emancipation. They are, as you
will soon perceive, very different from those on which the
emancipation was actually performed. No question is made of the
direct interference of the State in order to buy back from the
nobleman the plots of ground occupied by the serfs. This end is
to be alone attained by way of free agreement between the
parties. As long as this agreement has not taken place the serf
is to continue to perform the agricultural labour and make the
money payments fixed by law. The nobleman, on the other hand,
exercises, as in the past, a kind of feudal justice and police.
The ground of the whole manor is declared to be his property; the
peasant is to receive no other endowment but that of his
homestead.
    The nobility of Nijni-Novgorod, that of Moscow, and of
several other provinces, soon after this presented demands not
very unlike those already mentioned. They were answered in the
same way, and local committees, imposed of noblemen, were
accordingly formed, in order to elaborate the outlines of the
intended reform in accordance with the views of the Government as
already stated. These outlines were to be sent for further
examination to a central board, which was first appointed on
January 8, 1858, and was known under the name of the "Principal
Committee on the Peasant Question." They were also to be the
subject of careful study on the part of a newly opened section of
the Board of Statistics. Men of radical ideas, such as Nicolas
Miliutine and Soloviev, were included among its members. The
reactionary party, on the other hand, counted more than one
member in the "Principal Committee on the Peasant Question", a
fact which induced the Government to detach from this Committee
two especial sections, the so-called "Committee for the
Drawing-up of the Reform Project," and that of "The Elaboration
of Financial Measures, needed to secure the Execution of the Plan
in View." The guidance of both Committees and the election of
their members were entrusted to General Rostovzov, an avowed
friend of the intended reform. An important change was introduced
into the working of the bureaucratic machinery by the fact that
some elected members of the provincial committees were allowed to
have a seat at the meetings of the central bodies, and to
exercise there the functions of experts. Among the persons so
appointed we find several well-known Slavophiles, such as Samarin
and Tcherkasky.
    The work the central committees had to perform was, first of
all, the drawing-up of a concise statement of the results
attained by the deliberations of the local committees; next, the
discussion of the different opinions which these latter had
expressed; and, finally, the drawing-up of the conclusions to
which the members of the central committees themselves had
arrived. The members of the committees enjoyed the hitherto
unknown freedom of expressing their opinion, and of consulting
all sorts of papers and books, not excluding even those published
by Russian emigrants. One of the members protesting against the
idea of drawing information from the Kolokol, a Russian newspaper
published in London by the political refugee Herzen, the
President said that, according to his opinion, truth was to be
taken into account, whoever might have expressed it. The
formalism and official subordination so much observed by our
bureaucracy were for the first time laid aside, and each member
frankly expressed his views, however much they might be opposed
to those of the President. The committee even went so far as to
accept on certain points decisions which were not in accordance
with the Imperial decrees. The local committee appointed by the
nobility of Tver was the first to express the opinion that the
peasants ought to be endowed with land beyond that which
surrounded their homesteads. This opinion was endorsed by the
central committee, which maintained that, although it was
contradictory to the letter of the Imperial decrees, it was in
perfect correspondence with their spirit.
    On another occasion the "Committee for the Drawing-up of the
Scheme of Reform" showed the same independence by adopting the
view first put forward by members of the press, that it was
necessary that the Government should come forward to buy up the
land which the nobleman was called upon to surrender to the
peasants of his manor. Now this view was quite the reverse of
that expressed by the Imperial decrees we have previously cited.
    In the whole of the movement the large and important part
played by the public press is most striking. No doubt can be
entertained that at its beginning the officials to whom was
entrusted the elaboration of the plan were profoundly ignorant of
the bearings of the question. The President of the Committee,
General Rostovzov, frankly acknowledged this ignorance, and in
his private correspondence with the Czar betrayed his fears of a
national bankruptcy as the certain result of the Government
taking on itself the redemption of the lands which were to be
ceded to the peasants -- fears which seem almost ludicrous now
that this redemption has been effected, and the financial
interests of the State have not suffered even for a moment.
    A well-known Russian economist, Professor Ivanukoff,(3*) has
tried to show to what extent the press shared with the Government
the difficult task of elaborating the scheme, according to which
the serfs were to obtain "freedom and land." He is quite correct
when he says that, with the exception of a single paper called
the Journal of Landed Proprietors, the whole Russian Press
unanimously declared itself in favour, not only of the abolition
of personal servitude, but also of the endowment of the peasants
with land. Such writers as Katkof, the well-known editor of the
Moscow Gazette, a man who has lately played so prominent a part
in the reactionary movement, were then the open friends of
Liberalism, and rivalled the most advanced reformers in their
defence of civil freedom. The opinions of Katkof were so greatly
at variance with those of the Government at the beginning of the
movement, that he was obliged to bring to a close a series of
articles on the social condition of the serfs which he had begun
in his periodical, the Russian Courier. Another eminent
publicist, Koschelev, who was the author of one of the numerous
private schemes of emancipation (their number amounted to
sixty-one), was obliged at the same time to abandon the further
publication of a journal called the Welfare of the Country, on
account of the strong language in which he advocated the
endowment of the liberated serf with those portions of the land
already in his possession. A Russian magazine of great renown,
the Contemporary, was at the same time on the point of being
suppressed on account of an article written by Professor Kavelin,
expressing his views as to the opportuneness of redeeming the
lands actually possessed by the peasants, and that, too, with the
direct help of the State. The Minister of Public instruction,
Evgraf Kovalevsky, was even asked to issue a circular, by which
the censorship was entrusted with the power of suppressing any
article, pamphlet, or book, dealing with the question of
enfranchisement, that had not previously been approved by the
central committee. This untimely warfare against public opinion
and the liberty of the press, fortunately enough, did not last
long. The circular was printed in April, 1858, and seven months
later the Government relaxed the restrictions imposed; and that
because of the complete change in its own views as to the
outlines of the reform. The opinions recently suppressed became
those of the Government, and the prosecuted writers were
considered, for a while at least, its surest allies. I insist on
these facts, because I know of no instance which better
characterises the ordinary proceedings of the Russian
bureaucracy. It begins, as a rule, by suppressing all that lies
in its way, and then, finding no other issue, it adopts the line
of conduct which it has recently condemned. A foreigner who has
no notion of this mode of procedure must find great difficulty in
understanding how it happens that in a country where no freedom
of the press is recognised, in which generals and high officials
seem alone to have the right of professing opinions on public
matters, the press, nevertheless, has more than once exercised a
decisive influence on the course of politics. The all-powerful
bureaucracy is very often but an empty-headed fool, anxious to
accept the ideas of the despised and prosecuted journalist. In
Russia, as well as everywhere else, the true and lasting power is
that of public opinion, and of those who know how to influence
it. Periods in which the Government acts contrary to public
opinion occur from time to time. They are very harmful to those
who dare to remain faithful to their opinions. For a while
nothing is heard of but the need of suppression both of opinions
and of those who publicly profess them. But time passes and the
Government begins to reap the fruits of its own sowing. At every
step it takes, it finds on the part of those it governs nothing
but ill-will, a hidden but profound mistrust. As soon as it feels
that it is losing all hold on the minds and hearts of the people,
it is the first to condemn what it has recently praised. Some
fine morning everybody is stalled by learning that the very men
who had done their best to render impossible the public
expression of certain ideas are now drawing their inspiration
from these same ideas.
    But I feel that I have made perhaps a necessary, but at all
events a too long, digression from the direct line of my
inquiries. I will therefore return to them at once, and begin by
pointing out those points on which the committee appointed to
elaborate the law of enfranchisement carried out in their scheme
-- the opinions of the press.
    It was the press which first advocated the notion that the
liberated peasant ought to become the owner of the land actually
in his possession. Schemes for realising this idea had been
already worked out in the reign of Nicholas by some patriotic
scholars and publicists. Among them was Professor Kavelin, whose
project was published by the Russian contemporary, at the head of
other articles, on the impending reform. It was on Kavelin that
first fell the responsibility of expressing ideas in opposition
to the views of the Government. His opinion as to the necessity
of endowing the peasant with land soon found an echo in the
debates of the nobility of Tver, who petitioned the Czar to
extend his promise concerning grants of land to the enfranchised
serf, not only to his homestead and the ground surrounding it,
but also to the shares the peasant possessed in the open fields
of the village. In giving an account of the different opinions
expressed by the provincial nobility, the central committee
referred to this scheme proposed by the nobility of Tver, and
recommended it to the Government. Thus we see how prominent a
part the press played on this occasion.
    Its influence was no less powerful in the question on what
principle should be based the future ownership exercised by the
peasants. Two schemes, widely differing from each other, were at
the same time proposed by the press. The one (chiefly supported
by economists such as Vernadsky, and publicists like Katkof)
recommended the immediate acceptance of measures favourable to
the development of private property; the other (supported by the
majority of the Slavophile and Radical press) was in favour of
the strict maintenance of the village community system, with its
periodical redistribution of land. On this question, Slavophiles
such as Samarin and Koschelev went hand in hand with the
Socialist Tchernishevsky, the author of the very remarkable essay
on the "Prejudices of Political Economists against the Common
Ownership in Land," an essay which forms the base of the social
creed of the so-called Nihilists.
    The project of emancipation elaborated by Government
officials is a sort of compromise between these contradictory
opinions. It starts with the idea of a temporary maintenance of
the common ownership in land, but advocates certain measures
favourable to the development of private property. A new
redistribution of the shares is allowed only when it is demanded
by two-thirds of the persons voting at the village Assembly.
Every person paying back to the Government the money advanced to
him, in order to remunerate the landlord for the ground he has
been obliged to yield, is immediately acknowledged to be the
private proprietor of his share. The scheme of the Slavophiles
and the Radicals required a simple majority to make legal the
village decision concerning a new re-distribution of the land;
they were, and are still, opposed to the recognition of private
property on the part of the peasant who has bought back his share
in the common land.
    Very important, too, was the service rendered by the press on
the important question of the amount of land which the feudal
lord should be required to leave in the hands of his liberated
serfs. Most writers were in favour of leaving to the peasants the
quantity of land they actually occupied; "for," said they, and
not without reason, "this amount must, no doubt, correspond to
the necessities of their existence, as the amount has been
accorded to them by the landlord for no other purpose but that of
merely supporting life." Few advocated the desirability of
establishing in each province a certain maximum and minimum of
land donation. The members of the central committee were
favourable to the first scheme; and if the last prevailed, and
found its expression in the law, the explanation is to be found
in the opposition which the first plan met with on the part of
the nobility and their chief supporters in the higher official
circles.
    One important question arose, whether the landlord should
still keep a certain executive authority within the limits of the
township; or whether the inner life of the village was
thenceforth to be subject to no other rules than those issued by
the village Assembly and put in force by its elected chiefs, the
elders or starostas. The press almost unanimously expressed its
desire to see the realisation of the latter plan. The country
people, said the press, required complete liberty, or, to use the
popular expression, "pure liberty." Now this liberty was
inconsistent with the maintenance of rights such as those
exercised by the German noblemen in the Baltic provinces or the
junkers of Eastern Prussia. The only way to render any revival of
personal servitude impossible was to establish the system of
peasant self-government. Opinions differed on the question as to
whether the landlord ought to be a member of the township or not.
The Radicals were against it, and the Slavophiles did not attach
great importance to it, thinking that the landlord would feel
himself quite isolated amid the crowd of his former subjects. The
Liberals alone were favourable to the idea of increasing the
number of township members by admitting all residents, without
distinction of class, to vote in the village Assembly. Their
advice did not prevail, and the commune became a class
institution, to the great disadvantage both of the peasants and
of the whole State.
    One of the most difficult points was undoubtedly that of
fixing the amount of remuneration which the landlord ought to
receive, not for the loss of his right over the person of his
former serf, but for that of the land he was obliged to cede in
his favour. The question was the more difficult because the land,
in more than one part of Russia, had really no market price at
all, the nobility and gentry being alone allowed to bid for it.
The press, reasonably enough, insisted on the necessity of
establishing a correspondence between the revenue the peasant got
from his share and the amount of remuneration paid for it to the
landlord. But such was not the opinion, either of the central or
local committees; and we must lay on their shoulders the
responsibility of the fact, that it was the amount of payments in
kind and the quantity of villein-service performed by the
peasant, which were selected as the base of valuation. This
certainly was against the interests of the peasant, highly
overcharged as he was by the manorial lord, who obliged him to
pay rents much surpassing the revenue of the land he cultivated.
By not adopting on this point the views entertained by the press,
the reformers, as you easily see, did a great social injustice.
    It was the press also which first agitated the question of
the desirability of the direct interference of the Government, in
order to facilitate the expropriation of the nobleman in favour
of the peasants. The head of the central committee, Rostovzov, as
we have already seen, thought the financial difficulties of such
a measure insurmountable. Such was not the opinion of the press,
which predicted that the issue of "rentes," or Government bonds,
securing to the landlord a certain percentage on the capital
which he should cede to the peasant in the form of land, would
not lower the value of the paper money already in circulation. It
was fortunate that in the end this method was adopted, for the
prophecy was not only realised, but the interests of agriculture,
and consequently of the country generally, were considerably
advanced by the capital paid in the form of these bonds to the
expropriated landlords. More than one great landowner was deeply
in debt at the time emancipation took place; very few had the
capital needed for the economic arrangements required for the
substitution of the paid work of the free peasant for the unpaid
work of the serf. They obtained it by selling or mortgaging the
"rentes" or bonds paid to them by the Government.
    We therefore find that on all points the press was the guide,
the authoritative adviser, the sure ally of the Government. This
last character plainly appeared in the struggle which the central
committee had to maintain with the delegates of the provincial
Committees. These bodies were composed exclusively of members of
the local nobility, and were empowered to present their opinions
on the impending reform. Unconscious of the alteration which had
taken place in the intentions of the Government, they expressed
ideas in complete accord with those at first entertained by the
Emperor. The majority in each committee, seeing that it was
impossible under present circumstances to maintain their old
rights over the person of the serf, consented to recognise his
freedom, and that without pay. They were anxious about one thing
alone -- to retain as far as possible in their own hands the land
actually possessed by the peasant. This feeling was the stronger
where the soil was rich, as was the case in the Central and
Southern Governments, where the black soil prevails. It was less
so in the west and north, where the ground yielded but a small
rent. We find a complete unanimity between the utterances of the
central and southern nobles, both insisting on the necessity of
limiting the expropriation of the land in favour of the peasants
to that occupied by their homesteads, whilst in the north more
than one committee consented to extend this to the arable land
and the undivided common.
    The provincial committees were almost unanimous (I speak of
course only of the majority of their members) in their request
that the individual shares of each peasant household should be
readjusted according to a certain maximum and minimum fixed for
each province. Many a committee insisted on the maintenance of
feudal police, if not of feudal justice, and all showed an equal
interest in the suppression of the uncontrolled power of the
bureaucracy in matters of provincial administration.
    The minorities of almost every committee, who were more or
less influenced by the press, approached much more nearly in
their request to the views entertained by the majority in the
central committee. They gave their consent to the plan of
expropriating in favour of the peasants a part of the noblemen's
lands; they insisted on the participation of the Government in
the act of redeeming the area formerly allotted by the landlords
to the serfs of their respective manors; they strongly opposed
the scheme of a transitory state in which the peasant, unable to
buy back the land he owned, was condemned to continue his villein
service and his feudal dues or payments in kind. At the same time
they put forward certain general demands which went much beyond
the promises already given by the Government. They made requests
for a general change in the existing system of provincial
administration. According to these bureaucracy should give place
to a system of local self-government. They insisted on the
necessity of amending the deficient judicial organisation. They
demanded trial by jury and liberty of the press. Some of the
members went even so far as to draw up a resolution in favour of
the general representation of the people and the revival of the
ancient system of National Councils, the Sobors.
    We must not lose sight of these political requirements if we
wish to understand why it was that the Government, as soon as the
deputies both of the majority and the minority of provincial
committees were assembled in Petersburg, hindered their general
meetings. It was but separately that each of the delegates was
admitted to put forward his requests, and to give oral advice to
the members of the general committee. This mistrust on the part
of the Government embittered more than one of the delegates
against the members of the central committee, and threw them into
the arms of that minority which, in the central committee itself,
defended the interests of the nobility. It was chiefly composed
of the "Marshal" of the Petersburg nobility, Count Peter
Schouvalov, Mr Aprakasin, who occupied the same post in the
Government of Orel, and Mr Posen, the delegate of Pultawa. These
three gentlemen insisted on the desirability of keeping the land
in the hands of the nobility, and of granting to the peasantry
only a sort of soccage-tenure, or "censive," on the land they
occupied. Whilst the majority of the committee insisted on the
direct interference of the Government in the redemption of the
noblemen's land, and the propriety of putting an end to
villein-service, at any rate after a period of twelve years,
these gentlemen were in favour of leaving to a free contract,
entered into by the manorial lord and his former serfs, the
difficult task of settling their future relations. It was in the
house of Schouvalov that the discontented delegates regularly
assembled; it was there that they drew up this protest against
the action of the central committee and the so-called
"encroachments of the bureaucracy." Their appeal, made in the
form of a pamphlet, published in Leipsig, and addressed to the
new delegates summoned to Petersburg from the provinces not
hitherto represented, found a ready hearing, and the Government
encountered in these new helpers even a larger amount of mistrust
and ill-will than that already shown by their predecessors.
    This time the opposition of the nobility was of much greater
consequence. General Rostovzov, whose influence over the Czar was
very great, died suddenly, before the completion of the work
entrusted to his care, and Count Panin, an avowed foe to the
action of the committee, became its President. He did his best to
induce the members to abandon their former decision; and it is
only to the firmness of character shown by men like Nicholas
Milutine, that we are indebted for the strict maintenance of the
general outlines of the form already elaborated. Finding himself
powerless to change the decisions of the committee, Panin tried
to arouse some opposition to the scheme published by it, among
the ranks of that general committee of which the committee for
the elaboration of the law of emancipation was but a section. He
tried to achieve the same ends in the Council of State, where the
scheme of the new law had finally to be discussed. Happily the
time allowed for the debates was very limited, as the Government
insisted on the immediate realisation of the long-promised
"liberty." They lasted in the general committee but a few months,
while in the Council of State they were limited to a fortnight.
It is due to this fact that neither of the two boards introduced
very extensive amendments in the emancipation law. Those they did
make were all in favour of the nobility. The most mischievous
consisted in the considerable diminution of the maximum and
minimum shares accorded to the peasant, and in the resolution
that no rights would be recognised as belonging to the villagers
in the common pastures of the manor. The interests of the
peasants were also sacrificed in the permission which was given
to the landlords to diminish the shares of the peasants, on the
condition of renouncing all remuneration for the ground which
they ceded. In all these measures the demands of the nobles were
complied with.
    But the great ends at which the reformers aimed, the
liberation, that is to say, of the peasant from all personal
dependence on the manorial lord, and the securing to him the
right of possessing land in common, were nevertheless attained.
The law of February 19, 1861, was the beginning of a new era --
an era of democratic development, as well as of economic and
social growth, for the immense Empire of the Czars. For there is
no doubt about the vast influence which the law of 1861 has
exercised in all directions. It is that which made more than
twenty millions of people at once the free disposers of their own
destinies and the communistic owners of the land. Villein
services, rents in kind and in money, feudal monopolies, and
manorial jurisdiction, ceased to exist, and the peasant became
the member of a self-governing body, or the Mir. The ideas of
social justice and of equality before the law -- ideas hitherto
cherished but by a few dreamers such as Radischev and Herzen, or
revolutionists like those so-called "Decembrists," who organised
the rebellion of December 24, 1825 -- made their triumphant entry
into the Russian world, working a complete change in the
organisation of public schools, admitting the son of the peasant
to sit side by side with the son of the nobleman and the merchant
in the same grammar school and the same university,
revolutionising both official circles and the drawing-room,
admitting to both persons of low. birth but high education.
    The emancipation of the serf certainly was not carried out
without some loss to the land-owning gentry, but the squire soon
recovered from the state into which he was brought by his
inexperience in the management of his estate without the help of
unpaid servants. Capital was invested in land; agricultural
machines were introduced; the yearly income began to rise
rapidly, and with it the value of the land was augmented. It was
partly enhanced by the fact that it was thrown open to the free
purchase of all classes of society, while previous to the reform
the higher class alone was entitled to own it. Instead of
abandoning the tillage of the fields, according to the
expectation of some pessimists, the liberated serf soon became
the regular farmer of the lands possessed by the gentry, and
entire village communities have been seen during these last few
years renting, under conditions of mutual responsibility, the
land of a neighbouring estate.
    If we investigate the indirect results of the great reform
accomplished by the Emperor Alexander, we are first struck by the
fact that it involved the necessity of a complete change in
provincial administration. Justice and police had hitherto been
in the hands of persons elected by the nobility. This could no
longer be tolerated the moment the serf was liberated from his
previous subjection to the noble and squire. A system of
provincial self-government, based on the principle of
representation of the whole land-owning class, both private
proprietors and those possessing land in common, was introduced
in its stead. The organization of justice was completely changed,
learned jurists occupying the place of the ignorant magistrates
of old who had been appointed by the provincial gentry. The
people, as members of juries, were admitted to a share in the
exercise of criminal justice. The transformation of the medieval
State into one that answered to the requirements of modern
civilisation would have been completed if the Liberator of
millions had not been slaughtered on the very day on which he had
undertaken to give a constitution to his people.
    Years of violent reaction have followed. The feudal party,
whose secret designs had been defeated by the mode in which
emancipation had been effected, again got the upper hand; and
modern Russia now looks back to the period of 1861 as the golden
age of Russian Liberalism. It is in the work of the men who were
directly engaged in carrying out the great reform that Russian
Liberals seek consolation and help; and the Nineteenth of
February has become for them a day of general and of grateful
commemoration.


NOTES:

1. Compare V. Somevsky, "The Peasant Question in Russia during
the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Century", Petersburg, 1888.

2. "The Village from Petersburg to Novgorod."

3. See his work, entitled "The Fall of Bondage in Russia,"
Petersburg, 1883.

