

Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia
by Maxime Kovalevsky


Lecture II


The State of the Modern Russian Family, and Particularly that of
the Joint or Household Community of Great Russia


    We believe that the theory of the matriarchate finds a solid
basis in the past history of the Russian family. The present
condition of the latter seems to prove that the next stage in its
evolution was the household community, composed of persons united
by descent from a common forefather and accompanied by that
worship of ancestors which usually resulted from it. The complete
subjection of the wife to the husband, and of the children to the
father; community of goods and the common enjoyment of their
produce by the relatives living under the same roof; the
acknowledged superiority of old age and of direct descent from
the common ancestor; the total absence of testamentary
dispositions of property, and even of that mode of legal
succession which supposes partition, and the exclusion of the
more remote by the nearer kin; the elimination of women from
participation in the family estate because marriage makes them
aliens; all these features of the patriarchal family so ably
illustrated in the works of Sir Henry Maine, reappear in the
modern constitution of the Russian family. I mean, of course,
that of the country people, the middle and higher classes having
already adopted European manners and customs, and being on that
account subjected to a legislation which, on more than one point,
is in direct opposition to customary law. 
    Let us study one by one the characteristic features of this
family constitution of the peasant, a constitution more like that
of the early Celts and Germans than that of any of the modern
nations of Europe.
    The great importance still attached by the Russian peasant to
agnatism, that is to relationship on the father's side, is shown
by the part which ancestor worship plays even now at the
celebration of a country wedding. Before becoming a member of her
husband's family, the bride must sever all the ties which have
hitherto bound her to the house-spirits under whose protection
she has passed her youth, and must solemnly adopt the worship of
those of the family into which she is about to enter. This public
manifestation of a change of worship is most clearly seen in the
wedding ceremonies of the Southern Slavs. It is not so distinctly
preserved in those of the Eastern Slavs. Both these races being
identical as to their origin and nature, I will begin by first
stating the religious customs, customs of an undoubtedly pagan
origin -- still in use at Bulgarian betrothals. "In Lika," says
M. Bogisic, "the bride, before leaving her father's house, goes
three times round the hearth, prostrating herself. each time, as
if to implore forgiveness." As you are aware of the intimate
connection which has existed between the worship of the hearth
and that of the family ancestors, I need not tell you that the
act performed by the Bulgarian bride before leaving her parent's
house has no other meaning than that of a last invocation of the
house-spirits whose worship she is on the point of abandoning. 
    The spirits are supposed to be hurt by the decision she has
taken to withdraw to her husband's homestead, and to be appeased
by an act of humiliation on her part. When she is once in the
bridegroom's house the maiden is obliged to perform another
ceremony; she must seat herself close to the hearth, in order to
keep up for a short time the fire burning thereon by pieces of
wood thrown on to it with her own hands. The symbolical character
of this ceremony may easily be perceived. The young wife is on
the point of becoming a member of the house community of her
husband, and as such, a participant in its family worship. Her
acquiescence must be expressed by a symbol, and her keeping up
the fire on the hearth is precisely such a symbol. The custom
just described exists all over Bulgaria and has been more than
once alluded to by modern ethnographers, M. Bogisic, Mr. Krauss,
and others. 
    Let us now examine the corresponding customs of the Russian
peasantry. In little Russia the bride, while her father is
discussing the question of her marriage with the person sent by
the bridegroom, is obliged by custom to remain near the hearth,
towards which she stretches out her hand. By so doing she
expresses her desire still to remain under the protection of the
house-spirits of her family, the so-called "domovoi." A century
ago, according to the statement of Kalinovsky, the day on which
the bride was taken to the house of her future husband, a great
fire was lighted in the yard before it, and the young couple were
obliged to cross it sitting in their carriage. This custom is
still observed in certain parts of the Government of Kiev, but
only in those cases in which the bride is known to have
misbehaved before marriage. Heaps of straw are kindled on such
occasions in the yard before the bridegroom's house, and the
bride who has passed safely over these fires is considered to be
purified. But this does not prevent her, as soon as she has
entered the house of her husband, from seeking refuge at the
hearth, where she stands for a while singing a carol, the meaning
of which is that she laments her past bad conduct and promises to
be a good wife. 
    I beg you to observe that the fires are lighted in the yard
of the bridegroom's house and that they are to be considered as
being in direct relation with the house-community to which he
belongs. Not every fire has the power of purification, only that
which represents the family hearth. It is to this hearth that the
young wife appeals for protection, should she have any reason to
fear any ill-treatment from her husband's family, on account of
her former conduct; it is before this hearth that she confesses
and repents and promises to be a good and faithful wife. 
    In a society, in which the interests of the family constantly
prevail over those of the individual (and such is certainly the
case in all patriarchal societies, and amongst them the Russian),
there is no room for marriages contracted by the mutual consent
of the young people. I do not mean to say that Russian parents,
whose duty it is to find suitable matches for their sons and
daughters, never take into account the feelings of those they
intend to unite. I wish only to impress on you the idea that they
are not obliged to do so by custom. On more than one occasion
Russian customary courts have plainly expressed the opinion that
a marriage contract concluded by the bride's father with that of
the future husband is a legal act, for the infringement of which
amends ought to be made by the restitution to the party wronged
of the loss he or she may have sustained. 
    The clergy very early endeavoured to put an end to the
arbitrary manner in which parents disposed of their children's
future, but the force of custom and the feeling that supported it
were so strong that the only measure which the ecclesiastical
statute of Jaroslav (XIth century) introduced for the protection
of the freedom of marriageable children was the one by which a
fine which went to the bishop was inflicted on the parents of a
daughter who, after a marriage contracted against her will, had
committed suicide. 
    The country people still believe that a marriage without the
parent's approval will call down the wrath of Heaven on the heads
of the young couple. This moral sanction, the right of parents to
decide the future of their children, has received from the
customary law of Russia the support of a penalty in case of
disobedience; the son and daughter who conclude a marriage
without consulting their parents, lose all rights to inheritance
and dowry. 
    According to modern Russian law, marriage is a religious act;
it cannot be performed without the help of the Church, and is
regarded as a sacrament. But such is by no means the light in
which the country people look on it, nor was it the view of the
old Russian law. For many centuries the Russian clergy had to
fight against the inveterate custom of our lower classes to
contract unions without the sanction of the Church. The young
couple saved the expense of a religious ceremony and thought
their union legally established as soon as they were publicly
joined to each other in the presence of the community, which was
invited on the occasion to a sort of festival called the
vesselic. No later than the end of the sixteenth century an
assembly of Divines convened by Ivan the Cruel entered a strong
protest against the custom which everywhere prevailed of omitting
the religious consecration of the marriage tie, and strong
measures were in consequence taken against those who did not
comply with the requirements of the clergy. All, however, failed,
and marriage remained in the eyes of the common people nothing
more than a sort of civil contract, entered into in the presence
of the community as a sign of its recognition and sanction. 
    That such generally was, and still is, the prevailing opinion
of the Russian peasant may be seen from the following facts. 
    Among the Cossacks of the Don, not more than a century ago,
people, as a general rule, were joined in marriage in the
following way: The young couple, after previous agreement, went
to the popular assembly of the village, or stanitza, this
assembly being known by the name of Majdan, and declared that
they had made up their minds to become husband and wife." Be my
wife," said the bridegroom to the bride. "Be my husband," she
answered. "So be it," chanted the assembly. "We wish you good
luck and happiness."(1*)
    On the Don the absence of a religious ceremony may, to a
certain extent, be explained by the scarcity of priests; but such
is by no means the case in those provinces which were annexed to
Muscovy in the middle of the seventeenth century, after ages of
political dependence on Poland. I refer to the Governments of
Kiev, Tchernigov, and Poltava, which constitute what in our days
is known under the name of Little Russia. It is, therefore, very
interesting to find that in those provinces the religious
consecration of marriage is still considered by the peasants as a
superfluous ceremony. Matrimonial life begins here after the
nuptial festival, the "vesselic," and weeks may pass before the
couple find it necessary to be married at church. Facts of the
same description have been noticed by Madame Efimenko in the
extreme north of Russia, in the Government of Archangel, occupied
by colonists from Great Russia.
    The customary law of Russia, like the old German
jurisprudence, established a difference between betrothal and
marriage. Both are considered to be legal acts, and both ought
therefore to have distinct legal effects. Betrothal is legally
concluded as soon as the two families have come to an agreement,
first, as to the amount of the marriage expenses each party is to
bear, and secondly, as to the time fixed for the wedding. The
expenses are of different kinds: they comprise, first, the
"kladka" of the bridegroom, a sort of pretium emptionis paid to
the bride's father, and the dowry which the bride receives from
her family. Then come the presents to be made by each party to
the parents of the bride and those of the bridegroom, and the
amount of expense which the bridegroom has to incur on the
occasion of the nuptial feast. All these are regularly discussed
and settled by a sort of verbal agreement, known among the
peasantry by the name of "riad." In ancient Russia when
agreements of this kind were entered into even by the higher
classes, the "riad" was always put down in the form of a written
contract, and this is still occasionally done in the northern
Governments of Russia, especially in that of Archangel. Betrothal
is considered to be legally concluded at the moment when the two
parties, that of the bridegroom and that of the bride, have
shaken hands. It is not without reason that i insist on the fact
that it is this indefinite expression of the two parties which
concludes the act of betrothal. I want to impress on your minds
that the presence of the bridegroom's father is not considered
necessary. An outsider, called "Svat," may be authorised by the
father to speak and act for him in a contract of this sort. 
    As soon as the ceremony of shaking hands is over neither of
the contracting parties can break the engagement without
incurring the obligation of pecuniary compensation for the wrong
he does to the other party by his breach of contract. This
compensation is of two different kinds: the one seems to have
rather a moral, the other a purely monetary or material origin.
If the bride's party breaks the contract, the bridegroom and his
family consider themselves injured in their honour. If, however,
the breach of promise has been made by the bridegroom, the case
is more serious. Then it is not only the honour of the bride that
suffers, but also the material interests of the family, since a
bride rejected by the man whom she was on the point of marrying,
will generally experience great difficulty in finding another
suitor. Such being the case, the customary court of the village
usually accords to the party aggrieved the right to demand a
pecuniary compensation "for the loss of honour the bride is
supposed to have sustained" ("sa beschestic," say our peasants).
In case security has been received for a bridegroom's performance
of his promise by a pledge or by the partial payment of the money
which he owes to the bride's father, the question of compensation
is easily settled, as the family of the bride retain for her own
use the money already received; but if no payment has been made,
the court must decide the amount to be paid. It very seldom
happens that the sum demanded exceeds thirty roubles, at least,
in the provinces of Great Russia. No extenuating circumstances
are admitted on this occasion by the Court. A father leaving once
declared that he was drunk when he gave his consent to the
proposed marriage of his son, received no other answer but this:
"You may be drunk, but you must be clever" (bud pyan da umen). 
    The breach of contract may have two different results: one,
that which I have just mentioned, a compensation in money for the
loss of honour; as to the other, I have already stated that the
contract of betrothal contains certain engagements as to the
amount of the pretium emptionis, of the dowry and of the
different expenses to be incurred by each party on the occasion
of the marriage. If certain of these engagements have been partly
fulfilled before the breach of promise, the wronged party has the
right to demand the restitution of the money which had been
spent; the bridegroom receives back the presents which he has
made to his bride, and the bride those given to the bridegroom.
The Courts uniformly recognise the necessity for such mutual
restitution, the only exception being when the money already paid
serves to constitute the amount of compensation to either party
for the wrong inflicted by the loss of honour. 
    The contract of marriage which follows that of betrothal,
cannot at the present time be dissolved; but we should be
mistaken if we inferred from this fact that this indissolubility
of marriage has always been recognised by the common law of
Russia. Though the peasants are now known to use the following
aphorisms: "Marriage is known but not unmarriage;" "A bad pope
may marry you, but even a good one cannot unmarry you," the case
was quite different in the past. Not longer ago than the end of
the eighteenth century the Cossacks of the Don practiced divorce.
A husband and wife who did not wish to live together any longer,
appeared before the popular assembly and made the following
declaration. "This woman is no longer my wife;" "this man is no
longer my husband." "Be it so," was the answer of the assembly,
and the marriage tie ceased to exist. During the sixteenth
century husbands in Great Russia were still accustomed to grant
their wives full liberty to contract a new engagement, or, at
least, to live apart from their legal lords. An archbishop of
Novgorod, Theodosius, bitterly complained of this practice. Up to
the middle of the eighteenth century the Russian clergy dissolved
the marriage bond very often for no other reason than that of
incompatibility of temper, this incompatibility appearing in the
dissolute life of either husband or wife. 
    The memory of those days is still preserved among the country
folk, and we can explain the part taken by the customary Courts,
in direct contradiction to the law, only by the influence on them
of tradition. They take part in the making of certain contracts
in which husbands and wives who no longer wish to live under the
same roof, waive questions of interest, and agree to interfere no
more with each other's existence. 
    The part which the community is called on to play in the
contract and dissolution of marriage is strikingly manifested in
certain peculiar ceremonies still in use at a Little Russian
wedding. The tokens of the damsel's virginity are exhibited in
much the same way as they were exhibited unto the elders of a
Jewish city, as is described in the twenty-second chapter of
Deuteronomy. The whole company then begin to shout loudly,
congratulating the mother of the bride, and eulogising the
maiden's virtue. In case the newly married wife is no longer a
virgin, and her husband makes no statement as to his previous
cohabitation with her, instead of praises and cheers, the most
violent abuse is poured on the parents of the bride, and the most
shameful songs are sung. They often go on to insulting acts, such
as the following: spirits are offered in derision to the bride's
mother in a glass with a hole in the bottom; the outside walls of
the house are blackened with tar; a hole is made in the stove in
order to show the stain which the hearth has suffered. Sometimes,
also, one of the guests climbs up to the top of the house and
begins to throw water down on all sides -- a symbol of the
liberality with which the new wife has distributed her favours to
all those who asked for them. Very frequently, also, the parents
of the bride are insulted by having yokes made of straw,
previously besmeared with tar and dirt, placed by force on their
necks. 
    The reciprocal rights and duties of husband and wife
according to Russian customary law, and the position of children
as regards their parents, are the next topics I intend to discuss
in the present lecture. 
    The husband is acknowledged to be the master of the woman he
has married. "The wife is in the power of her husband," so runs
the common saying, and the fact of her complete subjection to his
will is illustrated by certain symbolical acts performed at the
time of the wedding. The bridegroom, while he is leading his
bride to her future home, gives her from time to time light blows
from a whip, saying at each stroke: "Forget the manners of thine
own family, and learn those of mine." As soon as they have
entered their bedroom, the husband says to his wife, "Take off my
boots." The wife immediately obeys her husband's orders, and,
taking them off, finds in one of them a whip, symbol of his
authority over her person. This authority implies the right of
the husband to control the behaviour of his wife, and to correct
her every time he thinks fit, not only by words, but also by
blows. The opinion which a Russian writer of the sixteenth
century, the pope or priest Silvester (the author of The
Domostroy), expressed as to the propriety of personal
chastisement, and even as to its beneficial effects on the
health, is still shared by the country people. In more than one
popular song the wife is represented as bitterly complaining of
the indifference of a husband who never on any occasion gives her
a good beating. "I thrash those I love best," says a well-known
Russian proverb. The customary Court seems to admit the use of
such disciplinary proceedings by not interfering in the personal
relations of husband and wife. "Never judge the quarrel of
husband and wife," is a common saying, scrupulously observed by
the village tribunals, which refuse to hear any complaint on the
part of the aggrieved woman, at least so long as the punishment
has not been of such a nature as to endanger life or limb. Where
that is the case, the offender may be condemned to imprisonment,
and the outraged victim allowed to retire for a time to the home
of her parents. The customary law has, however, taken effectual
measures for the protection of the wife's fortune. That husband
and wife should each have entirely distinct property, with sole
control over it, is still the leading principle at least in Great
Russia. In the provinces which, like those of Little Russia, have
been for centuries subject to the statute of Lithuania and the
municipal law of Magdeburg, the system of a partial community of
goods has prevailed. According to the customary law of Kiev,
Poltava, and Chernigov, a widow has a right to the third part of
the fortune left by her husband. in former times this third part
was a sort of pledge for the security of the dowry of the wife. 
    A few words will suffice to give a general idea of the
dependence in which the children are placed as regards their
parents, and more especially their father. The patriarchal
character of the Russian family plainly appears in the fact that
no amount of bad treatment on the part of the parents justifies
an appeal to the village tribunal, unless it involves danger to
life or limb. In such cases, the nature of which makes it
difficult to establish the facts before a Court of Law, the
further maintenance of the child is generally committed to some
near relative. 
    The complete dependence of the children upon their parents in
respect to fortune is proved by the fact that neither son nor
daughter can claim any portion of the family estate. The father
can, as he pleases, give or refuse a dowry to his daughter.
Should she marry against his wish no dowry is given, and she
enters penniless into her husband's family. It equally depends
upon the father's pleasure whether he shall transfer a portion of
his property to a grown-up son, or maintain it intact in spite of
his son's manifest wishes. An act of insubordination on the part
of the son, as for instance, his marrying without permission, may
become the occasion for his complete disinheritance by the
father, at least so far as the father's fortune is concerned. I
make this exception, inasmuch as, besides his share in the
father's fortune, the son may be enabled to inherit from his
mother's estate, or may possess property' the gift of some
relative Or friend. Such property must be scrupulously guarded by
the father whose rights over it are only those of the natural
guardian of his son's fortune. 
    Hitherto we have spoken of the Russian family as of a kind of
natural society, created by marriage and continued by the birth
of children; but side by side with this form of family
organisation, differing only in detail from that of Western
Europe, there exists in Russia a peculiar mode of family
communism. In various parts of the country numerous persons,
sometimes amounting to fifty and rarely to less than ten, are to
be found united in a common household, living under the same roof
and taking their meals at the same table. A family constituted
after this fashion is known to English scholars under the name of
"The Joint Family" or "House Community." Sir Henry Maine has made
the notion of it generally familiar through his marvellous
investigations in the early law of Ireland and the modern customs
of Northern India. He has also correctly settled the question of
its origin by appealing to natural increase and non-division as
the real sources of its growth. He has even made an attempt to
show that it was not limited to distinct peoples or races, but
that, notwithstanding the immense distance which separates the
Eastern or Hindoo branch of the Aryan race from the European
branches, notwithstanding, also, the difference in the historical
development which may be traced between its Celtic and Slavonic
ramifications, joint households are as likely to be met with in
the defiles of the Himalayas as in the plains of old Erin or of
modern Servia. Taking advantage of the recent investigations made
by Professor Bogisic in the customary law of the Southern Slavs,
Sir Henry Maine has presented a lively picture of the interior
organisation of the famous Servian "Zadrouga," which, as he
shows, has more than one feature in common with the House
Community of the Rajpoots. The barrier of language, of which he
so often complains, prevented this master in the field of
comparative jurisprudence from completing his studies of the
patriarchal system of House Communities by investigating the
Undivided Household of Great Russia. This Undivided Household has
been recently the subject of numerous and serious inquiries on
the part of Russian ethnographers; and the results of their
investigations I desire now to lay before you. 
    First of all let me tell you that the undivided household of
the Eastern Slavs is a very ancient institution. In the so-called
Chronicle of Nestor, mention is made of the "gens" organisation
of the Polians, a Slavonic tribe, dwelling as I have already
said, on the banks of the Dnieper. The Polians are stated to live
(I translate literally) "each ruling his own kindred or gens (rod
svoi) and occupying distinct localities." This rather obscure
text authorises the supposition that the Polians were divided
into independent house-communities, each of which possessed its
own piece of land. Another reference is made to these Undivided
Households in one of the paragraphs of the Pravda of
Jaroslav,(2*) a sort of Mirror of Justice compiled in the middle
of the eleventh century, by order of the Grand Duke Jaroslav, son
of that Vladimir who introduced Christianity into Russia. The
frequent occurrence of South Slavonic terms in this the oldest
Russian code, such, for instance, as that of "bratouchada" (the
son of the brother, the nephew) confirms the hypothesis first put
forth, so far as I know, by the well-known professor of Russian
history at Moscow, Mr Kluchevsky, that the work of codification
had been entrusted to some southern Slav. This is the more likely
as owing to the recent introduction of Christianity and learning
into Russia, there was a lack of well-educated natives, so that
the Byzantine Church had frequently to have recourse to priests
of South Slavonic origin, in order to propagate the Gospel and
the elements of learning among their eastern and northern
brethren. Old Russian being much more like the language into
which the Holy Scriptures had been translated, and the Slavonic
dialect of the translation being that of the Southern Slavs,
priests of Bulgarian or Servian origin were the fittest persons
in Russia to be employed in this work. The translation of Greek
texts, the transcription and composition of Slavonic and Russian
MSS., as also the first attempts at a written exposition of
Russian customary law would equally fall into their hands. The
share of. a Southern Slav in the work of codification would
explain the presence in the Pravda of Jaroslav of a term which
has led to much comment. The word in question is verv. Various
guesses had been made as to its meaning, when at last Professor
Leontovitch had the good fortune to find it used in an old South
Slavonic customary, the statute of Politza, and that in the sense
of Undivided Household or House Community. The sense agrees with
the context of the two paragraphs in which the word is used in
the Pravda. In one of them mention is made of a case where the
body of a man belonging to the "following" of the duke has been
found within the limits of a verv; and the other says that in
such a case the whole verv must pay in common a fine similar to
that which was inflicted in England in such cases during the
reigns of William the Conqueror and the early Plantagenets. 
    A "verv," paying in common a sort of pecuniary composition
for a crime supposed to have been committed by one of its
members; a "verv" possessing its own proper limits, and therefore
its own territorial possession, exactly corresponds to a
house-community, in which several persons, living under the same
roof and owning land in common, are jointly answerable for the
crimes and misdemeanours committed within the limits of their
possessions. 
    If from the eleventh and twelfth centuries, during which the
different versions of the Pravda were drawn up, we pass to the
end of the fourteenth and the beginning of the fifteenth
centuries, we find the same village community mentioned, as well
in the North Western principalities of Russia -- that of Pscov,
for example, as in those of the South West which were ruled by
the Statute of Lithuania. The name under which the members of
these communities are known to the Russian law is that of
"siabri." This term is employed both by the judicial charter of
Pscov (1397-1467) and by the before-mentioned Statute of
Lithuania (1529). This word siabri is also to be found among the
Southern Slavs. The code of Servian laws, published by King
Stefan Douschan in the year 1349, makes frequent use of it when
speaking of the peasants.(3*) The peasants of Servia, having
always lived, and still living, in undivided households, the term
meaning co-partners in the enjoyment of an undivided property,
was very naturally applied to them and it is this meaning that
the word still keeps in the judicial charter of Pscov, and also
in the Statute of Lithuania. The latter was the chief source of
the customary law of Little Russia, and the term "siabri" and the
institution it calls to mind, are often mentioned in the Little
Russian documents of the last three centuries. A recent survey of
these sources, made by Professor Louchitzky, has quite settled
the question of the existence of House Communities even in those
provinces of Little Russia where in our time division of property
most prevails. Here as elsewhere individualism seems to have been
preceded by a sort of family communism like that of India,
ireland and the South Slavonian principalities. 
    The term siabri is not the only one used by Old Russian
writers to designate the members of such a household. They are
often spoken of in the financial surveys of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries under the characteristic name of hearth,
pechische. The so-called piszoviia knigi, a kind of survey very
like the poll-tax rolls still preserved in the Record Office,
speak of the hearth as the unit of taxation. The pechische of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries corresponds to the feu of
Burgundy and is even known by that name in some of the northern
provinces of Russia. The private charters, which are still
preserved by more than one family in the Government of Archangel,
some of which were drawn up in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, when speaking of the house community always make use
of the term ognische, a word which means the hearthfire, thus
showing that what constituted the tie between members of the same
household was their cooking food at the same hearth. 
    Thus far we have shown the high antiquity of the institution
which we are engaged in examining. Let us now proceed to the
study of its characteristic features. 
    All over Russia, but particularly within the boundaries of
the old Muscovite empire, communities of persons belonging to the
same kindred and living under the same roof are still in
existence. The number of persons belonging to these communities
varies from ten, or even less, to fifty and upwards. In the
government of Koursk, a community composed of about sixty persons
has recently been noticed by Professor Samokvasov. But such cases
are rare, and the number of persons living in common does not, as
a rule, exceed twenty or thirty. Among them we find the
grandfather and grandmother, the father and mother, sons and
daughters, grandsons and granddaughters, brothers and sisters,
nephews and nieces, with such other persons as may be united to
them by ties of marriage, as daughters-in-law in right of their
husbands, and sons-in-law in right of their wives. Persons
incorporated into the family, working for the common good, and
having shares in the family profits are often mentioned by
writers on Russian folk-lore. Besides these others may perchance
have become members, as for instance persons adopted into it, or
the children of a widow contracting a new marriage with a member
of the community, who, on account of her unwillingness to be
separated from them, come to live with her under the roof of her
new husband. 
    From this we see how various may have been the origin of
those who were members of the Undivided Family.
Blood-relationship, in the proper sense of the word, is not
always required, it suffices that the members be considered as
relatives; adoption takes the place of actual descent, and the
fact of sharing the daily work very often gives a stranger the
rights of a relative. 
    Undivided households are, as a rule, governed by the oldest
members of the community, but in case of prolonged illness or
want of mental power the oldest member may be superseded by
another, sometimes elected by the whole community. The name given
to the house-elder is bolschack, which means the greatest in
power. His authority and functions perfectly correspond to those
belonging, in a Servian zadruga, to the so-called "domachin."
Like the domachin, he is assisted in the difficult task of
governing the female part of the house community by some aged
woman, known by the name of "bolschoucha" (the greatest woman),
who is not always his wife. 
    It would be a gross error to look upon the house-elder of a
Russian undivided family as holding the same position as the
Roman paterfamilias. The house-elder has neither the authority
nor the amount of independence enjoyed by the paterfamilias in
the administration of the family fortune. The Russian
house-elder, like the Servian domachin, is but primus inter
pares. All the grown-up members of the community constitute a
sort of family council, whose advice must be regularly asked in
matters of importance. The domachin has no right to dispose of
the family possessions without the unanimous consent of all the
persons for whom he acts. When I say all, I mean of course only
the grown-up members, women as well as men. The women's opinion,
though of less importance than the men's, is not to be
disregarded, the more so on account of the influence which they
exercise on their husbands. 
    The functions of the house-elder are of very various kinds.
We must mention first of all his exclusive right to represent the
community before the executive and judicial authorities of the
village and district (selo i volost). It is he who regularly
appears in the courts, either to answer the complaints against
the community, or to insist on the recognition of rights which
have been violated. It is to him also that the Government
officials address their demand for the speedy payment of the
taxes. It is his duty to attend to the execution of the law
concerning military service, and to the carrying out of the
different orders issued by the local and provincial authorities. 
    As to the duties which the domachin has to perform in
connection with the interior administration of the household,
they are of two different kinds: they concern either the persons
who compose the house community, or the undivided property owned
by them. All disputes arising between co-partners are settled by
the house-elder, who is regularly assisted in such cases by the
family council. His interference in the relations between husband
and wife, between parents and children, sometimes exerts a highly
beneficial influence, in so far as it prevents cases of gross
abuse in the exercise of marital and paternal power; but it often
happens on the other hand that disputes between married couples
are embittered by the partiality of the house-elder for one or
other party. On more than one occasion husbands have been known
to inflict severe punishment on their wives because they were
ordered to do so by the head of the community; instances, too,
are very frequent in which the wife, encouraged by the support of
the house-elder, disregards the rights of her husband, and lives
in almost open adultery with the person whose chief duty ought to
consist in the maintenance of a high moral standard amongst the
persons over whom he exercises authority. 
    The house-elder has also, if not a casting vote, at least a
consultative voice in such matters as the choice of a wife, or
the giving of a daughter in marriage. As the amount of the dowry
is always fixed by the family council, presided over by its
chief, his decision very often settles the question as to the
acceptance or refusal of the offer of marriage. It is also the
duty of the house-elder to find occupation for the unemployed
members of the household. If the community is too large to allow
of all its members being employed in agricultural labour, the
family finds it advantageous to permit a certain number of its
members to seek their fortunes abroad, either in private service
or as small traders or pedlars, travelling about the country with
packs on their backs. Such petty hawkers, verv numerous in our
Eastern provinces, are known in Russia under the various names of
"ofeni," "chodebocschiki," "korobhniki," and "prosoli." They
render a real service to the country population, which, at least
in places far distant from railways and markets, would without
them have no means of procuring the most simple necessaries of
life. 
    Young orphans find in the person of the house-elder their
legal guardian; their moral and mental education depends solely
on him; it is be who sends them to school, finds employment for
them in the fields, or apprentices them to the different village
artisans to learn a trade by which to earn a future livelihood.
    As the administration of the family fortune, as I have
already said, falls on the house-elder, he makes all arrangements
that are needful to secure that every kind of agricultural labour
shall be properly done, assigning to each his daily share in the
ploughing, harrowing, and sowing of the fields, thrashing of the
corn, and such like occupations. If the number of hands of which
the family can dispose is not sufficient to answer all its
requirements, he hires others to help them. When the time comes
for the exchange of harvest produce for such articles as the
peasants may need, it is again the business of the house-elder to
sign contracts of sale or exchange. Those under his charge have
in such cases the right to control actions and to demand a full
account of all the moneys received or paid by him. This control
is particularly useful on those somewhat rare occasions when, in
consequence of a series of bad harvests, the family is obliged to
dispose of a part of its estate. On such occasions the whole
family has a voice in the selection of the purchases. Their
unanimous consent, plainly expressed in the act of sale, is
necessary in order to render it legal. 
    The resources by which the family provides for all its
requirements are of different kinds: some are derived from the
lands it owns, others from the private earnings of its members.
Widely separated though some of its members may be from the
family, the travelling pedlar, the labourer who has hired himself
out on some distant farm, the soldier and sailor fighting in some
foreign country or sailing to some distant land, nevertheless
they all look upon it a duty to allow their family to share in
their earnings. On its part the House Community does not object
to maintain the wife and children of an absent member, or to pay
the amount of his yearly taxes. The communistic character of the
great Russian family is shown by the ease with which the
household gets its members who are temporarily separated from it
to pay over to it the gains which they make. These, as a rule,
make no claim to keep their earnings for themselves. The peculium
castrense and quasi castrense, formerly known to the ancient
Romans, appear still to exist among the members of the Russian
house communities of the present day. if a movement in favour of
the establishment of private property can be detected it is only
in the private earnings made by the women and girls in their
leisure hours. These earnings accumulated hour by hour and day by
day form, as a rule, the principal part of the future dowry, the
father and mother making but a small addition to the sum got
together by the industry and thrift of a maiden who for many
years has been preparing for her marriage. The Undivided
Household of Great Russia may in this respect be compared to the
house community of India, for it also secures to an unmarried
woman the right of providing a peculium apart, a sort of
independent fortune, the so-called "stridhana," by the
accumulation of the small savings she regularly makes by needle
work. 
    Now that I have traced, though only in its general outlines,
that peculiar institution known in Russia under the rather vague
term of "The Great Family," let me call your attention to the
advantages and disadvantages which this institution presents. Its
great merit certainly consists in the fact that it develops to a
far larger extent than the small families of our days the feeling
of mutual dependence and joint relationship without which no
system of social reform can have any chance of success.
Possessing as they do no other but common property and having an
equal share in all the material enjoyments of fortune, the
members of these communistic bodies escape from the disheartening
influence of economic competition. 
    The conditions of this existence necessarily develop in them
all the consciousness of mutual responsibility, and the
conviction that without reliance on one another they cannot
overcome the dangers and difficulties of life. It would be a
study of high psychological interest to analyse the character of
a people which had grown up under such conditions, and to show
how far the inborn selfish instincts of man have been moderated
by the softening influence of a state of society which, to a
certain extent, does away with the necessity for an uninterrupted
struggle for life. The Russian novelists, conscious of what might
properly be expected of them, have more than once tried to give a
picture of the Russian "moujik" who is so unlike the French
"paysan," that petty owner of a small piece of land jealously
watched and guarded from the encroachments of his neighbour and
from those of the State. 
    The life-like characters drawn by our great author,
Tourgenieff, in his vivid "Sketches of a Sportsman" are, I
believe, the best illustrations that have ever been given of the
thoughts and feelings of our people -a people who, though rough
and rude, yet enjoy the great blessing of being unconscious of
the need of securing their individual happiness by a constant
struggle and by the pursuit of egotistic ends. The reliance shown
by the Russian peasant on the community, his conviction that the
mir is always just and reasonable, and that truth is nowhere to
be found but in the unanimous opinion of the people have
certainly developed estimable qualities and have helped to make
the Russian moujik a communist. That this is really the case, and
that his character has been modified by the system of the Great
Family, is proved by the fact that wherever a division of the
common property had taken place, wherever the peasant has been
reduced by his own will to depend entirely on his personal
industry for his success in life, he has become the pushing,
unscrupulous man whom the American novelist has rendered so
familiar to us. Two great Russian writers, Mr Ouspensky and Mr
Slatovraczky, both equally unknown to the English public although
their popularity amongst my countrymen almost equals that of
Tourgenieffor Tolstoi, have recently published two widely
different accounts of the social and psychological condition of
our peasants. Mr Ouspensky has spoken of the peasant as a
creature whose ethics almost entirely depend upon the regular
performance of agricultural labour. As long as he remains a
proprietor his morals are sound, but let him once lose the piece
of land which he has made fruitful by the sweat of his brow he is
sure to fall into debauchery and vice. Mr Slatovraczky has
depicted him as a kind of unselfish philosopher, who thinks that
the products of the earth are the common inheritance of all men,
and that the chief duty of a Christian is to help his neighbour,
sometimes even at his own expense. 
    Now, what may seem hardly credible is that both authors have
been applauded by the same public -- applauded, moreover, because
both were equally correct in their statements. The key to the
mystery is to be found in the fact that it is a different life
which is pictured by each -- the first having chosen his hero
from among the members of a broken-up house community; the second
among those still living in common. Our thoughts and feelings
being directly influenced by our social conditions, Mr
Ouspensky's hero presents to us all the features of a hard
worker, pursuing no other object than his own interests and
welfare, whilst Mr Slatovraczky's hero appears to be "a person
living not after the word of man but after the word of God,"
caring for his fellow-creatures almost as much as for
himself.(4*)
    There is exaggeration in the way in which both authors
represent the modern Russian moujik; for the sense of proportion
which was so highly valued by the ancients is not always
possessed by my countrymen; but even taking into account this
partiality for certain social forms and institutions, I believe
they have rendered us a real service by pointing out the intimate
correspondence that exists between the moral character of our
peasantry and their ancient mode of li£e. 
    I must, nevertheless, confess that morality, that at least
which is concerned with the relations between the sexes, has not
much to gain from the close packing under the same roof of
persons differing in sex and age. I leave to Mr. Anatole Leroy
Beaulieu the task of instructing you on this subject: "Chez un
peuple pauvre et chez des hommes grossiers," says this acute
French observer, "tout n'est point profit et vertu sous le regime
patriarcal. On sait combien de maux de toutes sortes derivent
dans les grandes villes d'occident, de l'etroitesse des logements
et de l'entassement des individus. Les incony enients ne sont pas
moindres en Russie. Quand une etroite izba (chaumiere) reunit
plusieurs generations et plusieurs menages, que durant les
longues nuits d'un long hiver les peres et les enfants, les
freres et leurs femmes couchent pele-mele autour du large poele,
il en resulte une sorte de promiscuite aussi malsaine pour l'ame
que pour le corps. Chez le moujik, alors meme que les enfants
maries habitaient plusieurs izbas disposees autour de la meme
cour, l'autocratie domestique etait un danger pour l'integrite et
la chastete de la famille. De meme que le proprietaire noble sur
les serves de ses domaines, le chef de maison s'arrogeait parfois
une sorte de droit du seigneur sur les femmes soumises a son
autorite. Le chef, designe du surnom le Vieux, qui, grace a la
precocite des marriages, avait souvent a peine quarante ans,
prelevait sur ses belles filles un tribut que la jeunesse ou la
dependance de ses fils leur defendait de lui contester. Il
n'etait point rare de voir ainsi le foyer domestique souillie par
l'autorite qui en devait maintenir la purete.(5*)
    It may also certainly be question ed how far the loss of a
spirit of personal enterprise, and the removal of a strong
feeling of self-reliance ought to be considered beneficial. I
have no doubt that if modern Russia produces on the minds of
foreign observers an impression as of a land of paupers, the
reason of it, or at least one of the reasons, is to be found in
the prevalence of these old communistic institutions. We must not
forget that it is the principle of self-help that has created the
material growth of England and of the United States of America.
But in entering on these discussions I trench on very uncertain
ground. The relative advantages and disadvantages of
individualism and of communism have furnished matter for warm
controversy from the time of Plato down to the time of Ruskin and
of Spencer, and we need not discuss them here. I think it better
to state that the Russian peasant, at least in our time, is not
insensible to the advantages of individualism, as is well shown
by the fact that between two and three million divisions of House
Communities have been effected since the day when the liberated
serf obtained the right to make them. If divisions of family
property were rare before 1861, the year of the abolition of
serfdom, the reason lies in the fact that the manorial lords and
the State were alike interested in the preservation of the system
of Undivided Households. The natural responsibility of the
members for the payment of taxes and for the execution of those
various kinds of agricultural labour which serfs were bound to
perform on the lands of the manor, were advantages far too
precious to be easily abandoned. It was, and it still is, for the
interests of the national treasury that these divisions should
not take place. It is for this reason that the Government,
concealing its real designs under a show of good-will towards an
old and venerable institution, has recently taken measures to
prevent further divisions. It is no longer with the majority that
the decision is to rest in questions of this kind, but with the
chief of the household, a person who is, of course, as a rule,
interested in the maintenance of non-division. 
    The reasons which are brought forward by the peasants to
justify their breaking up of Undivided Households are generally
the following: Non-division, they say, causes the able and
laborious to work for the idle and incapable. It is unjust to
force an unmarried person to divide his savings with a relative
enjoying the pleasures of married life and a numerous progeny,
who, on account of their youth, are not yet able to earn anything
by the work of their hands. They also affirm that, as the
dwelling-place is too small to accommodate a large family, they
are forced to divide in order to live with decency. 
    It is also often said that disputes among the women are the
direct cause of separation, while, again, some peasants frankly
avow that they insist on leaving their communistic mode of life
in order to have their own homes and to be their own masters.(6*)
If the objections just mentioned are not those of individualism,
I do not know what individualism is. 
    It is in the most fertile regions of Russia -- in Little
Russia and New Russia -- that divisions have been most numerous.
in these parts small families are already the general rule, as
the black soil of those districts is rich enough to pay the taxes
that are levied, and the peasant is not alarmed by the prospect
of being deprived of the aid of his relatives. The spirit of
independence of the Cossacks, which all those who are acquainted
with them readily acknowledge, explains to a great extent the
reason why the undivided household is dying out in the southern
and south-western parts of Russia. 
    The northern provinces will certainly sooner or later follow
the same path, and the patriarchal house community will disappear
in Russia, just as it has disappeared in France, Italy, and
Spain, and as it is disappearing in our days in Servia and
Croatia. For we must not think that this system was altogether
unknown to the people of Western Europe. Not only in Ireland,
where its previous existence had been recognised by Sir Henry
Maine, but also among the German and Latin races, the undivided
household was, a few centuries ago, a still living institution.
Guy Coquille, a legal writer of the sixteenth century, speaks of
them in the province of Nivernais, and they have recently been
discovered in the old charters of Berry. The "consorteria" of
medieval Tuscany, the "genealogie" of the old Alemannic law, and
the still existing "Companias" of Spanish Galicia, are but
different names to designate the Undivided household. If these
have disappeared, or are likely to disappear, in the near future,
it is because they have been forced to yield to the requirements
of individualism. I see no reason why the same thing should not
happen in Russia. 

NOTES:

1. Charousin, "The Cossack Communities of the Don" (Moscow,
1883), p. 74.

2. "The Pravda of Jaroslav", published by Kalachev, ss. 88, 89.

3. This word appears, for instance, in the following sentences;
"No political assembly of the 'siabri' ought to exist." "If any
one convenes it, let him lose his ears."

4. The two novels to which I allude are, "The Power of the Land,"
by Ouspensky, and "The Solid Base" (Oustoi), by Slatovraczky.
Both novels were published in Moscow.

5. "L'Empire des Tzars et les Russes," p. 488.

6. Compare what M. Dobrotvorsky says about the family in the
Government of Vladmir (Juridical Journal, Moscow, 1889, vol. ii.
p. 283).
