





                           THE FOURTH PART
                      OF THE KINGDOM OF DARKNESS




                             CHAPTER XLIV
      OF SPIRITUAL DARKNESS FROM MISINTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE

  Besides these sovereign powers, divine and human, of which I have
hitherto discoursed, there is mention in Scripture of another power,
namely, that of "the rulers of the darkness of this world,"* "the
kingdom of Satan,"*(2) and "the principality of Beelzebub over
demons,"*(3) that is to say, over phantasms that appear in the air:
for which cause Satan is also called "the prince of the power of the
air";*(4) and, because he ruleth in the darkness of this world, "the
prince of this world":*(5) and in consequence hereunto, they who are
under his dominion, in opposition to the faithful, who are the
"children of the light," are called the "children of darkness." For
seeing Beelzebub is prince of phantasms, inhabitants of his dominion
of air and darkness, the children of darkness, and these demons,
phantasms, or spirits of illusion, signify allegorically the same
thing. This considered, the kingdom of darkness, as it is set forth in
these and other places of the Scripture, is nothing else but a
confederacy of deceivers that, to obtain dominion over men in this
present world, endeavour, by dark and erroneous doctrines, to
extinguish in them the light, both of nature and of the gospel; and so
to disprepare them for the kingdom of God to come.

  * Ephesians, 6. 12
  *(2) Matthew, 12. 26
  *(3) Ibid., 9. 34
  *(4) Ephesians, 2. 2
  *(5) John, 16. 11

  As men that are utterly deprived from their nativity of the light of
the bodily eye have no idea at all of any such light; and no man
conceives in his imagination any greater light than he hath at some
time or other perceived by his outward senses: so also is it of the
light of the gospel, and of the light of the understanding, that no
man can conceive there is any greater degree of it than that which
he hath already attained unto. And from hence it comes to pass that
men have no other means to acknowledge their own darkness but only
by reasoning from the unforeseen mischances that befall them in
their ways. The darkest part of the kingdom of Satan is that which
is without the Church of God; that is to say, amongst them that
believe not in Jesus Christ. But we cannot say that therefore the
Church enjoyeth, as the land of Goshen, all the light which to the
performance of the work enjoined us by God is necessary. Whence
comes it that in Christendom there has been, almost from the time of
the Apostles, such jostling of one another out of their places, both
by foreign and civil war; such stumbling at every little asperity of
their own fortune, and every little eminence of that of other men; and
such diversity of ways in running to the same mark, felicity, if it be
not night amongst us, or at least a mist? We are therefore yet in
the dark.
  The enemy has been here in the night of our natural ignorance, and
sown the tares of spiritual errors; and that, first, by abusing and
putting out the light of the Scriptures: for we err, not knowing the
Scriptures. Secondly, by introducing the demonology of the heathen
poets, that is to say, their fabulous doctrine concerning demons,
which are but idols, or phantasms of the brain, without any real
nature of their own, distinct from human fancy; such as are dead men's
ghosts, and fairies, and other matter of old wives' tales. Thirdly, by
mixing with the Scripture diverse relics of the religion, and much
of the vain and erroneous philosophy of the Greeks, especially of
Aristotle. Fourthly, by mingling with both these, false or uncertain
traditions, and feigned or uncertain history. And so we come to err,
by giving heed to seducing spirits, and the demonology of such as
speak lies in hypocrisy, or, as it is in the original, "of those
that play the part of liars,"* with a seared conscience, that is,
contrary to their own knowledge. Concerning the first of these,
which is the seducing of men by abuse of Scripture, I intend to
speak briefly in this chapter.

  * I Timothy, 4. 1, 2

  The greatest and main abuse of Scripture, and to which almost all
the rest are either consequent or subservient, is the wresting of it
to prove that the kingdom of God, mentioned so often in the Scripture,
is the present Church, or multitude of Christian men now living, or
that, being dead, are to rise again at the last day: whereas the
kingdom of God was first instituted by the ministry of Moses, over the
Jews only; who were therefore called his peculiar people; and ceased
afterward, in the election of Saul, when they refused to be governed
by God any more, and demanded a king after the manner of the
nations; which God Himself consented unto, as I have more at large
proved before, in the thirty-fifth Chapter. After that time, there was
no other kingdom of God in the world, by any pact or otherwise, than
He ever was, is, and shall be king of all men and of all creatures, as
governing according to His will, by His infinite power.
Nevertheless, He promised by His prophets to restore this His
government to them again, when the time He hath in His secret
counsel appointed for it shall be fully come, and when they shall turn
unto Him by repentance and amendment of life. And not only so, but
He invited also the Gentiles to come in, and enjoy the happiness of
His reign, on the same conditions of conversion and repentance. And He
promised also to send His Son into the world, to expiate the sins of
them all by his death, and to prepare them by his doctrine to
receive him at his second coming: which second coming not yet being,
the kingdom of God is not yet come, and we are not now under any other
kings by pact but our civil sovereigns; saving only that Christian men
are already in the kingdom of grace, inasmuch as they have already the
promise of being received at his coming again.
  Consequent to this error, that the present Church is Christ's
kingdom, there ought to be some one man, or assembly, by whose mouth
our Saviour, now in heaven, speaketh, giveth law, and which
representeth his person to all Christians; or diverse men, or
diverse assemblies that do the same to diverse parts of Christendom.
This power regal under Christ being challenged universally by the
Pope, and in particular Commonwealths by assemblies of the pastors
of the place (when the Scripture gives it to none but to civil
sovereigns), comes to be so passionately disputed that it putteth
out the light of nature, and causeth so great a darkness in men's
understanding that they see not who it is to whom they have engaged
their obedience.
  Consequent to this claim of the Pope to vicar general of Christ in
the present Church (supposed to be that kingdom of his to which we are
addressed in the gospel) is the doctrine that it is necessary for a
Christian king to receive his crown by a bishop; as if it were from
that ceremony that he derives the clause of Dei gratia in his title;
and that then only is he made king by the favour of God when he is
crowned by the authority of God's universal vicegerent on earth; and
that every bishop, whosoever be his sovereign, taketh at his
consecration an oath of absolute obedience to the Pope. Consequent
to the same is the doctrine of the fourth Council of Lateran, held
under Pope Innocent the Third (Chapter 3, De Haereticis), "That if a
king, at the pope's admonition, do not purge his kingdom of
heresies, and being excommunicate for the same, do not give
satisfaction within a year, his subjects are absolved of the bond of
their obedience." Whereby heresies are understood all opinions which
the Church of Rome hath forbidden to be maintained. And by this means,
as often as there is any repugnancy between the political designs of
the Pope and other Christian princes, as there is very often, there
ariseth such a mist amongst their subjects, that they know not a
stranger that thrusteth himself into the throne of their lawful
prince, from him whom they had themselves placed there; and, in this
darkness of mind, are made to fight one against another, without
discerning their enemies from their friends, under the conduct of
another man's ambition.
  From the same opinion, that the present Church is the kingdom of
God, it proceeds that pastors, deacons, and all other ministers of the
Church take the name to themselves of the clergy; giving to other
Christians the name of laity, that is, simply people. For clergy
signifies those whose maintenance is that revenue which God, having
reserved to Himself during His reign over the Israelites, assigned
to the tribe of Levi (who were to be His public ministers, and had
no portion of land set them out to live on, as their brethren) to be
their inheritance. The Pope therefore (pretending the present Church
to be, as the realms of Israel, the kingdom of God), challenging to
himself and his subordinate ministers the like revenue as the
inheritance of God, the name of clergy was suitable to that claim. And
thence it is that tithes and other tributes paid to the Levites as
God's right, amongst the Israelites, have a long time been demanded
and taken of Christians by ecclesiastics, jure divino, that is, in
God's right. By which means, the people everywhere were obliged to a
double tribute; one to the state, another to the clergy; whereof
that to the clergy, being the tenth of their revenue, is double to
that which a king of Athens (and esteemed a tyrant) exacted of his
subjects for the defraying of all public charges: for he demanded no
more but the twentieth part, and yet abundantly maintained therewith
the Commonwealth. And in the kingdom of the Jews, during the
sacerdotal reign of God, the tithes and offerings were the whole
public revenue.
  From the same mistaking of the present Church for the kingdom of God
came in the distinction between the civil and the canon laws: the
civil law being the acts of sovereigns in their own dominions, and the
canon law being the acts of the Pope in the same dominions. Which
canons, though they were but canons, that is, rules propounded, and
but voluntarily received by Christian princes, till the translation of
the Empire to Charlemagne; yet afterwards, as the power of the Pope
increased, became rules commanded, and the emperors themselves, to
avoid greater mischiefs, which the people blinded might be led into,
were forced to let them pass for laws.
  From hence it is that in all dominions where the Pope's
ecclesiastical power is entirely received, Jews, Turks, and Gentiles
are in the Roman Church tolerated in their religion as far forth as in
the exercise and profession thereof they offend not against the
civil power: whereas in a Christian, though a stranger, not to be of
the Roman religion is capital, because the Pope pretendeth that all
Christians are his subjects. For otherwise it were as much against the
law of nations to persecute a Christian stranger for professing the
religion of his own country, as an infidel; or rather more, inasmuch
as they that are not against Christ are with him.
  From the same it is that in every Christian state there are
certain men that are exempt, by ecclesiastical liberty, from the
tributes and from the tribunals of the civil state; for so are the
secular clergy, besides monks and friars, which in many places bear so
great a proportion to the common people as, if need were, there
might be raised out of them alone an army sufficient for any war the
Church militant should employ them in against their own or other
princes.
  A second general abuse of Scripture is the turning of consecration
into conjuration, or enchantment. To consecrate is, in Scripture, to
offer, give, or dedicate, in pious and decent language and gesture,
a man or any other thing to God, by separating of it from common
use; that is to say, to sanctify, or make it God's, and to be used
only by those whom God hath appointed to be His public ministers (as I
have already proved at large in the thirty-fifth Chapter), and thereby
to change, not the thing consecrated, but only the use of it, from
being profane and common, to be holy, and peculiar to God's service.
But when by such words the nature or quality of the thing itself is
pretended to be changed, it is not consecration, but either an
extraordinary work of God, or a vain and impious conjuration. But
seeing, for the frequency of pretending the change of nature in
their consecrations, it cannot be esteemed a work extraordinary, it is
no other than a conjuration or incantation, whereby they would have
men to believe an alteration of nature that is not, contrary to the
testimony of man's sight and of all the rest of his senses. As for
example, when the priest, instead of consecrating bread and wine to
God's peculiar service in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper (which is
but a separation of it from the common use to signify, that is, to put
men in mind of, their redemption by the Passion of Christ, whose
body was broken and blood shed upon the cross for our transgressions),
pretends that by saying of the words of our Saviour, "This is my
body," and "This is my blood," the nature of bread is no more there,
but his very body; notwithstanding there appeareth not to the sight or
other sense of the receiver anything that appeared not before the
consecration. The Egyptian conjurers, that are said to have turned
their rods to serpents, and the water into blood, are thought but to
have deluded the senses of the spectators by a false show of things,
yet are esteemed enchanters. But what should we have thought of them
if there had appeared in their rods nothing like a serpent, and in the
water enchanted nothing like blood, nor like anything else but
water, but that they had faced down the king, that they were
serpents that looked like rods, and that it was blood that seemed
water? That had been both enchantment and lying. And yet in this daily
act of the priest, they do the very same, by turning the holy words
into the manner of a charm, which produceth nothing new to the
sense; but they face us down, that it hath turned the bread into a
man; nay, more, into a God; and require men to worship it as if it
were our Saviour himself present,  God and Man, and thereby to
commit most gross idolatry. For if it be enough to excuse it of
idolatry to say it is no more bread, but God; why should not the
same excuse serve the Egyptians, in case they had the faces to say the
leeks and onions they worshipped were not very leeks and onions, but a
divinity under their species or likeness? The words, "This is my
body," are equivalent to these, "This signifies, or represents, my
body"; and it is an ordinary figure of speech: but to take it
literally is an abuse; nor, though so taken, can it extend any further
than to the bread which Christ himself with his own hands consecrated.
For he never said that of what bread soever any priest whatsoever
should say, "This is my body," or "This is Christ's body," the same
should presently be transubstantiated. Nor did the Church of Rome ever
establish this transubstantiation, till the time of Innocent the
Third; which was not above five hundred years ago, when the power of
Popes was at the highest, and the darkness of the time grown so great,
as men discerned not the bread that was given them to eat,
especially when it was stamped with the figure of Christ upon the
cross, as if they would have men believe it were transubstantiated,
not only into the body of Christ, but also into the wood of his cross,
and that they did eat both together in the sacrament.
  The like incantation, instead of consecration, is used also in the
sacrament of baptism: where the abuse of God's name in each several
person, and in the whole Trinity, with the sign of the cross at each
name, maketh up the charm. As first, when they make the holy water,
the priest saith, "I conjure thee, thou creature of water, in the name
of God the Father Almighty, and in the name of Jesus Christ His only
Son our Lord, and in virtue of the Holy Ghost, that thou become
conjured water, to drive away all the powers of the enemy, and to
eradicate, and supplant the enemy," etc. And the same in the
benediction of the salt to be mingled with it, "That thou become
conjured salt, that all phantasms and knavery of the Devil's fraud may
fly and depart from the place wherein thou art sprinkled; and every
unclean spirit be conjured by him that shall come to judge the quick
and the dead." The same in the benediction of the oil, "That all the
power of the enemy, all the host of the Devil, all assaults and
phantasms of Satan, may be driven away by this creature of oil." And
for the infant that is to be baptized, he is subject to many charms:
first, at the church door the priest blows thrice in the child's face,
and says, "Go out of him, unclean spirit, and give place to the Holy
Ghost the Comforter." As if all children, till blown on by the priest,
were demoniacs. Again, before his entrance into the church, he saith
as before, "I conjure thee, etc., to go out, and depart from this
servant of God"; and again the same exorcism is repeated once more
before he be baptized. These and some other incantations are those
that are used instead of benedictions and consecrations in
administration of the sacraments of baptism and the Lord's Supper;
wherein everything that serveth to those holy uses, except the
unhallowed spittle of the priest, hath some set form of exorcism.
  Nor are the other rites, as of marriage, of extreme unction, of
visitation of the sick, of consecrating churches, and churchyards, and
the like, exempt from charms; inasmuch as there is in them the use
of enchanted oil and water, with the abuse of the cross, and of the
holy word of David, asperges me Domine hyssopo, as things of
efficacy to drive away phantasms and imaginary spirits.
  Another general error is from the misinterpretation of the words
eternal life, everlasting death, and the second death. For though we
read plainly in Holy Scripture that God created Adam in an estate of
living for ever, which was conditional, that is to say, if he
disobeyed not His commandment; which was not essential to human
nature, but consequent to the virtue of the tree of life, whereof he
had liberty to eat, as long as he had not sinned; and that he was
thrust out of Paradise after he had sinned, lest he should eat
thereof, and live for ever; and that Christ's Passion is a discharge
of sin to all that believe on Him, and by consequence, a restitution
of eternal life to all the faithful, and to them only: yet the
doctrine is now and hath been a long time far otherwise; namely,
that every man hath eternity of life by nature, inasmuch as his soul
is immortal. So that the flaming sword at the entrance of Paradise,
though it hinder a man from coming to the tree of life, hinders him
not from the immortality which God took from him for his sin, nor
makes him to need the sacrificing of Christ for the recovering of
the same; and consequently, not only the faithful and righteous, but
also the wicked and the heathen, shall enjoy eternal life, without any
death at all, much less a second and everlasting death. To salve this,
it is said that by second and everlasting death is meant a second
and everlasting life, but in torments; a figure never used but in this
very case.
  All which doctrine is founded only on some of the obscurer places of
the New Testament; which nevertheless, the whole scope of the
Scripture considered, are clear enough in a different sense, and
unnecessary to the Christian faith. For supposing that when a man
dies, there remaineth nothing of him but his carcass; cannot God, that
raised inanimated dust and clay into a living creature by His word, as
easily raise a dead carcass to life again, and continue him alive
for ever, or make him die again by another word? The soul, in
Scripture, signifieth always either the life or the living creature;
and the body and soul jointly, the body alive. In the fifth day of the
Creation, God said, Let the waters produce reptile animae viventis,
the creeping thing that hath in it a living soul; the English
translate it, "that hath life." And again, God created whales, et
omnem animam viventem; which in the English is, "every living
creature." And likewise of man, God made him of the dust of the earth,
and breathed in his face the breath of life, et factus est homo in
animam viventem, that is, "and man was made a living creature." And
after Noah came out of the ark, God saith, He will no more smite omnem
animam viventem, that is, "every living creature." And, "Eat not the
blood, for the blood is the soul"; that is, the life. From which
places, if by soul were meant a substance incorporeal, with an
existence separated from the body, it might as well be inferred of any
other living creature, as of man. But that the souls of the faithful
are not of their own nature, but by God's special grace, to remain
in their bodies from the resurrection to all eternity, I have already,
I think, sufficiently proved out of the Scriptures, in the
thirty-eighth Chapter. And for the places of the New Testament where
it is said that any man shall be cast body and soul into hell fire, it
is no more than body and life; that is to say, they shall be cast
alive into the perpetual fire of Gehenna.
  This window it is that gives entrance to the dark doctrine, first,
of eternal torments, and afterwards of purgatory, and consequently
of the walking abroad, especially in places consecrated, solitary,
or dark, of the ghosts of men deceased; and thereby to the pretences
of exorcism and conjuration of phantasms, as also of invocation of men
dead; and to the doctrine of indulgences; that is to say, of exemption
for a time, or for ever, from the fire of purgatory, wherein these
incorporeal substances are pretended by burning to be cleansed and
made fit for heaven. For men being generally possessed, before the
time of our Saviour, by contagion of the demonology of the Greeks,
of an opinion that the souls of men were substances distinct from
their bodies; and therefore that when the body was dead, the soul of
every man, whether godly or wicked, must subsist somewhere by virtue
of its own nature, without acknowledging therein any supernatural gift
of God's; the doctors of the Church doubted a long time what was the
place which they were to abide in, till they should be reunited to
their bodies in the resurrection, supposing for a while, they lay
under the altars: but afterward the Church of Rome found it more
profitable to build for them this place of purgatory, which by some
other Churches, in this later age, has been demolished.
  Let us now consider what texts of Scripture seem most to confirm
these three general errors I have here touched. As for those which
Cardinal Bellarmine hath alleged for the present kingdom of God
administered by the Pope (than which there are none that make a better
show of proof), I have already answered them; and made it evident that
the kingdom of God, instituted by Moses, ended in the election of
Saul: after which time the priest of his own authority never deposed
any king. That which the high priest did to Athaliah was not done in
his own right, but in the right of the young King Joash, her son:
But Solomon in his own right deposed the high priest Abiathar, and set
up another in his place. The most difficult place to answer, of all
those that can be brought to prove the kingdom of God by Christ is
already in this world, is alleged, not by Bellarmine, nor any other of
the Church of Rome, but by Beza, that will have it to begin from the
resurrection of Christ. But whether he intend thereby to entitle the
presbytery to the supreme power ecclesiastical in the Commonwealth
of Geneva, and consequently to every presbytery in every other
Commonwealth, or to princes and other civil sovereigns, I do not know.
For the presbytery hath challenged the power to excommunicate their
own kings, and to be the supreme moderators in religion, in the places
where they have that form of Church government, no less than the
Pope challengeth it universally.
  The words are, "Verily I say unto you, that there be some of them
that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen
the kingdom of God come with power."* Which words, if taken
grammatically, make it certain that either some of those men that
stood by Christ at that time are yet alive, or else that the kingdom
of God must be now in this present world. And then there is another
place more difficult: for when the Apostles after our Saviour's
resurrection, and immediately before his ascension, asked our Saviour,
saying, "Wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to
Israel?" he answered them, "It is not for you to know the times and
the seasons, which the Father hath put in His own power; but ye
shall receive power by the coming of the Holy Ghost upon you, and ye
shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth":*(2) which is as
much as to say, My kingdom is not yet come, nor shall you foreknow
when it shall come; for it shall come as a thief in the night; but I
will send you the Holy Ghost, and by him you shall have power to
bear witness to all the world, by your preaching of my resurrection,
and the works I have done, and the doctrine I have taught, that they
may believe in me, and expect eternal life, at my coming again. How
does this agree with the coming of Christ's kingdom at the
resurrection? And that which St. Paul says, "That they turned from
idols, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for His Son
from heaven";*(3) where "to wait for His Son from heaven" is to wait
for his coming to be king in power; which were not necessary if his
kingdom had been then present. Again, if the kingdom of God began,
as Beza on that place*(4) would have it, at the resurrection; what
reason is there for Christians ever since the resurrection to say in
their prayers, "Let thy kingdom come"? It is therefore manifest that
the words of St. Mark are not so to be interpreted. There be some of
them that stand here, saith our Saviour, that shall not taste of death
till they have seen the kingdom of God come in power. If then this
kingdom were to come at the resurrection of Christ, why is it said,
some of them, rather than all? For they all lived till after Christ
was risen.

  * Mark, 9. 1
  *(2) Acts, 1. 6
  *(3) I Thessalonians, 1. 9, 10

  But they that require an exact interpretation of this text, let them
interpret first the like words of our Saviour to St. Peter
concerning St. John, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee?"* upon which was grounded a report that he should not
die. Nevertheless the truth of that report was neither confirmed, as
well grounded; nor refuted, as ill grounded on those words; but left
as a saying not understood. The same difficulty is also in the place
of St. Mark. And if it be lawful to conjecture at their meaning, by
that which immediately follows, both here and in St. Luke, where the
same is again repeated, it is not improbable to say they have relation
to the Transfiguration, which is described in the verses immediately
following, where it is said that "After six days Jesus taketh with him
Peter, and James, and John" (not all, but some of his Disciples), "and
leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves, and was
transfigured before them. And his raiment became shining, exceeding
white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them. And there
appeared unto them Elias with Moses, and they were talking with
Jesus," etc. So that they saw Christ in glory and majesty, as he is to
come; insomuch as "they were sore afraid." And thus the promise of our
Saviour was accomplished by way of vision. For it was a vision, as may
probably be inferred out of St. Luke, that reciteth the same story,
and saith that Peter and they that were with him were heavy with
sleep:*(2) but most certainly out of Matthew 17. 9 where the same is
again related; for our Saviour charged them, saying, "Tell no man
the vision until the Son of Man be risen from the dead." Howsoever
it be, yet there can from thence be taken no argument to prove that
the kingdom of God taketh beginning till the day of judgement.

  * John, 21. 22
  *(2) Luke, 9. 28

  As for some other texts to prove the Pope's power over civil
sovereigns (besides those of Bellarmine), as that the two swords
that Christ and his Apostles had amongst them were the spiritual and
the temporal sword, which they say St. Peter had given him by
Christ; and that of the two luminaries, the greater signifies the
Pope, and the lesser the king; one might as well infer out of the
first verse of the Bible that by heaven is meant the Pope, and by
earth the king: which is not arguing from Scripture, but a wanton
insulting over princes that came in fashion after the time the popes
were grown so secure of their greatness as to contemn all Christian
kings; and treading on the necks of emperors, to mock both them and
the Scripture, in the words of the ninety-first Psalm, "Thou shalt
tread upon the lion and the adder; the young lion and the dragon
thou shalt trample under thy feet."
  As for the rites of consecration, though they depend for the most
part upon the discretion and judgement of the governors of the Church,
and not upon the Scriptures; yet those governors are obliged to such
direction as the nature of the action itself requireth; as that the
ceremonies, words, gestures be both decent and significant, or at
least conformable to the action. When Moses consecrated the
tabernacle, the altar, and the vessels belonging to them, he
anointed them with the oil which God had commanded to be made for that
purpose:* and they were holy. There was nothing exorcized, to drive
away phantasms. The same Moses (the civil sovereign of Israel), when
he consecrated Aaron (the high priest) and his sons, did wash them
with water (not exorcized water), put their garments upon them, and
anointed them with oil; and they were sanctified, to minister unto the
Lord in the priest's office, which was a simple and decent cleansing
and adorning them before he presented them to God, to be His servants.
When King Solomon (the civil sovereign of Israel) consecrated the
temple he had built, he stood before all the congregation of Israel;
and having blessed them, he gave thanks to God for putting into the
heart of his father to build it, and for giving to himself the grace
to accomplish the same; and then prayed unto Him, first, to accept
that house, though it were not suitable to His infinite greatness, and
to hear the prayers of His servants that should pray therein, or (if
they were absent) towards it; and lastly, he offered a sacrifice of
peace offering, and the house was dedicated.*(2) Here was no
procession; the King stood still in his first place; no exorcized
water; no Asperges me, nor other impertinent application of words
spoken upon another occasion; but a decent and rational speech, and
such as in making to God a present of his new-built house was most
conformable to the occasion.

  * Exodus, 40
  *(2) II Kings, 8

  We read not that St. John did exorcize the water of Jordan; nor
Philip the water of the river wherein he baptized the eunuch; nor that
any pastor in the time of the Apostles did take his spittle and put it
to the nose of the person to be baptized, and say, in odorem
suavitatis, that is, "for a sweet savour unto the Lord"; wherein
neither the ceremony of spittle, for the uncleanness; nor the
application of that Scripture, for the levity, can by any authority of
man be justified.
  To prove that the soul, separated from the body, liveth eternally,
not only the souls of the elect, by especial grace, and restoration of
the eternal life which Adam lost by sin, and our Saviour restored by
the sacrifice of himself to the faithful; but also the souls of
reprobates, as a property naturally consequent to the essence of
mankind, without other grace of God but that which is universally
given to all mankind; there are diverse places which at the first
sight seem sufficiently to serve the turn: but such as when I
compare them with that which I have before (Chapter thirty-eight)
alleged out of the fourteenth of Job seem to me much more subject to a
diverse interpretation than the words of Job.
  And first there are the words of Solomon, "Then shall the dust
return to dust, as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that
gave it."* Which may bear well enough (if there be no other text
directly against it) this interpretation, that God only knows, but man
not, what becomes of a man's spirit when he expireth; and the same
Solomon, in the same book, delivereth the same sentence in the sense I
have given it. His words are, "All go to the same place; all are of
the dust, and all turn to dust again; who knoweth that the spirit of
man goeth upward, and that the spirit of the beast goeth downward to
the earth?"*(2) That is, none knows but God; nor is it an unusual
phrase to say of things we understand not, "God knows what," and
"God knows where." That of Genesis, 5. 24, "Enoch walked with God, and
he was not; for God took him"; which is expounded, Hebrews, 11. 5, "He
was translated, that he should not die; and was not found, because God
had translated him. For before his translation, he had this testimony,
that he pleased God," making as much for the immortality of the body
as of the soul, proveth that this his translation was peculiar to them
that please God; not common to them with the wicked; and depending
on grace, not on nature. But on the contrary, what interpretation
shall we give, besides the literal sense of the words of Solomon,
"That which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts, even one thing
befalleth them; as the one dieth, so doth the other; yea, they have
all one breath; so that a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast,
for all is vanity."*(3) By the literal sense, here is no natural
immortality of the soul; nor yet any repugnancy with the life eternal,
which the elect shall enjoy by grace. And, "Better is he that hath not
yet been than both they";*(4) that is, than they that live or have
lived; which, if the soul of all them that have lived were immortal,
were a hard saying; for then to have an immortal soul were worse
than to have no soul at all. And again, "The living know they shall
die, but the dead know not anything";*(5) that is, naturally, and
before the resurrection of the body.

  * Ecclesiastes, 12. 7
  *(2) Ibid., 3. 20, 21
  *(3) Ibid., 3. 19
  *(4) Ibid., 4. 3
  *(5) Ibid., 9. 5

  Another place which seems to make for a natural immortality of the
soul is that where our Saviour saith that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
are living: but this is spoken of the promise of God, and of their
certitude to rise again, not of a life then actual; and in the same
sense that God said to Adam that on the day he should eat of the
forbidden fruit, he should certainly die; from that time forward he
was a dead man by sentence; but not by execution, till almost a
thousand years after. So Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were alive by
promise, then, when Christ spoke; but are not actually till the
resurrection. And the history of Dives and Lazarus make nothing
against this, if we take it, as it is, for a parable.
  But there be other places of the New Testament where an
immortality seemeth to be directly attributed to the to the wicked.
For it is evident that they shall all rise to judgement. And it is
said besides, in many places, that they shall go into "everlasting
fire, everlasting torments, everlasting punishments; and that the worm
of conscience never dieth"; and all this is comprehended in the word
everlasting death, which is ordinarily interpreted "everlasting life
in torments": and yet I can find nowhere that any man shall live in
torments everlastingly. Also, it seemeth hard to say that God, who
is the Father of mercies, that doth in heaven and earth all that He
will; that hath the hearts of all men in His disposing; that worketh
in men both to do and to will; and without whose free gift a man
hath neither inclination to good nor repentance of evil, should punish
men's transgressions without any end of time, and with all the
extremity of torture that men can imagine, and more. We are
therefore to consider what the meaning is of everlasting fire, and
other the like phrases of Scripture.
  I have shown already that the kingdom of God by Christ beginneth
at the day of judgement: that in that day, the faithful shall rise
again, with glorious and spiritual bodies and be his subjects in
that his kingdom, which shall be eternal: that they shall neither
marry, nor be given in marriage, nor eat and drink, as they did in
their natural bodies; but live for ever in their individual persons,
without the specifical eternity of generation: and that the reprobates
also shall rise again, to receive punishments for their sins: as
also that those of the elect, which shall be alive in their earthly
bodies at that day, shall have their bodies suddenly changed, and made
spiritual and immortal. But that the bodies of the reprobate, who make
the kingdom of Satan, shall also be glorious or spiritual bodies, or
that they shall be as the angels of God, neither eating, nor drinking,
nor engendering; or that their life shall be eternal in their
individual persons, as the life of every faithful man is, or as the
life of Adam had been if he had not sinned, there is no place of
Scripture to prove it; save only these places concerning eternal
torments, which may otherwise be interpreted.
  From whence may be inferred that, as the elect after the
resurrection shall be restored to the estate wherein Adam was before
he had sinned; so the reprobate shall be in the estate that Adam and
his posterity were in after the sin committed; saving that God
promised a redeemer to Adam, and such of his seed as should trust in
him and repent, but not to them that should die in their sins, as do
the reprobate.
  These things considered, the texts that mention "eternal fire,"
"eternal torments," or "the worm that never dieth," contradict not the
doctrine of a second and everlasting death, in the proper and
natural sense of the word death. The fire or torments prepared for the
wicked in Gehenna, Tophet, or in what place soever, may continue
forever; and there may never want wicked men to be tormented in
them, though not every nor any one eternally. For the wicked, being
left in the estate they were in after Adam's sin, may at the
resurrection live as they did, marry, and give in marriage, and have
gross and corruptible bodies, as all mankind now have; and
consequently may engender perpetually, after the resurrection, as they
did before: for there is no place of Scripture to the contrary. For
St. Paul, speaking of the resurrection, understandeth it only of the
resurrection to life eternal, and not the resurrection to punishment.*
And of the first, he saith that the body is "sown in corruption,
raised in incorruption; sown in dishonour, raised in honour; sown in
weakness, raised in power; sown a natural body, raised a spiritual
body." There is no such thing can be said of the bodies of them that
rise to punishment. So also our Saviour, when he speaketh of the
nature of man after the resurrection, meaneth the resurrection to life
eternal, not to punishment. The text is Luke, 20, verses 34, 35, 36, a
fertile text: "The children of this world marry, and are given in
marriage; but they that shall be counted worthy to obtain that
world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are
given in marriage: neither can they die any more; for they are equal
to the angels, and are the children of God, being the children of
the resurrection." The children of this world, that are in the
estate which Adam left them in, shall marry and be given in
marriage; that is, corrupt and generate successively; which is an
immortality of the kind, but not of the persons of men: they are not
worthy to be counted amongst them that shall obtain the next world, an
absolute resurrection from the dead; but only a short time, as inmates
of that world; and to the end only to receive condign punishment for
their contumacy. The elect are the only children of the
resurrection; that is to say, the sole heirs of eternal life: they
only can die no more. It is they that are equal to the angels, and
that are the children of God, and not the reprobate. To the
reprobate there remaineth after the resurrection a second and
eternal death, between which resurrection and their second and eternal
death is but a time of punishment and torment, and to last by
succession of sinners thereunto as long as the kind of man by
propagation shall endure, which is eternally.

  * I Corinthians, 15

  Upon this doctrine of the natural eternity of separated souls is
founded, as I said, the doctrine of purgatory. For supposing eternal
life by grace only, there is no life but the life of the body; and
no immortality till the resurrection. The texts for purgatory
alleged by Bellarmine out of the canonical Scripture of the Old
Testament are, first, the fasting of David for Saul and Jonathan,
mentioned II Samuel, 1. 12, and again, II Samuel, 3. 35, for the death
of Abner. This fasting of David, he saith, was for the obtaining of
something for them at God's hands, after their death: because after he
had fasted to procure the recovery of his own child, as soon as he
knew it was dead, he called for meat. Seeing then the soul hath an
existence separate from the body, and nothing can be obtained by men's
fasting for the souls that are already either in heaven or hell, it
followeth that there be some souls of dead men that are neither in
heaven nor in hell; and therefore they must be in some third place,
which must be purgatory. And thus with hard straining, he has
wrested those places to the proof of a purgatory: whereas it is
manifest that the ceremonies of mourning and fasting, when they are
used for the death of men whose life was not profitable to the
mourners, they are used for honour's sake to their persons; and when
it is done for the death of them by whose life the mourners had
benefit, it proceeds from their particular damage: and so David
honoured Saul and Abner with his fasting; and, in the death of his own
child, recomforted himself by receiving his ordinary food.
  In the other places which he allegeth out of the Old Testament,
there is not so much as any show or colour of proof. He brings in
every text wherein there is the word anger, or fire, or burning, or
purging, or cleansing, in case any of the fathers have but in a sermon
rhetorically applied it to the doctrine of purgatory, already
believed. The first verse of Psalm 37, "O Lord, rebuke me not in thy
wrath, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure": what were this to
purgatory, if Augustine had not applied the wrath to the fire of hell,
and the displeasure to that of purgatory? And what is it to purgatory,
that of Psalm, 66. 12 "We went through fire and water, and thou
broughtest us to a moist place"; and other the like texts, with
which the doctors of those times intended to adorn or extend their
sermons or commentaries, haled to their purposes by force of wit?
  But he allegeth other places of the New Testament that are not so
easy to be answered. And first that of Matthew, 12. 32, "Whosoever
speaketh a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him;
but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to come"; where
he will have purgatory to be the world to come, wherein some sins
may be forgiven which in this world were not forgiven: notwithstanding
that it is manifest there are but three worlds; one from the
creation to the flood, which was destroyed by water, and is called
in Scripture "the old world"; another from the flood to the day of
judgement, which is "the present world, and shall be destroyed by
fire; and the third, which shall be from the day of judgement forward,
everlasting, which is called "the world to come"; and in which it
agreed by all there shall be no purgatory: and therefore the world
to come, and purgatory, are inconsistent. But what then can be the
meaning of those our Saviour's words? I confess they are very hardly
to be reconciled with all the doctrines now unanimously received:
nor is it any shame to confess the profoundness of the Scripture to be
too great to be sounded by the shortness of human understanding.
Nevertheless, I may propound such things to the consideration of
more learned divines, as the text itself suggesteth. And first, seeing
to speak against the Holy Ghost, as being the third person of the
Trinity, is to speak against the Church, in which the Holy Ghost
resideth; it seemeth the comparison is made between the easiness of
our Saviour in bearing with offences done to him while he himself
taught the world, that is, when he was on earth, and the severity of
the pastors after him, against those which should deny their
authority, which was from the Holy Ghost. As if he should say, you
that deny my power; nay, you that shall crucify me, shall be
pardoned by me, as often as you turn unto me by repentance: but if you
deny the power of them that teach you hereafter, by virtue of the Holy
Ghost, they shall be inexorable, and shall not forgive you, but
persecute you in this world, and leave you without absolution
(though you turn to me, unless you turn also to them), to the
punishments, as much as lies in them, of the world to come. And so the
words may be taken as a prophecy or prediction concerning the times,
as they have long been in the Christian Church: or if this be not
the meaning (for I am not peremptory in such difficult places),
perhaps there may be place left after the resurrection for the
repentance of some sinners. And there is also another place that
seemeth to agree therewith. For considering the words of St. Paul,
"What shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead
rise not at all? Why also are they baptized for the dead?"* a man
may probably infer, as some have done, that in St. Paul's time there
was a custom, by receiving baptism for the dead, (as men that now
believe are sureties and undertakers for the faith of infants that are
not capable of believing) to undertake for the persons of their
deceased friends, that they should be ready to obey and receive our
Saviour for their king at his coming again; and then the forgiveness
of sins in the world to come has no need of a purgatory. But in both
these interpretations, there is so much of paradox that I trust not to
them, but propound them to those that are thoroughly versed in the
Scripture, to inquire if there be no clearer place that contradicts
them. Only of thus much, I see evident Scripture to persuade me that
there is neither the word nor the thing of purgatory, neither in
this nor any other text; nor anything that can prove a necessity of
a place for the soul without the body; neither for the soul of Lazarus
during the four days he was dead; nor for the souls of them which
the Roman Church pretend to be tormented now in purgatory. For God,
that could give a life to a piece of clay, hath the same power to give
life again to a dead man, and renew his inanimate and rotten carcass
into a glorious, spiritual, and immortal body.

  * I Corinthians, 15. 29

  Another place is that of I Corinthians, 3, where it is said that
they which build stubble, hay, etc., on the true foundation, their
work shall perish; but "they themselves shall be saved; but as through
fire": this fire he will have to be the fire of purgatory. The
words, as I have said before, are an allusion to those of Zechariah,
13. 9, where he saith, "I will bring the third part through the
fire, and refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as
gold is tried": which is spoken of the coming of the Messiah in
power and glory; that is, at the day of judgement, and conflagration
of the present world; wherein the elect shall not be consumed, but
be refined; that is, depose their erroneous doctrines and
traditions, and have them, as it were, singed off; and shall
afterwards call upon the name of the true God. In like manner, the
Apostle saith of them that, holding this foundation, Jesus is the
Christ, shall build thereon some other doctrines that be erroneous,
that they shall not be consumed in that fire which reneweth the world,
but shall pass through it to salvation; but so as to see and
relinquish their former errors. The builders are the pastors; the
foundation, that Jesus is the Christ; the stubble and hay, false
consequences drawn from it through ignorance or frailty; the gold,
silver, and precious stones are their true doctrines; and their
refining or purging, the relinquishing of their errors. In all which
there is no colour at all for the burning of incorporeal, that is to
say, impatible souls.
  A third place is that of I Corinthians, 15. 29, before mentioned,
concerning baptism for the dead: out of which he concludeth, first,
that prayers for the dead are not unprofitable; and out of that,
that there is a fire of purgatory: but neither of them rightly. For of
many interpretations of the word baptism, he approveth this in the
first place, that by baptism is meant, metaphorically, a baptism of
penance; and that men are in this sense baptized when they fast, and
pray, and give alms; and so baptism for the dead, and prayer for the
dead, is the same thing. But this is a metaphor, of which there is
no example, neither in the Scripture nor in any other use of language;
and which is also discordant to the harmony and scope of the
Scripture. The word baptism is used for being dipped in one's own
blood, as Christ was upon the cross, and as most of the Apostles were,
for giving testimony of him.* But it is hard to say that prayer,
fasting, and alms have any similitude with dipping. The same is used
also, Matthew, 3. 11 (which seemeth to make somewhat for purgatory),
for a purging with fire. But it is evident the fire and purging here
mentioned is the same whereof the Prophet Zechariah speaketh, "I
will bring the third part through the fire, will refine them,"
etc.*(2) And St. Peter after him, "That the trial of your faith, which
is much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be
tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour, and glory
at the appearing of Jesus Christ";*(3) and St. Paul, "The fire shall
try every man's work of what sort it is."*(4) But St. Peter and St.
Paul speak of the fire that shall be at the second appearing of
Christ; and the Prophet Zechariah, of the day of judgement. And
therefore this place of St. Matthew may be interpreted of the same,
and then there will be no necessity of the fire of purgatory.

  * Mark, 10. 38, and Luke, 12. 50
  *(2) Zechariah, 13. 9
  *(3) I Epistle, 1. 7
  *(4) I Corinthians, 3. 13

  Another interpretation of baptism for the dead is that which I
have before mentioned, which he preferreth to the second place of
probability: and thence also he inferreth the utility of prayer for
the dead. For if after the resurrection such as have not heard of
Christ, or not believed in him, may be received into Christ's kingdom,
it is not in vain, after their death, that their friends should pray
for them till they should be risen. But granting that God, at the
prayers of the faithful, may convert unto him some of those that
have not heard Christ preached, and consequently cannot have
rejected Christ, and that the charity of men in that point cannot be
blamed; yet this concludeth nothing for purgatory, because to rise
from death to life is one thing; to rise from purgatory to life is
another; as being a rising from life to life, from a life in
torments to a life in joy.
  A fourth place is that of Matthew, 5. 25: "Agree with thine
adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, lest at any
time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver
thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto
thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid
the uttermost farthing." In which allegory, the offender is the
sinner; both the adversary and the judge is God; the way is this life;
the prison is the grave; the officer, death; from which the sinner
shall not rise again to life eternal, but to a second death, till he
have paid the utmost farthing, or Christ pay it for him by his
Passion, which is a full ransom for all manner of sin, as well
lesser sins as greater crimes, both being made by the Passion of
Christ equally venial.
  The fifth place is that of Matthew, 5. 22: "Whosoever is angry
with his brother without a cause shall be guilty in judgement. And
whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be guilty in the
council. But whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be guilty to hell
fire." From which words he inferreth three sorts of sins, and three
sorts of punishments; and that none of those sins, but the last, shall
be punished with hell fire; and consequently, that after this life
there is punishment of lesser sins in purgatory. Of which inference
there is no colour in any interpretation that hath yet been given of
them. Shall there be a distinction after this life of courts of
justice, as there was amongst the Jews in our Saviour's time, to
hear and determine diverse sorts of crimes, as the judges and the
council? Shall not all judicature appertain to Christ and his
Apostles? To understand therefore this text, we are not to consider it
solitarily, but jointly with the words precedent and subsequent. Our
Saviour in this chapter interpreteth the Law of Moses, which the
Jews thought was then fulfilled when they had not transgressed the
grammatical sense thereof, howsoever they had transgressed against the
sentence or meaning of the legislator. Therefore, whereas they thought
the sixth Commandment was not broken but by killing a man; nor the
seventh, but when a man lay with a woman not his wife; our Saviour
tells them, the inward anger of a man against his brother, if it be
without just cause, is homicide. You have heard, saith he, the Law
of Moses, "Thou shalt not kill," and that "Whosoever shall kill
shall be condemned before the judges," or before the session of the
Seventy: but I say unto you, to be angry with one's brother without
cause, or to say unto him Raca, or Fool, is homicide, and shall be
punished at the day of judgement, and session of Christ and his
Apostles, with hell fire. So that those words were not used to
distinguish between diverse crimes, and diverse courts of justice, and
diverse punishments; but to tax the distinction between sin and sin,
which the Jews drew not from the difference of the will in obeying
God, but from the difference of their temporal courts of justice;
and to show them that he that had the will to hurt his brother, though
the effect appear but in reviling, or not at all, shall be cast into
hell fire by the judges and by the session, which shall be the same,
not different, courts at the day of judgement. This considered, what
can be drawn from this text to maintain purgatory, I cannot imagine.
  The sixth place is Luke, 16. 9: "Make ye friends of the
unrighteous mammon, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting tabernacles." This he alleges to prove invocation of
saints departed. But the sense is plain, that we should make
friends, with our riches, of the poor; and thereby obtain their
prayers whilst they live. "He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the
Lord."
  The seventh is Luke, 23. 42: "Lord, remember me when thou comest
into thy kingdom." Therefore, saith he, there is remission of sins
after this life. But the consequence is not good. Our Saviour then
forgave him, and, at his coming again in glory, will remember to raise
him again to life eternal.
  The eighth is Acts, 2. 24, where St. Peter saith of Christ, "that
God had raised him up, and loosed the pains of death, because it was
not possible he should be holden of it": which he interprets to be a
descent of Christ into purgatory, to loose some souls there from their
torments: whereas it is manifest that it was Christ that was loosed.
It was he that could not be holden of death or the grave, and not
the souls in purgatory. But if that which Beza says in his notes on
this place be well observed, there is none that will not see that
instead of pains, it should be bands; and then there is no further
cause to seek for purgatory in this text.
                             CHAPTER XLV
                          OF DEMONOLOGY AND
             OTHER RELICS OF THE RELIGION OF THE GENTILES

  THE impression made on the organs of sight by lucid bodies, either
in one direct line or in many lines, reflected from opaque, or
refracted in the passage through diaphanous bodies, produceth in
living creatures, in whom God hath placed such organs, an
imagination of the object from whence the impression proceedeth; which
imagination is called sight, and seemeth not to be a mere imagination,
but the body itself without us; in the same manner as when a man
violently presseth his eye, there appears to him a light without,
and before him, which no man perceiveth but himself, because there
is indeed no such thing without him, but only a motion in the interior
organs, pressing by resistance outward, that makes him think so. And
the motion made by this pressure, continuing after the object which
caused it is removed, is that we call imagination, and memory, and, in
sleep, and sometimes in great distemper of the organs by sickness or
violence, a dream, of which things I have already spoken briefly in
the second and third Chapters.
  This nature of sight having never been discovered by the ancient
pretenders to natural knowledge, much less by those that consider
not things so remote (as that knowledge is) from their present use, it
was hard for men to conceive of those images in the fancy and in the
sense otherwise than of things really without us: which some,
because they vanish away, they know not whither nor how, will have
to be absolutely incorporeal, that is to say, immaterial, or forms
without matter (colour and figure, without any coloured or figured
body), and that they can put on airy bodies, as a garment, to make
them visible when they will to our bodily eyes; and others say, are
bodies and living and living creatures, but made of air, or other more
subtle and ethereal matter, which is, then, when they will be seen,
condensed. But both of them agree on one general appellation of
them, demons. As if the dead of whom they dreamed were not inhabitants
of their own brain, but of the air, or of heaven, or hell; not
phantasms, but ghosts; with just as much reason as if one should say
he saw his own ghost in a looking-glass, or the ghosts of the stars in
a river; or call the ordinary apparition of the sun, of the quantity
of about a foot, the demon or ghost of that great sun that
enlighteneth the whole visible world: and by that means have feared
them, as things of an unknown, that is, of an unlimited power to do
them good or harm; and consequently, given occasion to the governors
of the heathen Commonwealths to regulate this their fear by
establishing that demonology (in which the poets, as principal priests
of the heathen religion, were specially employed or reverenced) to the
public peace, and to the obedience of subjects necessary thereunto;
and to make some of them good demons, and others evil; the one as a
spur to the observance, the other as reins to withhold them from
violation of the laws.
  What kind of things they were to whom they attributed the name of
demons appeareth partly in the genealogy of their gods, written by
Hesiod, one of the most ancient poets of the Grecians, and partly in
other histories, of which I have observed some few before, in the
twelfth Chapter of this discourse.
  The Grecians, by their colonies and conquests communicated their
language and writings into Asia, Egypt, and Italy; and therein, by
necessary consequence, their demonology, or, as St. Paul calls it,
their doctrines of devils: and by that means the contagion was derived
also to the Jews, both of Judaea and Alexandria, and other parts,
whereinto they were dispersed. But the name of demon they did not,
as the Grecians, attribute to spirits both good and evil; but to the
evil only: and to the good demons they gave the name of the Spirit
of God, and esteemed those into whose bodies they entered to be
prophets. In sum, all singularity, if good, they attributed to the
Spirit of God; and if evil, to some demon, but a kakodaimen, an evil
demon, that is, a devil. And therefore, they called demoniacs, that
is, possessed by the devil, such as we call madmen or lunatics, or
such as had the falling-sickness; or that spoke anything which they,
for want of understanding, thought absurd. As also of an unclean
person in a notorious degree, they used to say he had an unclean
spirit; of a dumb man, that he had a dumb devil; and of John the
Baptist, for the singularity of his fasting, that he had a devil;* and
of our Saviour, because he said, he that keepeth his sayings should
not see death in aeternum, "Now we know thou hast a devil; Abraham
is dead, and the prophets are dead."*(2) And again, because he said
they went about to kill him, the people answered, "Thou hast a
devil: who goeth about to kill thee?"*(3) Whereby it is manifest
that the Jews had the same opinions concerning phantasms; namely, that
they were not phantasms, that is, idols of the brain, but things real,
and independent on the fancy.

  * Matthew, 11. 18
  *(2) John, 8. 52
  *(3) John, 7. 20

  Which doctrine, if it be not true, why, may some say, did not our
Saviour contradict it, and teach the contrary? Nay, why does He use on
diverse occasions such forms of speech as seem to confirm it? To
this I answer that, first, where Christ saith, "A spirit hath not
flesh and bone,"* though he show that there be spirits, yet he
denies not that they are bodies. And where St. Paul says, "We shall
rise spiritual bodies,"*(2) he acknowledgeth the nature of spirits,
but that they are bodily spirits; which is not difficult to
understand. For air and many other things are bodies, though not flesh
and bone, or any other gross body to be discerned by the eye. But when
our Saviour speaketh to the devil, and commandeth him to go out of a
man, if by the devil be meant a disease, as frenzy, or lunacy, or a
corporeal spirit, is not the speech improper? Can diseases hear? Or
can there be a corporeal spirit in a body of flesh and bone, full
already of vital and animal spirits? Are there not therefore
spirits, that neither have bodies, nor are mere imaginations? To the
first I answer that the addressing of our Saviour's command to the
madness or lunacy he cureth is no more improper than was his
rebuking of the fever, or of the wind and sea; for neither do these
hear: or than was the command of God to the light, to the firmament,
to the sun, and stars, when He commanded them to be; for they could
not hear before they had a being. But those speeches are not improper,
because they signify the power of God's word: no more therefore is
it improper to command madness or lunacy, under the appellation of
devils by which they were then commonly understood, to depart out of a
man's body. To the second, concerning their being incorporeal, I
have not yet observed any place of Scripture from whence it can be
gathered that any man was ever possessed with any other corporeal
spirit but that of his own by which his body is naturally moved.

  * Luke, 24. 39
  *(2) I Corinthians, 15. 44

  Our Saviour, immediately after the Holy Ghost descended upon Him
in the form of a dove, is said by St. Matthew to have been "led up
by the Spirit into the wilderness";* and the same is recited, Luke, 4.
1, in these words, "Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, was led in the
Spirit into the wilderness": whereby it is evident that by Spirit
there is meant the Holy Ghost. This cannot be interpreted for a
possession; for Christ and the Holy Ghost are but one and the same
substance, which is no possession of one substance, or body, by
another. And whereas in the verses following he is said "to have
been taken up by the devil into the holy city, and set upon a pinnacle
of the temple," shall we conclude thence that he was possessed of
the devil, or carried thither by violence? And again, "carried
thence by the devil into an exceeding high mountain, who showed him
thence all the kingdoms of the world": wherein we are not to believe
he was either possessed or forced by the devil; nor that any
mountain is high enough, according to the literal sense to show him
one whole hemisphere. What then can be the meaning of this place,
other than that he went of himself into the wilderness; and that
this carrying of him up and down, from the wilderness to the city, and
from thence into a mountain, was a vision? Conformable whereunto is
also the phrase of St. Luke, that he was led into the wilderness,
not by, but in the Spirit: whereas, concerning his being taken up into
the mountain, and unto the pinnacle of the temple, he speaketh as
St. Matthew doth, which suiteth with the nature of a vision.

  * Matthew, 4. 1

  Again, where St. Luke says of Judas Iscariot that "Satan entered
into him, and thereupon that he went and communed with the chief
priests, and captains, how he might betray Christ unto them";* it
may be answered that by the entering of Satan (that is, the enemy)
into him is meant the hostile and traitorous intention of selling
his Lord and Master. For as by the Holy Ghost is frequently in
Scripture understood the graces and good inclinations given by the
Holy Ghost; so by the entering of Satan may be understood the wicked
cogitations and designs of the adversaries of Christ and his
Disciples. For as it is hard to say that the devil was entered into
Judas, before he had any such hostile design; so it is impertinent
to say he was first Christ's enemy in his heart, and that the devil
entered into him afterwards. Therefore the entering of Satan, and
his wicked purpose, was one and the same thing.

  * Luke, 22. 3, 4

  But if there be no immaterial spirit, nor any possession of men's
bodies by any spirit corporeal, it may again be asked why our
Saviour his Apostles did not teach the people so, and in such clear
words as they might no more doubt thereof. But such questions as these
are more curious than necessary for a Christian man's salvation. Men
may as well ask why Christ, that could have given to all men faith,
piety, and all manner of moral virtues, gave it to some only, and
not to all: and why he left the search of natural causes and
sciences to the natural reason and industry of men, and did not reveal
it to all, or any man supernaturally; and many other such questions,
of which nevertheless there may be alleged probable and pious reasons.
For as God, when He brought the Israelites into the Land of Promise,
did not secure them therein by subduing all the nations round about
them, but left many of them, as thorns in their sides, to awaken
from time to time their piety and industry: so our Saviour, in
conducting us toward his heavenly kingdom, did not destroy all the
difficulties of natural questions, but left them to exercise our
industry and reason; the scope of his preaching being only to show
us this plain and direct way to salvation, namely, the belief of
this article, that he was the Christ, the Son of the living God,
sent into the world to sacrifice himself for our sins, and, at his
coming again, gloriously to reign over his elect, and to save them
from their enemies eternally: to which the opinion of possession by
spirits or phantasms is no impediment in the way, though it be to some
an occasion of going out of the way, and to follow their own
inventions. If we require of the Scripture an account of all questions
which may be raised to trouble us in the performance of God's
commands, we may as well complain of Moses for not having set down the
time of the creation of such spirits, as well as of the creation of
the earth and sea, and of men and beasts. To conclude, I find in
Scripture that there be angels and spirits, good and evil; but not
that they are incorporeal, as are the apparitions men see in the dark,
or in a dream or vision, which the Latins call spectra, and took for
demons. And I find that there are spirits corporeal, though subtle and
invisible; but not that any man's body was possessed or inhabited by
them, and that the bodies of the saints shall be such, namely,
spiritual bodies, as St. Paul calls them.
  Nevertheless, the contrary doctrine, namely, that there be
incorporeal spirits, hath hitherto so prevailed in the Church that the
use of exorcism (that is to say, of ejection of devils by conjuration)
is thereupon built; and, though rarely and faintly practised, is not
yet totally given over. That there were many demoniacs in the
primitive Church, and few madmen, and other such singular diseases;
whereas in these times we hear of, and see many madmen, and few
demoniacs, proceeds not from the change of nature, but of names. But
how it comes to pass that whereas heretofore the Apostles, and after
them for a time the pastors of the Church, did cure those singular
diseases, which now they are not seen to do; as likewise, why it is
not in the power of every true believer now to do all that the
faithful did then, that is to say, as we read "in Christ's name to
cast out devils, to speak with new tongues, to take up serpents, to
drink deadly poison without harm taking, and to cure the sick by the
laying on of their hands,"* and all this without other words but "in
the name of Jesus," is another question. And it is probable that those
extraordinary gifts were given to the Church for no longer a time than
men trusted wholly to Christ, and looked for their felicity only in
his kingdom to come; and consequently, that when they sought authority
and riches, and trusted to their own subtlety for a kingdom of this
world, these supernatural gifts of God were again taken from them.

  * Mark, 16. 17

  Another relic of Gentilism is the worship of images, neither
instituted by Moses in the Old, nor by Christ in the New Testament;
nor yet brought in from the Gentiles; but left amongst them, after
they had given their names to Christ. Before our Saviour preached,
it was the general religion of the Gentiles to worship for gods
those appearances that remain in the brain from the impression of
external bodies upon the organs of their senses, which are commonly
called ideas, idols, phantasms, conceits, as being representations
of those external bodies which cause them, and have nothing in them of
reality, no more than there is in the things that seem to stand before
us in a dream. And this is the reason why St. Paul says, "We know that
an idol is nothing": not that he thought that an image of metal,
stone, or wood was nothing; but that the thing which they honored or
feared in the image, and held for a god, was a mere figment, without
place, habitation, motion, or existence, but in the motions of the
brain. And the worship of these with divine honour is that which is in
the Scripture called idolatry, and rebellion against God. For God
being King of the Jews, and His lieutenant being first Moses, and
afterward the high priest, if the people had been permitted to worship
and pray to images (which are representations of their own fancies),
they had had no further dependence on the true God, of whom there
can be no similitude; nor on His prime ministers, Moses and the high
priests; but every man had governed himself according to his own
appetite, to the utter eversion of the Commonwealth, and their own
destruction for want of union. And therefore the first law of God was:
they should not take for gods, alienos deos, that is, the gods of
other nations, but that only true God, who vouchsafed to commune
with Moses, and by him to give them laws and directions for their
peace, and for their salvation from their enemies. And the second
was that they should not make to themselves any image to worship, of
their own invention. For it is the same deposing of a king to submit
to another king, whether he be set up by a neighbour nation or by
ourselves.
  The places of Scripture pretended to countenance the setting up of
images to worship them, or to set them up at all in the places where
God is worshipped, are, first, two examples; one of the cherubim
over the Ark of God; the other of the brazen serpent: secondly, some
texts whereby we are commanded to worship certain creatures for
their relation to God; as to worship His footstool: and lastly, some
other texts, by which is authorized a religious honouring of holy
things. But before I examine the force of those places, to prove
that which is pretended, I must first explain what is to be understood
by worshipping, and what by images and idols.
  I have already shown, in the twentieth Chapter of this discourse,
that to honour is to value highly the power of any person, and that
such value is measured by our comparing him with others. But because
there is nothing to be compared with God in power, we honour Him
not, but dishonour Him, by any value less than infinite. And thus
honour is properly of its own nature secret, and internal in the
heart. But the inward thoughts of men, which appear outwardly in their
words and actions, are the signs of our honouring, and these go by the
name of worship; in Latin, cultus. Therefore, to pray to, to swear by,
to obey, to be diligent and officious in serving; in sum, all words
and actions that betoken fear to offend, or desire to please, is
worship, whether those words and actions be sincere or feigned: and
because they appear as signs of honouring are ordinarily also called
honour.
  The worship we exhibit to those we esteem to be but men, as to kings
and men in authority, is civil worship: but the worship we exhibit
to that which we think to be God, whatsoever the words, ceremonies,
gestures, or other actions be, is divine worship. To fall prostrate
before a king, in him that thinks him but a man, is but civil worship:
and he that but putteth off his hat in the church, for this cause,
that he thinketh it the house of God, worshippeth with divine worship.
They that seek the distinction of divine and civil worship, not in the
intention of the worshipper, but in the words douleia and latreia,
deceive themselves. For whereas there be two sorts of servants: that
sort which is of those that are absolutely in the power of their
masters, as slaves taken in war, and their issue, whose bodies are not
in their own power (their lives depending on the will of their
masters, in such manner as to forfeit them upon the least
disobedience), and that are bought and sold as beasts, were called
Douloi, that is properly, slaves, and their service, Douleia; the
other, which is of those that serve for hire, or in hope of benefit
from their masters voluntarily, are called Thetes, that is, domestic
servants; to whose service the masters have no further right than is
contained in the covenants made betwixt them. These two kinds of
servants have thus much common to them both, that their labour is
appointed them by another: and the word Latris is the general name
of both, signifying him that worketh for another, whether as a slave
or a voluntary servant. So that latreia signifieth generally all
service; but douleia the service of bondmen only, and the condition of
slavery: and both are used in Scripture, to signify our service of
God, promiscuously. Douleia, because we are God's slaves; latreia,
because we serve Him: and in all kinds of service is contained, not
only obedience, but also worship; that is, such actions, gestures, and
words as signify honour.
  An image, in the most strict signification of the word, is the
resemblance of something visible: in which sense the fantastical
forms, apparitions, or seemings of visible bodies to the sight, are
only images; such as are the show of a man or other thing in the
water, by reflection or refraction; or of the sun or stars by direct
vision in the air; which are nothing real in the things seen, nor in
the place where they seem to be; nor are their magnitudes and
figures the same with that of the object, but changeable, by the
variation of the organs of sight, or by glasses; and are present
oftentimes in our imagination, and in our dreams, when the object is
absent; or changed into other colours, and shapes, as things that
depend only upon the fancy. And these are the images which are
originally and most properly called ideas and idols, and derived
from the language of the Grecians, with whom the word eido
signifieth to see. They are also called phantasms, which is in the
same language, apparitions. And from these images it is that one of
the faculties of man's nature is called the imagination. And from
hence it is manifest that there neither is, nor can be, any image made
of a thing invisible.
  It is also evident that there can be no image of a thing infinite:
for all the images and phantasms that are made by the impression of
things visible are figured. But figure is quantity every way
determined, and therefore there can be no image of God, nor of the
soul of man, nor of spirits; but only of bodies visible, that is,
bodies that have light in themselves, or are by such enlightened.
  And whereas a man can fancy shapes he never saw, making up a
figure out of the parts of diverse creatures, as the poets make
their centaurs, chimeras, and other monsters never seen: so can he
also give matter to those shapes, and make them in wood, clay, or
metal. And these are also called images, not for the resemblance of
any corporeal thing, but for the resemblance of some fantastical
inhabitants of the brain of the maker. But in these idols, as they are
originally in the brain, and as they are painted, carved, moulded,
or molten in matter, there is a similitude of the one to the other,
for which the material body made by art may be said to be the image of
the fantastical idol made by nature.
  But in a larger use of the word image is contained also any
representation of one thing by another. So an earthly sovereign may be
called the image of God, and an inferior magistrate the image of an
earthly sovereign. And many times in the idolatry of the Gentiles
there was little regard to the similitude of their material idol to
the idol in their fancy, and yet it was called the image of it. For
a stone unhewn has been set up for Neptune, and diverse other shapes
far different from the shapes they conceived of their gods. And at
this day we see many images of the Virgin Mary, and other saints,
unlike one another, and without correspondence to any one man's fancy;
and yet serve well enough for the purpose they were erected for, which
was no more but by the names only to represent the persons mentioned
in the history; to which every man applieth a mental image of his
own making, or none at all. And thus an image, in the largest sense,
is either the resemblance or the representation of some thing visible;
or both together, as it happeneth for the most part.
  But the name of idol is extended yet further in Scripture, to
signify also the sun, or a star, or any other creature, visible or
invisible, when they are worshipped for gods.
  Having shown what is worship, and what an image, I will now put them
together, and examine what that idolatry is which is forbidden in
the second Commandment, and other places of the Scripture.
  To worship an image is voluntarily to do those external acts which
are signs of honouring either the matter of the image (which is
wood, stone, metal, or some other visible creature), or the phantasm
of the brain for the resemblance or representation whereof the
matter was formed and figured, or both together as one animate body
composed of the matter and the phantasm, as of a body and soul.
  To be uncovered, before a man of power and authority, or before
the throne of a prince, or in such other places as he ordaineth to
that purpose in his absence, is to worship that man or prince with
civil worship; as being a sign, not of honouring the stool or place,
but the person, and is not idolatry. But if he that doth it should
suppose the soul of the prince to be in the stool, or should present a
petition to the stool, it were divine worship, and idolatry.
  To pray to a king for such things as he is able to do for us, though
we prostrate ourselves before him, is but civil worship, because we
acknowledge no other power in him but human: but voluntarily to pray
unto him for fair weather, or for anything which God only can do for
us, is divine worship, and idolatry. On the other side, if a king
compel a man to it by the terror of death, or other great corporal
punishment, it is not idolatry; for the worship which the sovereign
commandeth to be done unto himself by the terror of his laws is not
a sign that he that obeyeth him does inwardly honour him as a god, but
that he is desirous to save himself from death, or from a miserable
life: and that which is not a sign of internal honour is no worship,
and therefore no idolatry. Neither can it be said that he that does it
scandalizeth or layeth any stumbling block before his brother: because
how wise or learned soever he be that worshippeth in that manner,
another man cannot from thence argue that he approveth it, but that he
doth it for fear; and that it is not his act, but the act of his
sovereign.
  To worship God in some peculiar place, or turning a man's face
towards an image or determinate place, is not to worship or honour the
place or image, but to acknowledge it holy; that is to say, to
acknowledge the image or the place to be set apart from common use,
for that is the meaning of the word holy; which implies no new quality
in the place or image, but only a new relation by appropriation to
God, and therefore is not idolatry; no more than it was idolatry to
worship God before the brazen serpent; or for the Jews, when they were
out of their own country, to turn their faces, when they prayed,
toward the temple of Jerusalem; or for Moses to put off his shoes when
he was before the flaming bush, the ground appertaining to Mount
Sinai, which place God had chosen to appear in, and to give His laws
to the people of Israel, and was therefore holy ground, not by
inherent sanctity, but by separation to God's use; or for Christians
to worship in the churches which are once solemnly dedicated to God
for that purpose by the authority of the king or other true
representant of the Church. But to worship God as inanimating or
inhabiting such image or place; that is to say, an infinite
substance in a finite place, is idolatry: for such finite gods are but
idols of the brain, nothing real, and are commonly called in the
Scripture by the names of vanity, and lies, and nothing. Also to
worship God, not as inanimating, or present in the place or image, but
to the end to be put in mind of Him, or of some works of His, in
case the place or image be dedicated or set up by private authority,
and not by the authority of them that are our sovereign pastors, is
idolatry. For the Commandment is, "Thou shalt not make to thyself
any graven image." God commanded Moses to set up the brazen serpent;
he did not make it to himself; it was not therefore against the
Commandment. But the making of the golden calf by Aaron and the
people, as being done without authority from God, was idolatry; not
only because they held it for God, but also because they made it for a
religious use, without warrant either from God their Sovereign, or
from Moses that was His lieutenant.
  The Gentiles worshipped, for gods, Jupiter and others that,
living, were men perhaps that had done great and glorious acts; and,
for the children of God, diverse men and women, supposing them
gotten between an immortal deity and a mortal man. This was
idolatry, because they made them so to themselves, having no authority
from God, neither in His eternal law of reason, nor in His positive
and revealed will. But though our Saviour was a man, whom we also
believe to be God immortal and the Son of God, yet this is no
idolatry, because we build not that belief upon our own fancy or
judgement, but upon the word of God revealed in the Scriptures. And
for the adoration of the Eucharist, if the words of Christ, "This is
my body," signify that he himself, and the seeming bread in his
hand, and not only so, but that all the seeming morsels of bread
that have ever since been, and any time hereafter shall be,
consecrated by priests, be so many Christ's bodies, and yet all of
them but one body, then is that no idolatry, because it is
authorized by our Saviour: but if that text do not signify that (for
there is no other that can be alleged for it), then, because it is a
worship of human institution, it is idolatry. For it is not enough
to say, God can transubstantiate the bread into Christ's body, for the
Gentiles also held God to be omnipotent, and might upon that ground no
less excuse their idolatry, by pretending, as well as others, a
transubstantiation of their wood and stone into God Almighty.
  Whereas there be, that pretend divine inspiration to be a
supernatural entering of the Holy Ghost into a man, and not an
acquisition of God's graces by doctrine and study, I think they are in
a very dangerous dilemma. For if they worship not the men whom they
believe to be so inspired, they fall into impiety, as not adoring
God's supernatural presence. And again, if they worship them they
commit idolatry, for the Apostles would never permit themselves to
be so worshipped. Therefore the safest way is to believe that by the
descending of the dove upon the Apostles, and by Christ's breathing on
them when he gave them the Holy Ghost, and by the giving of it by
imposition of hands, are understood the signs which God hath been
pleased to use, or ordain to be used, of his promise to assist those
persons in their study to preach His kingdom, and in their
conversation, that it might not be scandalous, but edifying to others.
  Besides the idolatrous worship of images, there is also a scandalous
worship of them, which is also a sin, but not idolatry. For idolatry
is to worship by signs of an internal and real honour; but
scandalous worship is but seeming worship, and may sometimes be joined
with an inward and hearty detestation, both of the image and of the
fantastical demon or idol to which it is dedicated; and proceed only
from the fear of death or other grievous punishment; and is
nevertheless a sin in them that so worship, in case they be men
whose actions are looked at by others as lights to guide them by;
because following their ways, they cannot but stumble and fall in
the way of religion: whereas the example of those we regard not, works
not on us at all, but leaves us to our own diligence and caution,
and consequently are no causes of our falling.
  If therefore a pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others, or
any other, of whose knowledge there is a great opinion, do external
honour to an idol for fear; unless he make his fear and
unwillingness to it as evident as the worship, he scandalizeth his
brother by seeming to approve idolatry. For his brother arguing from
the action of his teacher, or of him whose knowledge he esteemeth
great, concludes it to be lawful in itself. And this scandal is sin,
and a scandal given. But if one being no pastor, nor of eminent
reputation for knowledge in Christian doctrine, do the same, and
another follow him, this is no scandal given (for he had no cause to
follow such example), but is a pretence of scandal which he taketh
of himself for an excuse before men. For an unlearned man that is in
the power of an idolatrous king or state, if commanded on pain of
death to worship before an idol, he detesteth the idol in his heart:
he doth well; though if he had the fortitude to suffer death, rather
than worship it, he should do better. But if a pastor, who as Christ's
messenger has undertaken to teach Christ's doctrine to all nations,
should do the same, it were not only a sinful scandal, in respect of
other Christian men's consciences, but a perfidious forsaking of his
charge.
  The sum of that which I have said hitherto, concerning the worship
of images, is this, that he that worshippeth in an image, or any
creature, either the matter thereof, or any fancy of his own which
he thinketh to dwell in it; or both together; or believeth that such
things hear his prayers, or see his devotions, without ears or eyes,
committeth idolatry. And he that counterfeiteth such worship for
fear of punishment, if he be a man whose example hath power amongst
his brethren, committeth a sin. But he that worshippeth the Creator of
the world before such an image, or in such a place as he hath not made
or chosen of himself, but taken from the commandment of God's word, as
the Jews did in worshipping God before the cherubim, and before the
brazen serpent for a time, and in or towards the temple of
Jerusalem, which was also but for a time, committeth not idolatry.
  Now for the worship of saints, and images, and relics, and other
things at this day practised in the Church of Rome, I say they are not
allowed by the word of God, nor brought into the Church of Rome from
the doctrine there taught; but partly left in it at the first
conversion of the Gentiles, and afterwards countenanced, and
confirmed, and augmented by the bishops of Rome.
  As for the proofs alleged out of Scripture; namely, those examples
of images appointed by God to be set up; they were not set up for
the people or any man to worship, but that they should worship God
Himself before them; as before the cherubim over the Ark, and the
brazen serpent. For we read not that the priest or any other did
worship the cherubim. But contrarily we read that Hezekiah broke in
pieces the brazen serpent which Moses had set up,* because the
people burnt incense to it. Besides, those examples are not put for
our imitation, that we also should set up images, under pretence of
worshipping God before them; because the words of the second
Commandment, "Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image,"
etc., distinguish between the images that God commanded to be set
up, and those which we set up to ourselves. And therefore from the
cherubim or brazen serpent, to the images of man's devising; and
from the worship commanded by God, to the will-worship of men, the
argument is not good. This also is to be considered, that as
Hezekiah broke in pieces the brazen serpent, because the Jews did
worship it, to the end they should do so no more; so also Christian
sovereigns ought to break down the images which their subjects have
been accustomed to worship, that there be no more occasion of such
idolatry. For at this day the ignorant people, where images are
worshipped, do really believe there is a divine power in the images;
and are told by their pastors that some of them have spoken, and
have bled; and that miracles have been done by them; which they
apprehend as done by the saint, which they think either is the image
itself, or in it. The Israelites, when they worshipped the calf, did
think they worshipped the God that brought them out of Egypt, and
yet it was idolatry, because they thought the calf either was that
God, or had Him in his belly. And though some man may think it
impossible for people to be so stupid as to think the image to be God,
or a saint, or to worship it in that notion, yet it is manifest in
Scripture to the contrary; where, when the golden calf was made, the
people said, "These are thy gods, O Israel";*(2) and where the
images of Laban are called his gods.*(3) And we see daily by
experience in all sorts of people that such men as study nothing but
their food and ease are content to believe any absurdity, rather
than to trouble themselves to examine it, holding their faith as it
were by entail unalienable, except by an express and new law.

  * II Kings, 18. 4
  *(2) Exodus, 32
  *(3) Genesis, 31. 30

  But they infer from some other places that it is lawful to paint
angels, and also God Himself: as from God's walking in the garden;
from Jacob's seeing God at the top of the ladder; and from other
visions and dreams. But visions and dreams, whether natural or
supernatural, are but phantasms: and he that painteth an image of
any of them, maketh not an image of God, but of his own phantasm,
which is making of an idol. I say not, that to draw a picture after
a fancy is a sin; but when it is drawn, to hold it for a
representation of God is against the second Commandment and can be
of no use but to worship. And the same may be said of the images of
angels, and of men dead; unless as monuments of friends, or of men
worthy remembrance: for such use of an image is not worship of the
image, but a civil honouring of the person; not that is, but that was:
but when it is done to the image which we make of a saint, for no
other reason but that we think he heareth our prayers, and is
pleased with the honour we do him, when dead and without sense, we
attribute to him more than human power, and therefore it is idolatry.
  Seeing therefore there is no authority, neither in the Law of
Moses nor in the Gospel, for the religious worship of images or
other representations of God which men set up to themselves, or for
the worship of the image of any creature in heaven, or earth, or under
the earth; and whereas Christian kings, who are living representants
of God, are not to be worshipped by their subjects by any act that
signifieth a greater esteem of his power than the nature of mortal man
is capable of; it cannot be imagined that the religious worship now in
use was brought into the Church by misunderstanding of the
Scripture. It resteth therefore that it was left in it by not
destroying the images themselves in the conversion of the Gentiles
that worshipped them.
  The cause whereof was the immoderate esteem and prices set upon
the workmanship of them, which made the owners, though converted
from worshipping them as they had done religiously for demons, to
retain them still in their houses, upon pretence of doing it in the
honor of Christ, of the Virgin Mary, and of the Apostles, and other
the pastors of the primitive Church; as being easy, by giving them new
names, to make that an image of the Virgin Mary and of her Son our
Saviour, which before perhaps was called the image of Venus and Cupid;
and so of a Jupiter to make a Barnabas, and of Mercury, a Paul, and
the like. And as worldly ambition, creeping by degrees into the
pastors, drew them to an endeavour of pleasing the new-made
Christians; and also to a liking of this kind of honour, which they
also might hope for after their decease, as well as those that had
already gained it: so the worshipping of the images of Christ and
his Apostles grew more and more idolatrous; save that somewhat after
the time of Constantine diverse emperors, and bishops, and general
councils observed and opposed the unlawfulness thereof, but too late
or too weakly.
  The canonizing of saints is another relic of Gentilism: it is
neither a misunderstanding of Scripture, nor a new invention of the
Roman Church, but a custom as ancient as the Commonwealth of Rome
itself. The first that ever was canonized at Rome was Romulus, and
that upon the narration of Julius Proculus, that swore before the
Senate he spoke with him after his death, and was assured by him he
dwelt in heaven, and was there called Quirinus, and would be
propitious to the state of their new city: and thereupon the Senate
gave public testimony of his sanctity. Julius Caesar, and other
emperors after him, had the like testimony; that is, were canonized
for saints: for by such testimony is canonization now defined, and
is the same with the apotheosis of the heathen.
  It is also from the Roman heathen that the popes have received the
name and power of Pontifex Maximus. This was the name of him that in
the ancient Commonwealth of Rome had the supreme authority under the
Senate and people of regulating all ceremonies and doctrines
concerning their religion: and when Augustus Caesar changed the
state into a monarchy, he took to himself no more but this office, and
that of tribune of the people (that is to say, the supreme power
both in state and religion); and the succeeding emperors enjoyed the
same. But when the Emperor Constantine lived, who was the first that
professed and authorized Christian religion, it was consonant to his
profession to cause religion to be regulated, under his authority,
by the bishop of Rome: though it do not appear they had so soon the
name of Pontifex; but rather that the succeeding bishops took it of
themselves, to countenance the power they exercised over the bishops
of the Roman provinces. For it is not any privilege of St. Peter,
but the privilege of the city of Rome, which the emperors were
always willing to uphold, that gave them such authority over other
bishops; as may be evidently seen by that, that the bishop of
Constantinople, when the Emperor made that city the seat of the
Empire, pretended to be equal to the bishop of Rome; though at last,
not without contention, the Pope carried it, and became the Pontifex
Maximus; but in right only of the Emperor, and not without the
bounds of the Empire, nor anywhere after the Emperor had lost his
power in Rome, though it were the Pope himself that took his power
from him. From whence we may by the way observe that there is no place
for the superiority of the Pope over other bishops, except in the
territories whereof he is himself the civil sovereign; and where the
emperor, having sovereign power civil, hath expressly chosen the
Pope for the chief pastor under himself of his Christian subjects.
  The carrying about of images in procession is another relic of the
religion of the Greeks and Romans, for they also carried their idols
from place to place, in a kind of chariot, which was peculiarly
dedicated to that use, which the Latins called thensa, and vehiculum
Deorum; and the image was placed in a frame, or shrine, which they
called ferculum. And that which they called pompa is the same that now
is named procession; according whereunto, amongst the divine honours
which were given to Julius Caesar by the Senate, this was one, that in
the pomp, or procession, at the Circaean games, he should have thensam
et ferculum, a sacred chariot and a shrine; which was as much as to be
carried up and down as a god, just as at this day the popes are
carried by Switzers under a canopy.
  To these processions also belonged the bearing of burning torches
and candles before the images of the gods, both amongst the Greeks and
Romans. For afterwards the emperors of Rome received the same honor;
as we read of Caligula, that at his reception to the Empire he was
carried from Misenum to Rome in the midst of a throng of people, the
ways beset with altars, and beasts for sacrifice, and burning torches;
and of Caracalla, that was received into Alexandria with incense,
and with casting of flowers, and dadouchiais, that is, with torches;
for dadochoi were they that amongst the Greeks carried torches lighted
in the processions of their gods. And in process of time the devout
but ignorant people did many times honour their bishops with the
like pomp of wax candles, and the images of our Saviour and the
saints, constantly, in the church itself. And thus came in the use
of wax candles and was also established by some of the ancient
councils.
  The heathens had also their aqua lustralis, that is to say, holy
water. The Church of Rome imitates them also in their holy days.
They had their bacchanalia, and we have our wakes, answering to
them; they their saturnalia, and we our carnivals and Shrove Tuesday's
liberty of servants; they their procession of Priapus, we our fetching
in, erection, and dancing about Maypoles; and dancing is one kind of
worship. They had their procession called Ambarvalia, and we our
procession about the fields in the Rogation week. Nor do I think
that these are all the ceremonies that have been left in the Church,
from the first conversion of the Gentiles, but they are all that I can
for the present call to mind. And if a man would well observe that
which is delivered in the histories, concerning the religious rites of
the Greeks and Romans, I doubt not but he might find many more of
these old empty bottles of Gentilism which the doctors of the Roman
Church, either by negligence or ambition, have filled up again with
the new wine of Christianity, that will not fail in time to break
them.
                             CHAPTER XLVI
       OF DARKNESS FROM VAIN PHILOSOPHY AND FABULOUS TRADITIONS

  BY philosophy is understood the knowledge acquired by reasoning,
from the manner of the generation of anything, to the properties; or
from the properties, to some possible way of generation of the same;
to the end to be able to produce, as far as matter and human force
permit, such effects as human life requireth. So the geometrician,
from the construction of figures, findeth out many properties thereof;
and from the properties, new ways of their construction, by reasoning;
to the end to be able to measure land and water; and for infinite
other uses. So the astronomer, from the rising, setting, and moving of
the sun and stars in diverse parts of the heavens, findeth out the
causes of day and night, and of the different seasons of the year,
whereby he keepeth an account of time; and the like of other sciences.
  By which definition it is evident that we are not to account as
any part thereof that original knowledge called experience, in which
consisteth prudence, because it is not attained by reasoning, but
found as well in brute beasts as in man; and is but a memory of
successions of events in times past, wherein the omission of every
little circumstance, altering the effect frustrateth the expectation
of the most prudent: whereas nothing is produced by reasoning
aright, but general, eternal, and immutable truth.
  Nor are we therefore to give that name to any false conclusions; for
he that reasoneth aright in words he understandeth can never
conclude an error:
  Nor to that which any man knows by supernatural revelation;
because it is not acquired by reasoning:
  Nor that which is gotten by reasoning from the authority of books;
because it is not by reasoning from the cause to the effect, nor
from the effect to the cause; and is not knowledge, but faith.
  The faculty of reasoning being consequent to the use of speech, it
was not possible but that there should have been some general truths
found out by reasoning, as ancient almost as language itself. The
savages of America are not without some good moral sentences; also
they have a little arithmetic, to add and divide in numbers not too
great; but they are not therefore philosophers. For as there were
plants of corn and wine in small quantity dispersed in the fields
and woods, before men knew their virtue, or made use of them for their
nourishment, or planted them apart in fields and vineyards; in which
time they fed on acorns and drank water: so also there have been
diverse true, general, and profitable speculations from the beginning,
as being the natural plants of human reason. But they were at first
but few in number; men lived upon gross experience; there was no
method; that is to say, no sowing nor planting of knowledge by itself,
apart from the weeds and common plants of error and conjecture. And
the cause of it being the want of leisure from procuring the
necessities of life, and defending themselves against their
neighbours, it was impossible, till the erecting of great
Commonwealths, it should be otherwise. Leisure is the mother of
philosophy; and Commonwealth, the mother of peace and leisure. Where
first were great and flourishing cities, there was first the study
of philosophy. The Gymnosophists of India, the Magi of Persia, and the
Priests of Chaldaea and Egypt are counted the most ancient
philosophers; and those countries were the most ancient of kingdoms.
Philosophy was not risen to the Grecians and other people of the West,
whose Commonwealths, no greater perhaps than Lucca or Geneva, had
never peace but when their fears of one another were equal; nor the
leisure to observe anything but one another. At length, when war had
united many of these Grecian lesser cities into fewer and greater,
then began seven men, of several parts of Greece, to get the
reputation of being wise; some of them for moral and politic
sentences, and others for the learning of the Chaldaeans and
Egyptians, which was astronomy and geometry. But we hear not yet of
any schools of philosophy.
  After the Athenians, by the overthrow of the Persian armies, had
gotten the dominion of the sea; and thereby, of all the islands and
maritime cities of the archipelago, as well of Asia as Europe; and
were grown wealthy; they that had no employment, neither at home nor
abroad, had little else to employ themselves in but either, as St.
Luke says, "in telling and hearing news,"* or in discoursing of
philosophy publicly to the youth of the city. Every master took some
place for that purpose: Plato, in certain public walks called
Academia, from one Academus; Aristotle in the walk of the temple of
Pan, called Lycaeum; others in the Stoa, or covered walk, wherein
the merchants' goods were brought to land; others in other places,
where they spent the time of their leisure in teaching or in disputing
of their opinions; and some in any place where they could get the
youth of the city together to hear them talk. And this was it which
Carneades also did at Rome, when he was ambassador, which caused
Cato to advise the Senate to dispatch him quickly, for fear of
corrupting the manners of the young men that delighted to hear him
speak, as they thought, fine things.

  * Acts, 17. 21

  From this it was that the place where any of them taught and
disputed was called schola, which in their tongue signifieth
leisure; and their disputations, diatribae, that is to say, passing of
the time. Also the philosophers themselves had the name of their
sects, some of them, from these their schools: for they that
followed Plato's doctrine were called Academics; the followers of
Aristotle, Peripatetics, from the walk he taught in; and those that
Zeno taught, Stoics, from the Stoa: as if we should denominate men
from More-fields, from Paul's Church, and from the Exchange, because
they meet there often to prate and loiter.
  Nevertheless, men were so much taken with this custom, that in
time it spread itself over all Europe, and the best part of Africa; so
as there were schools, publicly erected and maintained, for lectures
and disputations, almost in every Commonwealth.
  There were also schools, anciently, both before and after the time
of our Saviour, amongst the Jews: but they were schools of their
law. For though they were called synagogues, that is to say,
congregations of the people; yet, inasmuch as the law was every
Sabbath day read, expounded, and disputed in them, they differed not
in nature, but in name only, from public schools; and were not only in
Jerusalem, but in every city of the Gentiles where the Jews inhabited.
There was such a school at Damascus, whereinto Paul entered, to
persecute. There were others at Antioch, Iconium and Thessalonica,
whereinto he entered, to dispute. And such was the synagogue of the
Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicians, and those of Asia;
that is to say, the school of Libertines, and of Jews, that were
strangers in Jerusalem: and of this school they were that disputed
with St. Stephen.*

  * Acts, 6. 9

  But what has been the utility of those schools? What science is
there at this day acquired by their readings and disputings? That we
have of geometry, which is the mother of all natural science, we are
not indebted for it to the schools. Plato, that was the best
philosopher of the Greeks, forbade entrance into his school to all
that were not already in some measure geometricians. There were many
that studied that science to the great advantage of mankind: but there
is no mention of their schools; nor was there any sect of
geometricians; nor did they then pass under the name of
philosophers. The natural philosophy of those schools was rather a
dream than science, and set forth in senseless and insignificant
language, which cannot be avoided by those that will teach
philosophy without having first attained great knowledge in
geometry. For nature worketh by motion; the ways and degrees whereof
cannot be known without the knowledge of the proportions and
properties of lines and figures. Their moral philosophy is but a
description of their own passions. For the rule of manners, without
civil government, is the law of nature; and in it, the law civil, that
determineth what is honest and dishonest; what is just and unjust; and
generally what is good and evil. Whereas they make the rules of good
and bad by their own liking and disliking; by which means, in so great
diversity of taste, there is nothing generally agreed on; but every
one doth, as far as he dares, whatsoever seemeth good in his own eyes,
to the subversion of Commonwealth. Their logic, which should be the
method of reasoning, is nothing else but captions of words, and
inventions how to puzzle such as should go about to pose them. To
conclude, there is nothing so absurd that the old philosophers (as
Cicero saith, who was one of them) have not some of them maintained.
And I believe that scarce anything can be more absurdly said in
natural philosophy than that which now is called Aristotle's
Metaphysics; nor more repugnant to government than much of that he
hath said in his Politics, nor more ignorantly, than a great part of
his Ethics.
  The school of the Jews was originally a school of the law of
Moses, who commanded that at the end of every seventh year, at the
Feast of the Tabernacles, it should be read to all the people, that
they might hear and learn it.* Therefore the reading of the law (which
was in use after the Captivity) every Sabbath day ought to have had no
other end but the acquainting of the people with the Commandments
which they were to obey, and to expound unto them the writings of
the prophets. But it is manifest, by the many reprehensions of them by
our Saviour, that they corrupted the text of the law with their
false commentaries, and vain traditions; and so little understood
the prophets that they did neither acknowledge Christ, nor the works
he did, of which the prophets prophesied. So that by their lectures
and disputations in their synagogues, they turned the doctrine of
their law into a fantastical kind of philosophy, concerning the
incomprehensible nature of God and of spirits; which they compounded
of the vain philosophy and theology of the Grecians, mingled with
their own fancies, drawn from the obscurer places of the Scripture,
and which might most easily be wrested to their purpose; and from
the fabulous traditions of their ancestors.

  * Deuteronomy, 31. 10

  That which is now called a University is a joining together, and
an incorporation under one government, of many public schools in one
and the same town or city, in which the principal schools were
ordained for the three professions; that is to say, of the Roman
religion, of the Roman law, and of the art of medicine. And for the
study of philosophy it hath no otherwise place than as a handmaid to
the Roman religion: and since the authority of Aristotle is only
current there, that study is not properly philosophy (the nature
whereof dependeth not on authors), but Aristotelity. And for geometry,
till of very late times it had no place at all, as being subservient
to nothing but rigid truth. And if any man by the ingenuity of his own
nature had attained to any degree of perfection therein, he was
commonly thought a magician, and his art diabolical.
  Now to descend to the particular tenets of vain philosophy,
derived to the Universities, and thence into the Church, partly from
Aristotle, partly from blindness of understanding; I shall first
consider their principles. There is a certain philosophia prima on
which all other philosophy ought to depend; and consisteth principally
in right limiting of the significations of such appellations, or
names, as are of all others the most universal; which limitations
serve to avoid ambiguity and equivocation in reasoning, and are
commonly called definitions; such as are the definitions of body,
time, place, matter, form, essence, subject, substance, accident,
power, act, finite, infinite, quantity, quality, motion, action,
passion, and diverse others, necessary to the explaining of a man's
conceptions concerning the nature and generation of bodies. The
explication (that is, the settling of the meaning) of which, and the
like terms, is commonly in the Schools called metaphysics; as being
a part of the philosophy of Aristotle, which hath that for title.
But it is in another sense; for there it signifieth as much as
"books written or placed after his natural philosophy": but the
Schools take them for books of supernatural philosophy: for the word
metaphysics will bear both these senses. And indeed that which is
there written is for the most part so far from the possibility of
being understood, and so repugnant to natural reason, that whosoever
thinketh there is anything to be understood by it must needs think
it supernatural.
  From these metaphysics, which are mingled with the Scripture to make
School divinity, we are told there be in the world certain essences
separated from bodies, which they call abstract essences, and
substantial forms; for the interpreting of which jargon, there is need
of somewhat more than ordinary attention in this place. Also I ask
pardon of those that are not used to this kind of discourse for
applying myself to those that are. The world (I mean not the earth
only, that denominates the lovers of it "worldly men," but the
universe, that is, the whole mass of all things that are) is
corporeal, that is to say, body; and hath the dimensions of magnitude,
namely, length, breadth, and depth: also every part of body is
likewise body, and hath the like dimensions; and consequently every
part of the universe is body, and that which is not body is no part of
the universe: and because the universe is all that which is no part of
it is nothing, and consequently nowhere. Nor does it follow from hence
that spirits are nothing: for they have dimensions and are therefore
really bodies; though that name in common speech be given to such
bodies only as are visible or palpable; that is, that have some degree
of opacity: but for spirits, they call them incorporeal, which is a
name of more honour, and may therefore with more piety be attributed
to God Himself; in whom we consider not what attribute expresseth best
His nature, which is incomprehensible, but what best expresseth our
desire to honour Him.
  To know now upon what grounds they say there be essences abstract,
or substantial forms, we are to consider what those words do
properly signify. The use of words is to register to ourselves, and
make manifest to others, the thoughts and conceptions of our minds. Of
which words, some are the names of the things conceived; as the
names of all sorts of bodies that work upon the senses and leave an
impression in the imagination: others are the names of the
imaginations themselves; that is to say, of those ideas or mental
images we have of all things we see or remember: and others again
are names of names, or of different sorts of speech; as universal,
plural, singular, are the names of names; and definition, affirmation,
negation, true, false, syllogism, interrogation, promise, covenant,
are the names of certain forms of speech. Others serve to show the
consequence or repugnance of one name to another; as when one saith,
"a man is a body," he intendeth that the name of body is necessarily
consequent to the name of man, as being but serval name of the same
thing, man; which consequence is signified by coupling them together
with the word is. And as we use the verb is; so the Latins use their
verb est, and the Greeks their esti through all its declinations.
Whether all other nations of the world have in their several languages
a word that answereth to it, or not, I cannot tell; but I am sure they
have not need of it: for the placing of two names in order may serve
to signify their consequence, if it were the custom (for custom is
it that gives words their force), as well as the words is, or be, or
are, and the like.
  And if it were so, that there were a language without any verb
answerable to est, or is, or be; yet the men that used it would be not
a jot the less capable of inferring, concluding, and of all kind of
reasoning, than were the Greeks and Latins. But what then would become
of these terms, of entity, essence, essential, essentiality, that
are derived from it, and of many more that depend on these, applied as
most commonly they are? They are therefore no names of things; but
signs, by which we make known that we conceive the consequence of
one name or attribute to another: as when we say, "a man is a living
body," we mean not that the man is one thing, the living body another,
and the is, or being, a third; but that the man and the living body is
the same thing, because the consequence, "If he be a man, he is a
living body," is a true consequence, signified by that word is.
Therefore, to be a body, to walk, to be speaking, to live, to see, and
the like infinitives; also corporeity, walking, speaking, life, sight,
and the like, that signify just the same, are the names of nothing; as
I have elsewhere more amply expressed.
  But to what purpose, may some man say, is such subtlety in a work of
this nature, where I pretend to nothing but what is necessary to the
doctrine of government and obedience? It is to this purpose, that
men may no longer suffer themselves to be abused by them that by
this doctrine of "separated essences," built on the vain philosophy of
Aristotle, would fright them from obeying the laws of their country,
with empty names; as men fright birds from the corn with an empty
doublet, a hat, and a crooked stick. For it is upon this ground
that, when a man is dead and buried, they say his soul, that is his
life, can walk separated from his body, and is seen by night amongst
the graves. Upon the same ground, they say that the figure, and
colour, and taste of a piece of bread has a being, there, where they
say there is no bread: and upon the same ground they say that faith,
and wisdom, and other virtues are sometimes poured into a man,
sometimes blown into him, from heaven; if the virtuous and their
virtues could be asunder; and a great many other things that serve
to lessen the dependence of subjects on the sovereign power of their
country. For who will endeavour to obey the laws, if he expect
obedience to be poured or blown into him? Or who will not obey a
priest, that can make God, rather than his sovereign; nay, than God
Himself?  Or who that is in fear of ghosts will not bear great respect
to those that can make the holy water that drives them from him? And
this shall suffice for an example of the errors which are brought into
the Church from the entities and essences of Aristotle: which it may
be he knew to be false philosophy, but wrote it as a thing consonant
to, and corroborative of, their religion; and fearing the fate of
Socrates.
  Being once fallen into this error of "separated essences," they
are thereby necessarily involved in many other absurdities that follow
it. For seeing they will have these forms to be real, they are obliged
to assign them some place. But because they hold them incorporeal,
without all dimension of quantity, and all men know that place is
dimension, and not to be filled but by that which is corporeal, they
are driven to uphold their credit with a distinction, that they are
not indeed anywhere circumscriptive, but definitive: which terms being
mere words, and in this occasion insignificant, pass only in Latin,
that the vanity of them may be concealed. For the circumscription of a
thing is nothing else but the determination or defining of its
place; and so both the terms of the distinction are the same. And in
particular, of the essence of a man, which, they say, is his soul,
they affirm it to be all of it in his little finger, and all of it
in every other part, how small soever, of his body; and yet no more
soul in the whole body than in any one of those parts. Can any man
think that God is served with such absurdities? And yet all this is
necessary to believe, to those that will believe the existence of an
incorporeal soul, separated from the body.
  And when they come to give account how an incorporeal substance
can be capable of pain, and be tormented in the fire of hell or
purgatory, they have nothing at all to answer, but that it cannot be
known how fire can burn souls.
  Again, whereas motion is change of place, and incorporeal substances
are not capable of place, they are troubled to make it seem possible
how a soul can go hence, without the body, to heaven, hell, or
purgatory; and how the ghosts of men (and I may add, of their
clothes which they appear in) can walk by night in churches,
churchyards, and other places of sepulture. To which I know not what
they can answer, unless they will say, they walk definitive, not
circumscriptive, or spiritually, not temporally: for such egregious
distinctions are equally applicable to any difficulty whatsoever.
  For the meaning of eternity, they will not have it to be an
endless succession of time; for then they should not be able to render
a reason how God's will and pre-ordaining of things to come should not
be before His prescience of the same, as the efficient cause before
the effect, or agent before the action; nor of many other their bold
opinions concerning the incomprehensible nature of God. But they
will teach us that eternity is the standing still of the present time,
a nunc-stans, as the Schools call it; which neither they nor any
else understand, no more than they would a hic-stans for an infinite
greatness of place.
  And whereas men divide a body in their thought, by numbering parts
of it, and in numbering those parts, number also the parts of the
place it filled; it cannot be but in making many parts, we make also
many places of those parts; whereby there cannot be conceived in the
mind of any man more or fewer parts than there are places for: yet
they will have us believe that by the Almighty power of God, one
body may be at one and the same time in many places; and many bodies
at one and the same time in one place; as if it were an
acknowledgement of the Divine Power to say, that which is, is not;
or that which has been, has not been. And these are but a small part
of the incongruities they are forced to, from their disputing
philosophically, instead of admiring and adoring of the divine and
incomprehensible Nature; whose attributes cannot signify what He is,
but ought to signify our desire to honour Him with the best
appellations we can think on. But they that venture to reason of His
nature, from these attributes of honour, losing their understanding in
the very first attempt, fall from one inconvenience into another,
without end and without number; in the same manner as when a man
ignorant of the ceremonies of court, coming into the presence of a
greater person than he is used to speak to, and stumbling at his
entrance, to save himself from falling, lets slip his cloak; to
recover his cloak, lets fall his hat; and, with one disorder after
another, discovers his astonishment and rusticity.
  Then for physics, that is, the knowledge of the subordinate and
secondary causes of natural events, they render none at all but
empty words. If you desire to know why some kind of bodies sink
naturally downwards toward the earth, and others go naturally from it,
the Schools will tell you, out of Aristotle, that the bodies that sink
downwards are heavy; and that this heaviness is it that causes them to
descend. But if you ask what they mean by heaviness, they will
define it to be an endeavour to go to the center of the earth: so that
the cause why things sink downward is an endeavour to be below;
which is as much as to say that bodies descend, or ascend, because
they do. Or they will tell you the center of the earth is the place of
rest and conservation for heavy things, and therefore they endeavour
to be there: as if stones and metals had a desire, or could discern
the place they would be at, as man does; or loved rest, as man does
not; or that a piece of glass were less safe in the window than
falling into the street.
  If we would know why the same body seems greater, without adding
to it, one time than another; they say, when it seems less, it is
condensed; when greater, rarefied. What is that condensed and
rarefied? Condensed is when there is in the very same matter less
quantity than before; and rarefied, when more. As if there could be
matter that had not some determined quantity; when quantity is nothing
else but the determination of matter; that is to say, of body, by
which we say one body is greater or lesser than another by thus, or
thus much. Or as if a body were made without any quantity at all,
and that afterwards more or less were put into it, according as it
is intended the body should be more or less dense.
  For the cause of the soul of man, they say, creatur infundendo and
creando infunditur: that is, "It is created by pouring it in," and
"poured in by creation."
  For the cause of sense, an ubiquity of species; that is, of the
shows or apparitions of objects; which when they be apparitions to the
eye is sight; when to the ear, hearing; to the palate, taste; to the
nostril, smelling; and to the rest of the body, feeling.
  For cause of the will to do any particular action, which is called
volitio, they assign the faculty, that is to say, the capacity in
general, that men have to will sometimes one thing, sometimes another,
which is called voluntas; making the power the cause of the act: as if
one should assign for cause of the good or evil acts of men their
ability to do them.
  And in many occasions they put for cause of natural events, their
own ignorance, but disguised in other words: as when they say, fortune
is the cause of things contingent; that is, of things whereof they
know no cause: and as when they attribute many effects to occult
qualities; that is, qualities not known to them, and therefore also,
as they think, to no man else: and to sympathy, antipathy,
antiperistasis, specifical qualities, and other like terms, which
signify neither the agent that produceth them, nor the operation by
which they are produced.
  If such metaphysics and physics as this be not vain philosophy,
there was never any; nor needed St. Paul to give us warning to avoid
it.
  And for their moral and civil philosophy, it hath the same or
greater absurdities. If a man do an action of injustice, that is to
say, an action contrary to the law, God, they say, is the prime
cause of the law and also the prime cause of that and all other
actions; but no cause at all of the injustice; which is the
inconformity of the action to the law. This is vain philosophy. A
man might as well say that one man maketh both a straight line and a
crooked, and another maketh their incongruity. And such is the
philosophy of all men that resolve of their conclusions before they
know their premises, pretending to comprehend that which is
incomprehensible; and of attributes of honour to make attributes of
nature; as this distinction was made to maintain the doctrine of
free will, that is, of a will of man not subject to the will of God.
  Aristotle and other heathen philosophers define good and evil by the
appetite of men; and well enough, as long as we consider them governed
every one by his own law: for in the condition of men that have no
other law but their own appetites, there can be no general rule of
good and evil actions. But in a Commonwealth this measure is false:
not the appetite of private men, but the law, which is the will and
appetite of the state, is the measure. And yet is this doctrine
still practised, and men judge the goodness or wickedness of their own
and of other men's actions, and of the actions of the Commonwealth
itself, by their own passions; and no man calleth good or evil but
that which is so in his own eyes, without any regard at all to the
public laws; except only monks and friars, that are bound by vow to
that simple obedience to their superior to which every subject ought
to think himself bound by the law of nature to the civil sovereign.
And this private measure of good is a doctrine, not only vain, but
also pernicious to the public state.
  It is also vain and false philosophy to say the work of marriage
is repugnant to chastity or continence, and by consequence to make
them moral vices; as they do that pretend chastity and continence
for the ground of denying marriage to the clergy. For they confess
it is no more but a constitution of the Church that requireth in those
holy orders, that continually attend the altar and administration of
the Eucharist, a continual abstinence from women, under the name of
continual chastity, continence, and purity. Therefore they call the
lawful use of wives want of chastity and continence; and so make
marriage a sin, or at least a thing so impure and unclean as to render
a man unfit for the altar. If the law were made because the use of
wives is incontinence, and contrary to chastity, then all marriage
is vice: if because it is a thing too impure and unclean for a man
consecrated to God, much more should other natural, necessary, and
daily works, which all men do, render men unworthy to be priests,
because they are more unclean.
  But the secret foundation of this prohibition of marriage of priests
is not likely to have been laid so slightly as upon such errors in
moral philosophy; nor yet upon the preference of single life to the
estate of matrimony; which proceeded from the wisdom of St. Paul,
who perceived how inconvenient a thing it was for those that in
those times of persecution were preachers of the gospel, and forced to
fly from one country to another, to be clogged with the care of wife
and children; but upon the design of the popes and priests of after
times, to make themselves, (the clergy, that is to say,) sole heirs of
the kingdom of God in this world, to which it was necessary to take
from them the use of marriage, because our Saviour saith that at the
coming of his kingdom the children of God "shall neither marry, nor be
given in marriage, but shall be as the angels in heaven"; that is to
say, spiritual. Seeing then they had taken on them the name of
spiritual, to have allowed themselves, when there was no need, the
propriety of wives, had been an incongruity.
  From Aristotle's civil philosophy, they have learned to call all
manner of Commonwealths but the popular (such as was at that time
the state of Athens), tyranny. All kings they called tyrants; and
the aristocracy of the thirty governors set up there by the
Lacedaemonians that subdued them, the thirty tyrants: as also to
call the condition of the people under the democracy, liberty. A
tyrant originally signified no more, simply, but a monarch. But when
afterwards in most parts of Greece that kind of government was
abolished, the name began to signify, not only the thing it did
before, but with it the hatred which the popular states bore towards
it: as also the name of king became odious after the deposing of the
kings in Rome, as being a thing natural to all men to conceive some
great fault to be signified in any attribute that is given in despite,
and to a great enemy. And when the same men shall be displeased with
those that have the administration of the democracy, or aristocracy,
they are not to seek for disgraceful names to express their anger
in; but call readily the one anarchy, and the other oligarchy, or
the tyranny of a few. And that which offendeth the people is no
other thing but that they are governed, not as every one of them would
himself, but as the public representant, be it one man or an
assembly of men, thinks fit; that is, by an arbitrary government:
for which they give evil names to their superiors, never knowing (till
perhaps a little after a civil war) that without such arbitrary
government, such war must be perpetual; and that it is men and arms,
not words and promises, that make the force and power of the laws.
  And therefore this is another error of Aristotle's politics, that in
a well-ordered Commonwealth, not men should govern, but the laws. What
man that has his natural senses, though he can neither write nor read,
does not find himself governed by them he fears, and believes can kill
or hurt him when he obeyeth not? Or that believes the law can hurt
him; that is, words and paper, without hands and swords of men? And
this is of the number of pernicious errors: for they induce men, as
oft as they like not their governors, to adhere to those that call
them tyrants, and to think it lawful to raise war against them: and
yet they are many times cherished from the pulpit, by the clergy.
  There is another error in their civil philosophy (which they never
learned of Aristotle, nor Cicero, nor any other of the heathen), to
extend the power of the law, which is the rule of actions only, to the
very thoughts and consciences of men, by examination and inquisition
of what they hold, notwithstanding the conformity of their speech
and actions. By which men are either punished for answering the
truth of their thoughts, or constrained to answer an untruth for
fear of punishment. It is true that the civil magistrate, intending to
employ a minister in the charge of teaching, may enquire of him if
he be content to preach such and such doctrines; and, in case of
refusal, may deny him the employment: but to force him to accuse
himself of opinions, when his actions are not by law forbidden, is
against the law of nature; and especially in them who teach that a man
shall be damned to eternal and extreme torments, if he die in a
false opinion concerning an article of the Christian faith. For who is
there (that knowing there is so great danger in an error) whom the
natural care of himself compelleth not to hazard his soul upon his own
judgement, rather than that of any other man that is unconcerned in
his damnation?
  For a private man, without the authority of the Commonwealth; that
is to say, without permission from the representant thereof, to
interpret the law by his own spirit, is another error in the politics:
but not drawn from Aristotle, nor from any other of the heathen
philosophers. For none of them deny but that in the power of making
laws is comprehended also the power of explaining them when there is
need. And are not the Scriptures, in all places where they are law,
made law by the authority of the Commonwealth and, consequently, a
part of the civil law?
  Of the same kind it is also when any but the sovereign restraineth
in any man that power which the Commonwealth hath not restrained; as
they do that impropriate the preaching of the gospel to one certain
order of men, where the laws have left it free. If the state give me
leave to preach or teach; that is, if it forbid me not, no man can
forbid me. If I find myself amongst the idolaters of America, shall
I that am a Christian, though not in orders, think it a sin to
preach Jesus Christ, till I have received orders from Rome? Or when
I have preached, shall not I answer their doubts and expound the
Scriptures to them; that is, shall I not teach? But for this may
some say, as also for administering to them the sacraments, the
necessity shall be esteemed for a sufficient mission; which is true.
But this is true also, that for whatsoever a dispensation is due for
the necessity, for the same there needs no dispensation when there
is no law that forbids it. Therefore to deny these functions to
those to whom the civil sovereign hath not denied them is a taking
away of a lawful liberty, which is contrary to the doctrine of civil
government.
  More examples of vain philosophy, brought into religion by the
doctors of School divinity, might be produced; but other men may if
they please observe them of themselves. I shall only add this, that
the writings of School divines are nothing else, for the most part,
but insignificant trains of strange and barbarous words, or words
otherwise used than in the common use of the Latin tongue; such as
would pose Cicero, and Varro, and all the grammarians of ancient Rome.
Which, if any man would see proved, let him (as I have said once
before) see whether he can translate any School divine into any of the
modern tongues, as French, English, or any other copious language: for
that which cannot in most of these be made intelligible is not
intelligible in the Latin. Which insignificancy of language, though
I cannot note it for false philosophy, yet it hath a quality, not only
to hide the truth, but also to make men think they have it, and desist
from further search.
  Lastly, for the errors brought in from false or uncertain history,
what is all the legend of fictitious miracles in the lives of the
saints; and all the histories of apparitions and ghosts alleged by the
doctors of the Roman Church, to make good their doctrines of hell
and purgatory, the power of exorcism, and other doctrines which have
no warrant, neither in reason nor Scripture; as also all those
traditions which they call the unwritten word of God; but old wives'
fables? Whereof, though they find dispersed somewhat in the writings
of the ancient Fathers, yet those Fathers were men that might too
easily believe false reports. And the producing of their opinions
for testimony of the truth of what they believed hath no other force
with them that, according to the counsel of St. John,* examine spirits
than in all things that concern the power of the Roman Church (the
abuse whereof either they suspected not, or had benefit by it), to
discredit their testimony in respect of too rash belief of reports;
which the most sincere men without great knowledge of natural
causes, such as the Fathers were, are commonly the most subject to:
for naturally, the best men are the least suspicious of fraudulent
purposes. Gregory the Pope and St. Bernard have somewhat of
apparitions of ghosts that said they were in purgatory; and so has our
Bede: but nowhere, I believe, but by report from others. But if
they, or any other, relate any such stories of their own knowledge,
they shall not thereby confirm the more such vain reports, but
discover their own infirmity or fraud.

  * I John, 4. 1

  With the introduction of false, we may join also the suppression
of true philosophy by such men as neither by lawful authority nor
sufficient study are competent judges of the truth. Our own
navigations make manifest, and all men learned in human sciences now
acknowledge, there are antipodes: and every day it appeareth more
and more that years and days are determined by motions of the earth.
Nevertheless, men that have in their writings but supposed such
doctrine, as an occasion to lay open the reasons for and against it,
have been punished for it by authority ecclesiastical. But what reason
is there for it? Is it because such opinions are contrary to true
religion? That cannot be, if they be true. Let therefore the truth
be first examined by competent judges, or confuted by them that
pretend to know the contrary. Is it because they be contrary to the
religion established? Let them be silenced by the laws of those to
whom the teachers of them are subject; that is, by the laws civil: for
disobedience may lawfully be punished in them that against the laws
teach even true philosophy. Is it because they tend to disorder in
government, as countenancing rebellion or sedition? Then let them be
silenced, and the teachers punished, by virtue of his power to whom
the care of the public quiet is committed; which is the authority
civil. For whatsoever power ecclesiastics take upon themselves (in any
place where they are subject to the state) in their own right,
though they call it God's right, is but usurpation.
                            CHAPTER XLVII
          OF THE BENEFIT THAT PROCEEDETH FROM SUCH DARKNESS,
                       AND TO WHOM IT ACCRUETH

  CICERO maketh honourable mention of one of the Cassii, a severe
judge amongst the Romans, for a custom he had in criminal causes, when
the testimony of the witnesses was not sufficient, to ask the
accusers, cui bono; that is to say, what profit, honour, or other
contentment the accused obtained or expected by the fact. For
amongst presumptions, there is none that so evidently declareth the
author as doth the benefit of the action. By the same rule I intend in
this place to examine who they may be that have possessed the people
so long in this part of Christendom with these doctrines contrary to
the peaceable societies of mankind.
  And first, to this error that the present Church, now militant on
earth, is the kingdom of God (that is, the kingdom of glory, or the
land of promise; not the kingdom of grace, which is but a promise of
the land), are annexed these worldly benefits: first, that the pastors
and teachers of the Church are entitled thereby, as God's public
ministers, to a right of governing the Church; and consequently,
because the Church and Commonwealth are the same persons, to be
rectors and governors of the Commonwealth. By this title it is that
the Pope prevailed with the subjects of all Christian princes to
believe that to disobey him was to disobey Christ himself; and in
all differences between him and other princes (charmed with the word
power spiritual) to abandon their lawful sovereigns; which is in
effect a universal monarchy over all Christendom. For though they were
first invested in the right of being supreme teachers of Christian
doctrine, by and under Christian emperors within the limits of the
Roman Empire (as is acknowledged by themselves), by the title of
Pontifex Maximus, who was an officer subject to the civil state; yet
after the Empire was divided and dissolved, it was not hard to obtrude
upon the people already subject to them, another title, namely, the
right of St. Peter; not only to save entire their pretended power, but
also to extend the same over the same Christian provinces, though no
more united in the Empire of Rome. This benefit of a universal
monarchy, considering the desire of men to bear rule, is a
sufficient presumption that the Popes that pretended to it, and for
a long time enjoyed it, were the authors of the doctrine by which it
was obtained; namely, that the Church now on earth is the kingdom of
Christ. For that granted, it must be understood that Christ hath
some lieutenant amongst us by whom we are to be told what are his
commandments.
  After that certain Churches had renounced this universal power of
the Pope, one would expect, in reason, that the civil sovereigns in
all those Churches should have recovered so much of it as (before they
had unadvisedly let it go) was their own right and in their own hands.
And in England it was so in effect; saving that they by whom the kings
administered the government of religion, by maintaining their
employment to be in God's right, seemed to usurp, if not a
supremacy, yet an independency on the civil power: and they but seemed
to usurp it, inasmuch as they acknowledged a right in the king to
deprive them of the exercise of their functions at his pleasure.
  But in those places where the presbytery took that office, though
many other doctrines of the Church of Rome were forbidden to be
taught; yet this doctrine, that the kingdom of Christ is already come,
and that it began at the resurrection of our Saviour, was still
retained. But cui bono? What profit did they expect from it? The
same which the popes expected: to have a sovereign power over the
people. For what is it for men to excommunicate their lawful king, but
to keep him from all places of God's public service in his own
kingdom; and with force to resist him when he with force
endeavoureth to correct them? Or what is it, without authority from
the civil sovereign, to excommunicate any person, but to take from him
his lawful liberty, that is, to usurp an unlawful power over their
brethren? The authors therefore of this darkness in religion are the
Roman and the Presbyterian clergy.
  To this head, I refer also all those doctrines that serve them to
keep the possession of this spiritual sovereignty after it is
gotten. As first, that the Pope, in his public capacity, cannot err.
For who is there that, believing this to be true, will not readily
obey him in whatsoever he commands?
  Secondly, that all other bishops, in what Commonwealth soever,
have not their right, neither immediately from God, nor mediately from
their civil sovereigns, but from the Pope, is a doctrine by which
there comes to be in every Christian Commonwealth many potent men (for
so are Bishops) that have their dependence on the Pope, owe
obedience to him, though he be a foreign prince; by which means he
is able, as he hath done many times, to raise a civil war against
the state that submits not itself to be governed according to his
pleasure and interest.
  Thirdly, the exemption of these and of all other priests, and of all
monks and friars, from the power of the civil laws. For by this means,
there is a great part of every Commonwealth that enjoy the benefit
of the laws and are protected by the power of the civil state, which
nevertheless pay no part of the public expense; nor are liable to
the penalties, as other subjects, due to their crimes; and,
consequently, stand not in fear of any man, but the Pope; and adhere
to him only, to uphold his universal monarchy.
  Fourthly, the giving to their priests (which is no more in the New
Testament but presbyters, that is, elders) the name of sacerdotes,
that is, sacrificers, which was the title of the civil sovereign,
and his public ministers, amongst the Jews, whilst God was their king.
Also, the making the Lord's Supper a sacrifice serveth to make the
people believe the Pope hath the same power over all Christians that
Moses and Aaron had over the Jews; that is to say, all power, both
civil and ecclesiastical, as the high priest then had.
  Fifthly, the teaching that matrimony is a sacrament giveth to the
clergy the judging of the lawfulness of marriages; and thereby, of
what children are legitimate; and consequently, of the right of
succession to hereditary kingdoms.
  Sixthly, the denial of marriage to priests serveth to assure this
power of the Pope over kings. For if a king be a priest, he cannot
marry and transmit his kingdom to his posterity; if he be not a
priest, then the Pope pretendeth this authority ecclesiastical over
him, and over his people.
  Seventhly, from auricular confession they obtain, for the
assurance of their power, better intelligence of the designs of
princes and great persons in the civil state than these can have of
the designs of the state ecclesiastical.
  Eighthly, by the canonization of saints, and declaring who are
martyrs, they assure their power in that they induce simple men into
an obstinacy against the laws and commands of their civil
sovereigns, even to death, if by the Pope's excommunication they be
declared heretics or enemies to the Church; that is, as they interpret
it, to the Pope.
  Ninthly, they assure the same, by the power they ascribe to every
priest of making Christ; and by the power of ordaining penance, and of
remitting and retaining of sins.
  Tenthly, by the doctrine of purgatory, of justification by
external works, and of indulgences, the clergy is enriched.
  Eleventhly, by their demonology, and the use of exorcism, and
other things appertaining thereto, they keep, or think they keep,
the people more in awe of their power.
  Lastly, the metaphysics, ethics, and politics of Aristotle, the
frivolous distinctions, barbarous terms, and obscure language of the
Schoolmen, taught in the universities (which have been all erected and
regulated by the Pope's authority), serve them to keep these errors
from being detected, and to make men mistake the ignis fatuus of
vain philosophy for the light of the Gospel.
  To these, if they sufficed not, might be added other of their dark
doctrines, the profit whereof redoundeth manifestly to the setting
up of an unlawful power over the lawful sovereigns of Christian
people; or for the sustaining of the same when it is set up; or to the
worldly riches, honour, and authority of those that sustain it. And
therefore by the aforesaid rule of cui bono, we may justly pronounce
for the authors of all this spiritual darkness, the Pope, and Roman
clergy, and all those besides that endeavour to settle in the minds of
men this erroneous doctrine, that the Church now on earth is that
kingdom of God mentioned in the Old and New Testament.
  But the emperors, and other Christian sovereigns, under whose
government these errors and the like encroachments of ecclesiastics
upon their office at first crept in, to the disturbance of their
possessions and of the tranquillity of their subjects, though they
suffered the same for want of foresight of the sequel, and of
insight into the designs of their teachers, may nevertheless be
esteemed accessaries to their own and the public damage. For without
their authority there could at first no seditious doctrine have been
publicly preached. I say they might have hindered the same in the
beginning: but when the people were once possessed by those
spiritual men, there was no human remedy to be applied that any man
could invent. And for the remedies that God should provide, who
never faileth in His good time to destroy all the machinations of
men against the truth, we are to attend His good pleasure that
suffereth many times the prosperity of His enemies, together with
their ambition, to grow to such a height as the violence thereof
openeth the eyes, which the wariness of their predecessors had
before sealed up, and makes men by too much grasping let go all, as
Peter's net was broken by the struggling of too great a multitude of
fishes; whereas the impatience of those that strive to resist such
encroachment, before their subjects' eyes were opened, did but
increase the power they resisted. I do not therefore blame the Emperor
Frederick for holding the stirrup to our countryman Pope Adrian; for
such was the disposition of his subjects then, as if he had not done
it, he was not likely to have succeeded in the empire. But I blame
those that, in the beginning, when their power was entire, by
suffering such doctrines to be forged in the universities of their own
dominions, have held the stirrup to all the succeeding popes, whilst
they mounted into the thrones of all Christian sovereigns, to ride and
tire both them and their people, at their pleasure.
  But as the inventions of men are woven, so also are they ravelled
out; the way is the same, but the order is inverted. The web begins at
the first elements of power, which are wisdom, humility, sincerity,
and other virtues of the Apostles, whom the people, converted,
obeyed out of reverence, not by obligation. Their consciences were
free, and their words and actions subject to none but the civil power.
Afterwards the presbyters, as the flocks of Christ increased,
assembling to consider what they should teach, and thereby obliging
themselves to teach nothing against the decrees of their assemblies,
made it to be thought the people were thereby obliged to follow
their doctrine, and, when they refused, refused to keep them company
(that was then called excommunication), not as being infidels, but
as being disobedient: and this was the first knot upon their
liberty. And the number of presbyters increasing, the presbyters of
the chief city or province got themselves an authority over the
parochial presbyters, and appropriated to themselves the names of
bishops: and this was a second knot on Christian liberty. Lastly,
the bishop of Rome, in regard of the Imperial City, took upon him an
authority (partly by the wills of the emperors themselves, and by
the title of Pontifex Maximus, and at last when the emperors were
grown weak, by the privileges of St. Peter) over all other bishops
of the Empire: which was the third and last knot, and the whole
synthesis and construction of the pontifical power.
  And therefore the analysis or resolution is by the same way, but
beginneth with the knot that was last tied; as we may see in the
dissolution of the preterpolitical Church government in England.
First, the power of the popes was dissolved totally by Queen
Elizabeth; and the bishops, who before exercised their functions in
right of the Pope, did afterwards exercise the same in right of the
Queen and her successors; though by retaining the phrase of jure
divino they were thought to demand it by immediate right from God: and
so was untied the first knot. After this, the Presbyterians lately
in England obtained the putting down of Episcopacy: and so was the
second knot dissolved. And almost at the same time, the power was
taken also from the Presbyterians: and so we are reduced to the
independency of the primitive Christians to follow Paul, or Cephas, or
Apollos, every man as he liketh best: which if it be without
contention, and without measuring the doctrine of Christ by our
affection to the person of his minister (the fault which the Apostle
reprehended in the Corinthians), is perhaps the best: first, because
there ought to be no power over the consciences of men, but of the
word itself, working faith in every one, not always according to the
purpose of them that plant and water, but of God Himself, that
giveth the increase. And secondly, because it is unreasonable in them,
who teach there is such danger in every little error, to require of
a man endued with reason of his own to follow the reason of any
other man, or of the most voices of many other men, which is little
better than to venture his salvation at cross and pile. Nor ought
those teachers to be displeased with this loss of their ancient
authority: for there is none should know better than they that power
is preserved by the same virtues by which it is acquired; that is to
say, by wisdom, humility, clearness of doctrine, and sincerity of
conversation; and not by suppression of the natural sciences, and of
the morality of natural reason; nor by obscure language; nor by
arrogating to themselves more knowledge than they make appear; nor
by pious frauds; nor by such other faults as in the pastors of God's
Church are not only faults, but also scandals, apt to make men stumble
one time or other upon the suppression of their authority.
  But after this doctrine, that the Church now militant is the kingdom
of God spoken of in the Old and New Testament, was received in the
world, the ambition and canvassing for the offices that belong
thereunto, and especially for that great office of being Christ's
lieutenant, and the pomp of them that obtained therein the principal
public charges, became by degrees so evident that they lost the inward
reverence due to the pastoral function: insomuch as the wisest men
of them that had any power in the civil state needed nothing but the
authority of their princes to deny them any further obedience. For,
from the time that the Bishop of Rome had gotten to be acknowledged
for bishop universal, by pretence of succession to St. Peter, their
whole hierarchy, or kingdom of darkness, may be compared not unfitly
to the kingdom of fairies; that is, to the old wives' fables in
England concerning ghosts and spirits, and the feats they play in
the night. And if a man consider the original of this great
ecclesiastical dominion, he will easily perceive that the papacy is no
other than the ghost of the deceased Roman Empire, sitting crowned
upon the grave thereof: for so did the papacy start up on a sudden out
of the ruins of that heathen power.
  The language also which they use, both in the churches and in
their public acts, being Latin, which is not commonly used by any
nation now in the world, what is it but the ghost of the old Roman
language?
  The fairies in what nation soever they converse have but one
universal king, which some poets of ours call King Oberon; but the
Scripture calls Beelzebub, prince of demons. The ecclesiastics
likewise, in whose dominions soever they be found, acknowledge but one
universal king, the Pope.
  The ecclesiastics are spiritual men and ghostly fathers. The fairies
are spirits and ghosts. Fairies and ghosts inhabit darkness,
solitudes, and graves. The ecclesiastics walk in obscurity of
doctrine, in monasteries, churches, and churchyards.
  The ecclesiastics have their cathedral churches, which, in what town
soever they be erected, by virtue of holy water, and certain charms
called exorcisms, have the power to make those towns, cities, that
is to say, seats of empire. The fairies also have their enchanted
castles, and certain gigantic ghosts, that domineer over the regions
round about them.
  The fairies are not to be seized on, and brought to answer for the
hurt they do. So also the ecclesiastics vanish away from the tribunals
of civil justice.
  The ecclesiastics take from young men the use of reason, by
certain charms compounded of metaphysics, and miracles, and
traditions, and abused Scripture, whereby they are good for nothing
else but to execute what they command them. The fairies likewise are
said to take young children out of their cradles, and to change them
into natural fools, which common people do therefore call elves, and
are apt to mischief.
  In what shop or operatory the fairies make their enchantment, the
old wives have not determined. But the operatories of the clergy are
well enough known to be the universities, that received their
discipline from authority pontifical.
  When the fairies are displeased with anybody, they are said to
send their elves to pinch them. The ecclesiastics, when they are
displeased with any civil state, make also their elves, that is,
superstitious, enchanted subjects, to pinch their princes, by
preaching sedition; or one prince, enchanted with promises, to pinch
another.
  The fairies marry not; but there be amongst them incubi that have
copulation with flesh and blood. The priests also marry not.
  The ecclesiastics take the cream of the land, by donations of
ignorant men that stand in awe of them, and by tithes: so also it is
in the fable of fairies, that they enter into the dairies, and feast
upon the cream, which they skim from the milk.
  What kind of money is current in the kingdom of fairies is not
recorded in the story. But the ecclesiastics in their receipts
accept of the same money that we do; though when they are to make
any payment, it is in canonizations, indulgences, and masses.
  To this and such like resemblances between the papacy and the
kingdom of fairies may be added this, that as the fairies have no
existence but in the fancies of ignorant people, rising from the
traditions of old wives or old poets: so the spiritual power of the
Pope (without the bounds of his own civil dominion) consisteth only in
the fear that seduced people stand in of their excommunications,
upon hearing of false miracles, false traditions, and false
interpretations of the Scripture.
  It was not therefore a very difficult matter for Henry the Eighth by
his exorcism; nor for Queen Elizabeth by hers, to cast them out. But
who knows that this spirit of Rome, now gone out, and walking by
missions through the dry places of China, Japan, and the Indies,
that yield him little fruit, may not return; or rather, an assembly of
spirits worse than he enter and inhabit this clean-swept house, and
make the end thereof worse than the beginning? For it is not the Roman
clergy only that pretends the kingdom of God to be of this world,
and thereby to have a power therein, distinct from that of the civil
state. And this is all I had a design to say, concerning the
doctrine of the POLITICS. Which, when I have reviewed, I shall
willingly expose it to the censure of my country.
                       A REVIEW AND CONCLUSION

  FROM the contrariety of some of the natural faculties of the mind,
one to another, as also of one passion to another, and from their
reference to conversation, there has been an argument taken to infer
an impossibility that any one man should be sufficiently disposed to
all sorts of civil duty. The severity of judgement, they say, makes
men censorious and unapt to pardon the errors and infirmities of other
men: and on the other side, celerity of fancy makes the thoughts
less steady than is necessary to discern exactly between right and
wrong. Again, in all deliberations, and in all pleadings, the
faculty of solid reasoning is necessary: for without it, the
resolutions of men are rash, and their sentences unjust: and yet if
there be not powerful eloquence, which procureth attention and
consent, the effect of reason will be little. But these are contrary
faculties; the former being grounded upon principles of truth; the
other upon opinions already received, true or false; and upon the
passions and interests of men, which are different and mutable.
  And amongst the passions, courage (by which I mean the contempt of
wounds and violent death) inclineth men to private revenges, and
sometimes to endeavour the unsettling of the public peace: and
timorousness many times disposeth to the desertion of the public
defence. Both these, they say, cannot stand together in the same
person.
  And to consider the contrariety of men's opinions and manners in
general, it is, they say, impossible to entertain a constant civil
amity with all those with whom the business of the world constrains us
to converse: which business consisteth almost in nothing else but a
perpetual contention for honour, riches, and authority.
  To which I answer that these are indeed great difficulties, but
not impossibilities: for by education and discipline, they may be, and
are sometimes, reconciled. Judgement and fancy may have place in the
same man; but by turns; as the end which he aimeth at requireth. As
the Israelites in Egypt were sometimes fastened to their labour of
making bricks, and other times were ranging abroad to gather straw: so
also may the judgement sometimes be fixed upon one certain
consideration, and the fancy at another time wandering about the
world. So also reason and eloquence (though not perhaps in the natural
sciences, yet in the moral) may stand very well together. For
wheresoever there is place for adorning and preferring of error, there
is much more place for adorning and preferring of truth, if they
have it to adorn. Nor is there any repugnancy between fearing the
laws, and not fearing a public enemy; nor between abstaining from
injury, and pardoning it in others. There is therefore no such
inconsistence of human nature with civil duties, as some think. I have
known clearness of judgement, and largeness of fancy; strength of
reason, and graceful elocution; a courage for the war, and a fear
for the laws, and all eminently in one man; and that was my most noble
and honoured friend, Mr. Sidney Godolphin; who, hating no man, nor
hated of any, was unfortunately slain in the beginning of the late
civil war, in the public quarrel, by an undiscerned and an
undiscerning hand.
  To the Laws of Nature declared in the fifteenth Chapter, I would
have this added: that every man is bound by nature, as much as in
him lieth, to protect in war the authority by which he is himself
protected in time of peace. For he that pretendeth a right of nature
to preserve his own body, cannot pretend a right of nature to
destroy him by whose strength he is preserved: it is a manifest
contradiction of himself. And though this law may be drawn by
consequence from some of those that are there already mentioned, yet
the times require to have it inculcated and remembered.
  And because I find by diverse English books lately printed that
the civil wars have not yet sufficiently taught men in what point of
time it is that a subject becomes obliged to the conqueror; nor what
is conquest; nor how it comes about that it obliges men to obey his
laws: therefore for further satisfaction of men therein, I say, the
point of time wherein a man becomes subject to a conqueror is that
point wherein, having liberty to submit to him, he consenteth,
either by express words or by other sufficient sign, to be his
subject. When it is that a man hath the liberty to submit, I have
shown before in the end of the twenty-first Chapter; namely, that
for him that hath no obligation to his former sovereign but that of an
ordinary subject, it is then when the means of his life is within
the guards and garrisons of the enemy; for it is then that he hath
no longer protection from him, but is protected by the adverse party
for his contribution. Seeing therefore such contribution is
everywhere, as a thing inevitable, notwithstanding it be an assistance
to the enemy, esteemed lawful; a total submission, which is but an
assistance to the enemy, cannot be esteemed unlawful. Besides, if a
man consider that they submit, assist the enemy but with part of their
estates, whereas they that refuse, assist him with the whole, there is
no reason to call their submission or composition an assistance, but
rather a detriment, to the enemy. But if a man, besides the obligation
of a subject, hath taken upon him a new obligation of a soldier,
then he hath not the liberty to submit to a new power, as long as
the old one keeps the field and giveth him means of subsistence,
either in his armies or garrisons: for in this case, he cannot
complain of want of protection and means to live as a soldier. But
when that also fails, a soldier also may seek his protection
wheresoever he has most hope to have it, and may lawfully submit
himself to his new master. And so much for the time when he may do
it lawfully, if he will. It therefore he do it, he is undoubtedly
bound to be a true subject: for a contract lawfully made cannot
lawfully be broken.
  By this also a man may understand when it is that men may be said to
be conquered; and in what the nature of conquest, and the right of a
conqueror consisteth: for this submission is it implieth them all.
Conquest is not the victory itself; but the acquisition, by victory,
of a right over the persons of men. He therefore that is slain is
overcome, but not conquered: he that is taken and put into prison or
chains is not conquered, though overcome; for he is still an enemy,
and may save himself if he can: but he that upon promise of
obedience hath his life and liberty allowed him, is then conquered and
a subject; and not before. The Romans used to say that their general
had pacified such a province, that is to say, in English, conquered
it; and that the country was pacified by victory when the people of it
had promised imperata facere, that is, to do what the Roman people
commanded them: this was to be conquered. But this promise may be
either express or tacit: express, by promise; tacit, by other signs.
As, for example, a man that hath not been called to make such an
express promise, because he is one whose power perhaps is not
considerable; yet if he live under their protection openly, he is
understood to submit himself to the government: but if he live there
secretly, he is liable to anything that may be done to a spy and enemy
of the state. I say not, he does any injustice (for acts of open
hostility bear not that name); but that he may be justly put to death.
Likewise, if a man, when his country is conquered, be out of it, he is
not conquered, nor subject: but if at his return he submit to the
government, he is bound to obey it. So that conquest, to define it, is
the acquiring of the right of sovereignty by victory. Which right is
acquired in the people's submission, by which they contract with the
victor, promising obedience, for life and liberty.
  In the twenty-ninth Chapter I have set down for one of the causes of
the dissolutions of Commonwealths their imperfect generation,
consisting in the want of an absolute and arbitrary legislative power;
for want whereof, the civil sovereign is fain to handle the sword of
justice unconstantly, and as if it were too hot for him to hold: one
reason whereof (which I have not there mentioned) is this, that they
will all of them justify the war by which their power was at first
gotten, and whereon, as they think, their right dependeth, and not
on the possession. As if, for example, the right of the kings of
England did depend on the goodness of the cause of William the
Conqueror, and upon their lineal and directest descent from him; by
which means, there would perhaps be no tie of the subjects'
obedience to their sovereign at this day in all the world: wherein
whilst they needlessly think to justify themselves, they justify all
the successful rebellions that ambition shall at any time raise
against them and their successors. Therefore I put down for one of the
most effectual seeds of the death of any state, that the conquerors
require not only a submission of men's actions to them for the future,
but also an approbation of all their actions past; when there is
scarce a Commonwealth in the world whose beginnings can in
conscience be justified.
  And because the name of tyranny signifieth nothing more nor less
than the name of sovereignty, be it in one or many men, saving that
they that use the former word are understood to be angry with them
they call tyrants; I think the toleration of a professed hatred of
tyranny is a toleration of hatred to Commonwealth in general, and
another evil seed, not differing much from the former. For to the
justification of the cause of a conqueror, the reproach of the cause
of the conquered is for the most part necessary: but neither of them
necessary for the obligation of the conquered. And thus much I have
thought fit to say upon the review of the first and second part of
this discourse.
  In the thirty-fifth Chapter, I have sufficiently declared out of the
Scripture that in the Commonwealth of the Jews, God Himself was made
the Sovereign, by pact with the people; who were therefore called
His "peculiar people," to distinguish them from the rest of the world,
over whom God reigned, not by their consent, but by His own power: and
that in this kingdom Moses was God's lieutenant on earth; and that
it was he that told them what laws God appointed them to be ruled
by. But I have omitted to set down who were the officers appointed
to do execution; especially in capital punishments; not then
thinking it a matter of so necessary consideration as I find it since.
We know that generally in all Commonwealths, the execution of
corporeal punishments was either put upon the guards, or other
soldiers of the sovereign power, or given to those in whom want of
means, contempt of honour, and hardness of heart concurred to make
them sue for such an office. But amongst the Israelites it was a
positive law of God their Sovereign that he that was convicted of a
capital crime should be stoned to death by the people; and that the
witnesses should cast the first stone, and after the witnesses, then
the rest of the people. This was a law that designed who were to be
the executioners; but not that any one should throw a stone at him
before conviction and sentence, where the congregation was judge.
The witnesses were nevertheless to be heard before they proceeded to
execution, unless the fact were committed in the presence of the
congregation itself, or in sight of the lawful judges; for then
there needed no other witnesses but the judges themselves.
Nevertheless, this manner of proceeding, being not thoroughly
understood, hath given occasion to a dangerous opinion, that any man
may kill another, in some cases, by a right of zeal; as if the
executions done upon offenders in the kingdom of God in old time
proceeded not from the sovereign command, but from the authority of
private zeal: which, if we consider the texts that seem to favour
it, is quite contrary.
  First, where the Levites fell upon the people that had made and
worshipped the golden calf, and slew three thousand of them, it was by
the commandment of Moses from the mouth of God; as is manifest,
Exodus, 32. 27. And when the son of a woman of Israel had blasphemed
God, they that heard it did not kill him, but brought him before
Moses, who put him under custody, till God should give sentence
against him; as appears, Leviticus, 24. 11, 12. Again, when Phinehas
killed Zimri and Cozbi,* it was not by right of private zeal: their
crime was committed in the sight of the assembly; there needed no
witness; the law was known, and he the heir apparent to the
sovereignty; and, which is the principal point, the lawfulness of
his act depended wholly upon a subsequent ratification by Moses,
whereof he had no cause to doubt. And this presumption of a future
ratification is sometimes necessary to the safety of a Commonwealth;
as in a sudden rebellion any man that can suppress it by his own power
in the country where it begins, without express law or commission, may
lawfully do it, and provide to have it ratified, or pardoned, whilst
it is in doing, or after it is done. Also, it is expressly said,
"Whosoever shall kill the murderer shall kill him upon the word of
witnesses":*(2) but witnesses suppose a formal judicature, and
consequently condemn that pretence of jus zelotarum. The Law of
Moses concerning him that enticeth to idolatry, that is to say, in the
kingdom of God to a renouncing of his allegiance, forbids to conceal
him, and commands the accuser to cause him to be put to death, and
to cast the first stone at him;*(3) but not to kill him before he be
condemned. And the process against idolatry is exactly set down: for
God there speaketh to the people as Judge, and commandeth them, when a
man is accused of idolatry, to enquire diligently of the fact, and
finding it true, then to stone him; but still the hand of the
witness throweth the first stone.*(4) This is not private zeal, but
public condemnation. In like manner when a father hath a rebellious
son, the law is that he shall bring him before the judges of the town,
and all the people of the town shall stone him.*(5) Lastly, by
pretence of these laws it was that St. Stephen was stoned, and not
by pretence of private zeal: for before he was carried away to
execution, he had pleaded his cause before the high priest. There is
nothing in all this, nor in any other part of the Bible, to
countenance executions by private zeal; which, being oftentimes but
a conjunction of ignorance and passion, is against both the justice
and peace of a Commonwealth.

  * Numbers, 25. 6, 7
  *(2) Ibid., 35. 30
  *(3) Deuteronomy, 13. 8
  *(4) Ibid., 17. 4, 5, 6
  *(5) Ibid., 21. 18-21

  In the thirty-sixth Chapter I have said that it is not declared in
what manner God spoke supernaturally to Moses: not that He spoke not
to him sometimes by dreams and visions, and by a supernatural voice,
as to other prophets; for the manner how He spoke unto him from the
mercy seat is expressly set down in these words, "From that time
forward, when Moses entered into Tabernacle of the congregation to
speak with God, he heard a voice which spake unto him from over the
mercy seat, which is over the Ark of the testimony; from between the
cherubims he spake unto him."* But it is not declared in what
consisted the pre-eminence of the manner of God's speaking to Moses,
above that of His speaking to other prophets, as to Samuel and to
Abraham, to whom He also spoke by a voice (that is, by vision), unless
the difference consist in the clearness of the vision. For "face to
face," and "mouth to mouth," cannot be literally understood of the
infiniteness and incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature.

  * Numbers, 7. 89

  And as to the whole doctrine, I see not yet, but the principles of
it are true and proper, and the ratiocination solid. For I ground
the civil right of sovereigns, and both the duty and liberty of
subjects, upon the known natural inclinations of mankind, and upon the
articles of the law of nature; of which no man, that pretends but
reason enough to govern his private family, ought to be ignorant.
And for the power ecclesiastical of the same sovereigns, I ground it
on such texts as are both evident in themselves and consonant to the
scope of the whole Scripture, and therefore am persuaded that he
that shall read it with a purpose only to be informed, shall be
informed by it. But for those that by writing or public discourse,
or by their eminent actions, have already engaged themselves to the
maintaining of contrary opinions, they will not be so easily
satisfied. For in such cases, it is natural for men, at one and the
same time, both to proceed in reading and to lose their attention in
the search of objections to that they had read before: of which, in
a time wherein the interests of men are changed (seeing much of that
doctrine which serveth to the establishing of a new government must
needs be contrary to that which conduced to the dissolution of the
old), there cannot choose but be very many.
  In that part which treateth of a Christian Commonwealth, there are
some new doctrines which, it may be, in a state where the contrary
were already fully determined, were a fault for a subject without
leave to divulge, as being a usurpation of the place of a teacher. But
in this time that men call not only for peace, but also for truth,
to offer such doctrines as I think true, and that manifestly tend to
peace and loyalty, to the consideration of those that are yet in
deliberation, is no more but to offer new wine, to be put into new
casks, that both may be preserved together. And I suppose that then,
when novelty can breed no trouble nor disorder in a state, men are not
generally so much inclined to the reverence of antiquity as to
prefer ancient errors before new and well-proved truth.
  There is nothing I distrust more than my elocution, which
nevertheless I am confident (excepting the mischances of the press) is
not obscure. That I have neglected the ornament of quoting ancient
poets, orators, and philosophers, contrary to the custom of late time,
whether I have done well or ill in it, proceedeth from my judgement,
grounded on many reasons. For first, all truth of doctrine dependeth
either upon reason or upon Scripture; both which give credit to
many, but never receive it from any writer. Secondly, the matters in
question are not of fact, but of right, wherein there is no place
for witnesses. There is scarce any of those old writers that
contradicteth not sometimes both himself and others; which makes their
testimonies insufficient. Fourthly, such opinions as are taken only
upon credit of antiquity are not intrinsically the judgement of
those that cite them, but words that pass, like gaping, from mouth
to mouth. Fifthly, it is many times with a fraudulent design that
men stick their corrupt doctrine with the cloves of other men's wit.
Sixthly, I find not that the ancients they cite took it for an
ornament to do the like with those that wrote before them.
Seventhly, it is an argument of indigestion, when Greek and Latin
sentences unchewed come up again, as they use to do, unchanged.
Lastly, though I reverence those men of ancient time that either
have written truth perspicuously, or set us in a better way to find it
out ourselves; yet to the antiquity itself I think nothing due. For if
we will reverence the age, the present is the oldest: if the antiquity
of the writer, I am not sure that generally they to whom such honour
is given, were more ancient when they wrote than I am that am writing:
but if it be well considered, the praise of ancient authors proceeds
not from the reverence of the dead, but from the competition and
mutual envy of the living.
  To conclude, there is nothing in this whole discourse, nor in that I
wrote before of the same subject in Latin, as far as I can perceive,
contrary either to the word of God or to good manners; or to the
disturbance of the public tranquillity. Therefore I think it may be
profitably printed, and more profitably taught in the Universities, in
case they also think so, whom the judgement of the same belongeth. For
seeing the Universities are the fountains of civil and moral doctrine,
from whence the preachers and the gentry, drawing such water as they
find, use to sprinkle the same (both from the pulpit and in their
conversation) upon the people, there ought certainly to be great
care taken, to have it pure, both from the venom of heathen
politicians, and from the incantation of deceiving spirits. And by
that means the most men, knowing their duties, will be the less
subject to serve the ambition of a few discontented persons in their
purposes against the state, and be the less grieved with the
contributions necessary for their peace and defence; and the governors
themselves have the less cause to maintain at the common charge any
greater army than is necessary to make good the public liberty against
the invasions and encroachments of foreign enemies.
  And thus I have brought to an end my discourse of civil and
ecclesiastical government, occasioned by the disorders of the
present time, without partiality, without application, and without
other design than to set before men's eyes the mutual relation between
protection and obedience; of which the condition of human nature,
and the laws divine, both natural and positive, require an
inviolable observation. And though in the revolution of states there
can be no very good constellation for truths of this nature to be born
under (as having an angry aspect from the dissolvers of an old
government, and seeing but the backs of them that erect a new); yet
I cannot think it will be condemned at this time, either by the public
judge of doctrine, or by any that desires the continuance of public
peace. And in this hope I return to my interrupted speculation of
bodies natural; wherein, if God give me health to finish it, I hope
the novelty will as much please as in the doctrine of this
artificial body it useth to offend. For such truth as opposeth no
man's profit nor pleasure is to all men welcome.


                               THE END
.
