



Book IV







Of Credit and Debts







Part I







Of the Interest of Money







Introduction







    I come now to inquire into the principles of credit; a



subject already introduced in the the 27th chapter of the second



book, where I examined nature of circulation, and pointed out the



principles, which direct a statesman when and how to retard or



accelerate its activity, according as the political interests of



his people may require.



    In that chapter the object was, when and how either to extend



or restrain the use of credit, according to political



circumstances. The inquiry now comes to be, what this credit is;



upon what it is founded; what the various species of it are; what



are the methods of establishing and extending it, while it is in



its infancy and vigour; how to sustain it when it is



overstretched; and last of all, how to let it fall as gently as



possible, when by no human prudence it can be longer supported.



    Many political writers in treating of credit, represent it as



being of a very mysterious nature; owing its establishment to a



confidence not easily accounted for, and disappearing from the



slightest unfavourable circumstances.



    That credit, in its fancy, is of a very delicate nature, I



willingly allow. as also that we have many examples which confirm



the sentiments, of those who believe it to contain, in itself,



something very mysterious: but this proves no more, than that, in



such cases, credit (as I consider it, and as it will appear



really to be) has not been properly established. The cause of



confidence has had nothing in it but opinion, and when this is



the case, credit is but a shadow; and like a thin vapour, it may



be dissipated by the smallest breath of wind.



    They all agree that credit is no more than confidence, but



they do not examine how this confidence is to be established on a



solid foundation.



    The operations of credit are incompatible with the involved



contracts of the law, and with the spirit of intricate



land-securities. The policy of such contracts was analogous to



the manners of the times which gave them birth. Trade is a late



refinement, in most nations of Europe, and industry is still a



later: the beginnings of both are slow, imperceptible, and



obscure. The instruments by which they are promoted, are the



lower classes of a people; the interest of the individuals who



compose them, may appear to some, to be below the attention of a



statesman; and yet it is by the accumulation of their industry



only, that this huge fabric is erected.



    To establish that credit, which is necessary for carrying on



so great a work, a statesman must lend his hand. He must give a



validity to mercantile obligations, which have no name in his



law-books: he must support the weak against the strong: he must



reform the unwieldy procedure of courts of justice: he must



facilitate the sale of property: he must establish the



credibility of merchants' books regularly kept: he must



discourage frauds, and support fair dealing.



    When such a plan is once established, confidence will find a



basis in the property of every individual who profits by it. When



it is not established, credit will appear like a meteor:



intelligent and crafty men will avail themselves of it, and



thereby dazzle the eyes of the public, with gilded schemes of



opulence and prosperity: mankind will fly to industry, confidence



will be established; but as there will be no method of



determining the bounds of this confidence, the promoters of the



scheme will profit of the delusion: confidence will vanish; and



the whole will appear to have been a mystery, a dream. Is not



this a representation of many projects set on foot since the



beginning of this century? What were the South Sea's and



Missisippi's, but an abuse of confidence? Had ever the cause of



confidence been examined into, would ever such extravagant ideas



have arrived at the height they did?



    Credit therefore must have a real, not an imaginary object to



support it; and although I allow that in all operations of



mercantile credit, there must be something left to chance and



accident; yet this chance must bear a due proportion to the



extraordinary profits reasonably to be expected from the



undertaking.



    From this it appears, what an useful speculation it is to



inquire properly into the nature of credit; to deduce with



accuracy the principles upon which it is founded; to banish



mystery from plain reason; to shew how every the most surprizing



effect of credit, whether tending to the advantage, or to the



hurt of society, may easily be accounted for; and, which is the



most useful of all, to point out how such effects may be



foreseen, so as either to be improved or prevented.



    In going through so extensive a subject, as a deduction of



the principles of credit, method is very necessary; and when a



detail is long, subdivisions are very convenient. I have, upon



this account, divided this book into four parts.



    The first shall be set apart for deducing the principles



which regulate the rate of interest; because this is the basis of



the whole.



    The second, for the principles of banking; under which I



shall have an opportunity to unfold the whole doctrine of



domestic circulation.



    The third, for those of exchange. which is equally well



calculated for carrying on foreign circulation; and as to what



regards debts, and the borrowing of money, with all the



consequences which they draw along with them, these important



objects will furnish ample matter for



    The fourth and last part, which shall treat of the principles



of public credit.



    These things premised, I proceed to the definition of credit.











Chap. I







What Credit is, and on what founded







    Credit is the reasonable expectation; entertained by him who



fulfils his side of any contract, that the other contracting



party will reciprocally make good his engagements.



    To illustrate this, we may say with the lawyers, that as all



contracts may be reduced under one of the following heads, Do ut



des, do ut facias; facio ut des, facio ut facias: so he who



actually gives or performs his part, is the creditor, or the



person who gives credit; and he who promises only to give or to



perform, is the debtor, or the person who receives it.



    Credit, therefore, is no more than a well established



confidence between men, in what relates to the fulfilling of



their engagements. This confidence must be supported by laws, and



established by manners. By laws, the execution of formal



contracts may be enforced: manners, alone, can introduce that



entire confidence which is requisite to form the spirit of a



trading nation.



    Credit, in its fancy, must be supported by statutes, and



enforced by penalties; but when it is once well established,



every recourse had to law, is found to wound the delicacy of its



constitution. For this reason we see, that in certain



nations,(1*) the legislator wisely excludes the ordinary courts



of justice from extending their rigid jurisdiction over



mercantile engagements: they leave to the prudence and good faith



of men versed in commerce, to solve the difficulties which result



from such transactions; because they are to be interpreted more



according to the constant fluctuation of manners, than to the



more permanent institutions of positive law.



    The more the jurisdiction of the statesman is limited; or, in



other words, the less the power of any sovereign is restrained,



by the laws and constitution of the state he governs, the more it



behoves him to avoid every step of administration which can make



his authority be felt in cases where credit is concerned. If he



should happen, for example, to be a debtor himself, he must take



good care never to appear in any other light to his creditor. The



moment he puts on the sovereign, the same moment all confidence



is lost. For these reasons, we have hitherto had few examples (I



might perhaps have said none at all) where credit has been found



permanently solid, under a pure monarchy.



    But we must observe, at the same time, that the stability of



credit is not incompatible with this form of government. At



certain times, we have seen credit make a surprising progress in



France; and it has never suffered any check in that state, but



from acts of power, which I think have proceeded more from



inadvertency, and want of knowledge, than from a formed design of



defrauding creditors. These may be looked on as blunders in



administration; because they have constantly disappointed the



purpose for which they were intended. Let me prove this by some



examples.



    The arret of 21 May 1720, (of which we shall give an account



hereafter), destroyed in one day the whole fabric of credit,



which had been erected in France during the course of three



years; and which in so short a time had mounted to a height



hardly credible. I say, that in one day this inadvertent step



(for no real injury was intended) destroyed the credit of



2,697,048,000 livres of bank notes, (above 120 millions sterling)



and of 624,000 actions of the East India company, which (reckoned



at 5000 livres apiece, the price at which the company had last



sold them) amount to 3,120,000,000 livres, or above 140 millions



sterling. Thus at one blow, and in one day, 260 millions sterling



of paper currency, payable to bearers, were struck out of the



circulation of France; by an useless and inadvertent act of



power, which ruined the nation, and withered the hand which



struck it: an event too little understood, and too little



remembered in that kingdom.



    This plainly appears from their late conduct; for in the end



of 1759, at a time when the credit of France was in so



flourishing a situation as to have enabled her to borrow, that



very year, near 200 millions of livres; and when there was a



prospect of being able to borrow, in the year following, a far



greater sum, the shutting up what they called their caisse



d'amortissement, for the sake of withholding 32 millions of



livres interest due to the creditors, struck all credit with



foreigners dead in one instant.



    These examples shew what fatal consequences follow a



misjudged exercise of power in matters of credit.



    On the other hand, the rapid progress of credit in France



before the Missisippi, and the stability of it from 1726 to the



year 1759, abundantly proves, that no two things are more



compatible than monarchy and confidence. All that is wanting is



the establishment of one maxim in government; to wit, that the



King's power is never to extend so far, as to alter the smallest



article of such contracts as have been made with those who have



lent money for the service of the state.



    Maxims in government bind the monarch and the legislature, as



laws bind subjects and subordinate magistrates: the one and the



other ought to be held inviolable, so far as they regard credit;



or confidence will be precarious.



    What has supported the credit of Great Britain, but the maxim



constantly adhered to, that the public faith pledged to her



creditors is to be inviolable?



    Does any one doubt, but the legislature of this nation may



spunge out the public debts, with as much ease as a King of



France? But in the one kingdom, the whole nation must be



consulted as to the propriety of such a step; in the other, it



may be done at the instigation of a single person, ignorant of



the consequences: but I hope to make it appear, before the



conclusion of this book, that it is impossible to form a



supposition, by which a state can be benefitted by deliberately



departing, for one moment, from the faith of her engagements. A



national bankruptcy may no doubt happen, and become irreparable;



but this must be when the state is emerging from a signal



calamity, after having been involved in ruin and confusion.



    Confidence, then, is the soul and essence of credit; and in



every modification of it, we shall constantly find it built on



this basis: but this confidence must have for its object a



willingness and a capacity in the debtor to fulfil his



obligations.







Chap. II







Of the Nature of Obligations to be performed, in consequence of



Credit given; and of what is meant by the terms regorging and



stagnating of money







    We have already said, that all obligations contracted with a



view to be performed in future time, consist in doing or giving



something in consideration of something done or given.



    When actions only are stipulated in contracts, credit (in a



strict acceptation of the term) is little concerned; because no



adequate security can be given for performing an action: such



contracts stand wholly upon the willingness and capacity of



acting, which depend more upon the person than upon the faculties



of the debtor. To supply this defect, we see penalties usually



stipulated in such cases; which reduce those contracts to an



alternative obligation of either doing or giving.



    We shall therefore throw out the consideration of the first



altogether, as being foreign to our purpose; and adhere to the



later, which is the true object of credit. Again:



    In all obligations to give any particular thing, there is



constantly implied an alternative also; to wit, either the thing



stipulated, or the value (id quod interest, according to the



lawyers): this must be relative to money; which is the common



price of all things in commerce among men.



    Thus we have brought credit to the object under which we are



to consider it, viz. the obligation to pay money, either for



value received, or for some consideration relative to the



parties, which may be the just ground of a contract.



    Credit and debts are therefore inseparable, because they



necessarily imply each other; and very properly come to be



examined together in this book.



    When money is to be paid at a distant period of time, the



obligation may either be, for one precise sum; or for that sum



with interest, during the interval between contracting and



fulfilling the obligation.



    The lending of money without interest, was very common before



the introduction of trade and industry. Money then was considered



as a barren stock, incapable of producing fruit; and whenever the



quantity of it, in any country, exceeded the uses of circulation,



the remainder was locked up in treasures: in which case, the



exacting of interest for it appeared unreasonable.



    Things are now changed: no money is ever locked up; and when



borrowed, the regular payment of interest for it, is as essential



to the obtaining of credit, as the confidence of being repaid the



capital. These periodical payments are a constant corroboration



of this confidence; so that it may be said with truth, that he



who can give good security, to pay to perpetuity, a regular



interest for money, will obtain credit for any sum, although it



should appear evident, that he never can be in a capacity to



refund the capital.



    The reason of this may be gathered from the principles



already deduced, and from the plan of our modern oeconomy.



    We have said in the second book, that the current money of a



country is always in proportion to the trade, industry,



consumption, and alienation, which regularly take place in it;



and when it happens that the money already in the country is not



sufficient for carrying on these purposes, a part of the solid



property, equal to the deficiency, may be melted down (as we have



called it) and made to circulate in paper: that as soon again as



this paper augments beyond this proportion, a part of what was



before in circulation, must return upon the debtor in the paper,



and be realized anew.



    Let us now consider what is understood by realized. By this



term is meant, that the regorging paper, or that quantity of



currency which a nation possesses over and above what is



necessary for its circulation, must be turned into some shape



whereby it may produce an income; for it is now a maxim, that no



money is to be suffered to remain useless to the proprietor of



it.(2*)



    When this regorging or stagnating paper then comes upon the



debtor in it, if he should pay the value of it in hard specie,



how would the condition of the creditor be improved?



    We suppose the credit of the paper equal to the credit of the



coin within the country. We also suppose that the paper has so



stagnated in the hands of the bearer, that he can neither lend



it, or purchase with it any species of solid property, within the



country, capable to produce an income: for if any way of



disposing it usefully can be found, this circumstance will prove



that circulation is not overstocked at that time; consequently,



the money does not regorge. But let us suppose that it does



regorge: then he must either oblige the debtor in the paper to



pay in coin, that he may lock it up in his coffer (as was the



case of old); or he must send his coin to other countries, where



circulation is not fully stocked, and where an income may be



bought with it. This constantly happens when circulation is



either overstocked, or when the quantity of circulation begins to



diminish in a country.



    Let me next suppose, that in a country overstocked with



money, a sudden demand for it, far beyond the ordinary rate of



circulation, shall occur: suppose a war to break out, which



absorbs, in a short time, more money than, perhaps, all the coin



and all the paper can supply. The state upon this occasion



imposes a tax, which, let me suppose, may produce a sum equal to



the interest of the money required. Is it not very certain, that



such persons who found a difficulty in placing their regorging



capitals, will be better pleased to purchase a part of this



annual interest, than to lend it to any person who might pay it



back in a short time; by which repayment the lender would again



be thrown into the same inconvenience as before, of finding a



proper out-let for it? This is a way of realizing superfluous



money, more effectual than turning it into gold or silver.



    When I speak, therefore, of realizing paper money, I



understand either the converting of it into gold and silver,



which is the money of the world; or the placing of it in such a



way as to produce a perpetual fund of annual interest.



    Were public borrowing, therefore, to work the effect of



bringing the money in circulation below the proportion required



for carrying on alienation, trade, etc. then an obligation to



repay the capital would be necessary, and complaints would be



heard against the state for not paying off their debts; because



thereby the progress of industry would be prevented. But when the



operations of credit are allowed to introduce a method of



creating money anew, in proportion as trade and industry shall



demand it, then the state has no occasion to pay back the



capitals; because the public creditors enjoy far better



conditions in their annual income, than if their capitals were



refunded.



    Let me illustrate this by an example.



    We must take it for granted, that in every nation in Europe,



there is a sum in circulation, nearly equal to the alienation,



trade, etc. which goes on actually at the time. We must also take



it for granted, that the amount of all debts whatsoever, public



and private, paying interest to the class of creditors, is every



where a very great sum: now let us suppose, that the class of



debtors should be enabled (no matter by what means) to pay off



what they owe, in coin newly acquired; would not, by the



supposition, a sum of the old currency nearly equal to this coin



newly acquired, immediately fall into stagnation, and would it



not be impossible to draw any income from this stagnated coin?



This was exactly the case of old. The coin far exceeded the uses



of circulation, and stagnated in treasures. Wars brought it out;



because then circulation augmented; peace again cutting off these



extraordinary demands, the coin stagnated again, and returned to



the treasures.



    What is the case at present?



    Money and coin are never found to surpass the uses of



circulation in commercial countries. When war comes, which



demands an extraordinary supply, recourse is had to borrowing



upon interest; not to treasures: and the desire of purchasing



this interest, which we call an annuity, draws treasures even



from the enemies of those nations who have the best credit.



Again, at the end of a war, in place of an empty treasury, as was



the case of old, we find a huge sum of public debts. As oeconomy



filled the treasury then, so oeconomy must pay off the debts now.



    From what has been said, it plainly appears, that interest is



now become so absolutely essential to credit, that it may be



considered as the principal requisite and basis on which the



whole fabric stands: we shall therefore begin by examining the



origin and nature of interest, and also the principles which



influence the rate, and regulate the fluctuations of it.







Chap. III







Of the Interest of Money







    I shall leave it to divines and causists to determine how far



the exacting of interest for money is lawful, according to the



principles of our religion.



    It was forbidden to the Jews, by the laws of Moses, to lend



at interest to their brethren, but it was permitted to lend to



strangers. Deut. chap. xxiii, ver. 19, 20. This is one of the



wisest political institutions to be met with in so remote



antiquity, as we shall hereafter explain.



    In the primitive ages of christianity, the lending of money



at interest was certainly reputed to be unlawful on most



occasions. That spirit of charity to all who were in want, was so



worked in with the doctrine of our religion, that a borrower was



constantly considered to be in that situation. Trade was little



known; trading men were generally ill looked upon; and those who



debated so far from the spirit of the times, as to think of



accumulating wealth by the use of their money, commonly



degenerated into usurers.



    In the middle centuries, when a mistaken zeal animated



christianity with a most ungodly thirst for the blood of



infidels, the Jews were, in every nation in Europe, almost the



only money-lenders. This circumstance still more engaged the



church to dart her thunder against this practice; and the loan



upon interest never took root among christians, until a spirit of



trade and industry sprung up in Italy in the time of the



Lombards, and from thence spread itself, through the channel of



the Hans-towns, over several nations.



    Then the church began to open her eyes and saw the expediency



of introducing many modifications, in order to limit the general



anathema which she had denounced against the whole class of



money-lenders. At one time it was declared lawful to lend at



interest, when the capital shared any risque in the hands of the



borrower; at another, it was found allowable, when the capital



was not demandable from the debtor, while he paid the interest;



again, it was permitted, when the debtor was declared by sentence



of a judge, to be in mora in acquitting his obligation: at last,



it was permitted on bills of exchange. In short, in most Roman



catholic countries, interest is now permitted in every interest



for case almost, except in obligations including a stipulation of



sums demandable at any time after the term of payment; and it is



as yet no where considered to be so essential to loan, as to be



due on all debts whatsoever; not even upon obligations payable on



demand.



    Expediency and the good of society (politically speaking) are



the only rule for judging, when the loan upon interest should be



permitted, when forbidden. While people borrowed in order only to



procure a circulating equivalent for providing their necessaries,



until they could have time to dispose of their effects; and while



there was seldom any certain profit to be made by the use of the



money borrowed, as now, by turning it into trade, it was very



natural to consider the lender in an unfavourable light; because



it was supposed that his money, had it not been lent, must have



remained locked up in his coffers. But at present, when we see so



many people employed in providing stores of necessaries for



others, which, without money, cannot be done; were the loan upon



interest forbidden, it would have the effect of locking up the



very instrument (money) which is necessary for supplying the



wants of the society. The loan, therefore, upon interest, as



society now stands composed, is established, not in favour of the



lenders, but of the whole community; and taking the matter in



this light, no one, I suppose, will pretend that what is



beneficial to a whole society should be forbidden, because of its



being proportionably advantageous to some particular members of



it.



    If it be then allowed, that the loan upon interest is a good



political institution, relatively to the present situation of



European societies, the next question is, to determine a proper



standard for it, so as to avoid the oppression of usurers, on one



hand, and on the other, to allow such a reasonable profit to the



lender, as may engage him to throw his money into circulation for



the common advantage.



    This question leads us directly to the examination of the



principles which regulate the rate of interest; and if we can



discover a certain rule, arising from the nature of things, and



from the principles of commerce, which may direct a statesman how



to establish a proper regulation in this matter, we may conclude



with certainty concerning the exact limits, between unlawful and



pinching usury, exacted by a vicious set of men, who profit of



the distress of individuals; and that reasonable equivalent which



men have a right to expect for the use of their money, lent for



carrying on the circulation of trade, and the employment of the



lower classes of a people who must subsist by their industry or



labour.







Chap. IV







Of the Principles which regulate the Rate of Interest







    We must now recal to mind the principles of demand and



competition, so fully deduced in the second book, in order to



answer the following question, viz.



    What is the principle which regulates, at all times, the just



and adequate rate of interest for money, in any particular state?



    I answer, That at all times, there is in every state a



certain number of persons who have occasion to borrow money, and



a certain number of persons who desire to lend: there is also a



certain sum of money demanded by the borrowers, and a certain sum



offered to be lent. The borrowers desire to fix the interest as



low as they can; the lenders seek, from a like principle of



self-interest, to carry the rate of it as high as they can.



    From this combination of interests arises a double



competition, which fluctuates between the two parties. If more be



demanded to be borrowed, than there is found to be lent, the



competition will take place among the borrowers. Such among them



as have the most pressing occasion for money, will offer the



highest interest, and will be preferred. If, on the contrary, the



money to be lent exceed the demand of the borrowers, the



competition will be upon the other side. Such of the lenders, as



have the most pressing occasion to draw an interest for their



money, will offer it at the lowest interest, and this offer will



be accepted.



    I need not launch out into a repetition of what has been said



concerning the influence of double competition, in fixing the



price of commodities; as I suppose these principles to be now



well understood, and well retained, by those who read this



chapter; I shall therefore confine myself here to what is



peculiar to the demand for money.



    The price of commodities is extremely fluctuating: they are



every one calculated for particular uses; money serves every



purpose. Commodities, though of the same kind, differ in



goodness: money is all, or ought to be all of the same value,



relatively to its denominations. Hence the price of money (which



is what we express by the term interest) is susceptible of a far



greater stability and uniformity, than the price of any other



thing.



    We have shewn in the 28th chapter of the second book, in



examining the principles which regulate the price of subsistence,



that the only thing which can fix a standard for it, is frequent



and familiar alienation. The same holds true of money. Were we to



suppose a state, where borrowing and lending are not common, and



where the laws fix no determinate interest for money, it would



hardly be possible to ascertain the rate of it at any time. This



was the case of old.



    Before the reign of Henry VIII of England, in 1545, there was



no statute regulating the rate of interest, in that kingdom. The



reason is very plain. In those days there was little circulation,



and the borrowing of money upon interest was considered as a



mortal sin. The consequence of this was, that usurers, having



nothing but conscience to restrain them, carried the price of



their money to a level with the pressing occasion of



spendthrifts, while others, from friendship, lent for no interest



at all. Henry fixed the rate of interest at 10 per cent and his



contemporary, Francis I of France, in 1522, (who was the first



who borrowed money in a regular manner upon the townhouse of



Paris) fixed the interest at the 12th penny, that is, at 8 1/3



per cent.



    In those days, it was impossible for a statesman to determine



any just rate for interest; and accordingly we find history



filled with the extortion of usurers, on one hand, and the



violence and injustice of princes and ministers towards those who



had lent them money, on the other: was it then any wonder, that



lending at interest was universally cried out against? It really



produced very little good, and was the cause of manifold



calamities to a state. When the Prince borrowed, it was in the



most urgent distress: those who had money, foresaw the danger of



being plundered if they refused to lend it to him, and of being



defrauded as soon as the public distress was over: for this



reason they exacted the most exorbitant interest: the consequence



was, that the people were loaded with the most grievous taxes,



and the tax-gatherers were the Prince's creditors, to whom such



taxes were assigned.



    In our days, trade, industry, and a call for money, enable



the borrower to enrich himself, to supply the wants of the state,



and to pay his interest regularly.



    If we compare the two situations, we shall find every



disadvantage attending the former, and every advantage connected



with the latter.



    Without good faith their can be no credit; without credit



there can be no borrowing of money, no trade, no industry, no



circulation, no bread for the lower classes, no luxury, not even



the conveniences of life, for the rich. Under these



circumstances, there can be no rule for the rate of interest;



because borrowing cannot be frequent and familiar.



    In proportion, therefore, as borrowing becomes frequent and



familiar, the rule for fixing the rate of a legal interest



becomes more practicable to a statesman. Let me make a step



farther.



    We have said, that it is the fluctuation of the double



competition between borrowers and lenders, which occasions the



rise and fall of the rate of interest; I must now point out the



principles which occasion this fluctuation.



    Were the interests of trade and industry so exactly



established, as to produce the same profit on every branch of



them, the money borrowed for carrying them on, would naturally be



taken at the same rate; but this is not the case: some branches



afford more, some less profit. In proportion, therefore, to the



advantages to be reaped from borrowed money, the borrowers may



offer more or less for the use of it.



    Besides the class of men who borrow in order to profit by the



loan, there is another class, who borrow in order to dissipate.



The first class never can offer an interest which exceeds the



proportion of their gains: the second class, finding nothing but



want of credit to limit their expence, become a prey to usurers.



Were it not then upon account of these last, there would be no



occasion for a statute to regulate the rate of interest. The



profits on trade would strike an average among the industrious



classes; and this average would fall and rise, in proportion to



the flourishing or decay of commerce.



    Let us next examine the principles which prevent the monied



men from committing extortions, and which oblige them to lend



their money for that rate of interest which is in proportion to



the profits upon trade and industry.



    In every country there is found a sum of money (that is, of



circulating value, no matter whether coin or paper) proportioned



to the trade and industry of it. How this sum is determined, and



how it is made to augment and diminish in proportion to industry,



we have already explained in the 26th chapter of the second book:



we are now to examine some of the consequences which result from



the accidental stagnation of any part of it to the prejudice of



alienation; and we must shew how the loan upon interest is the



means of throwing it again into circulation.



    There are in every state some who spend more, and some who



spend less than their income. What is not spent must stagnate; or



must be lent to those who spend more than the produce of their



own funds. Were the first class found so to preponderate, as to



require more money to borrow than all that is to be lent, the



consequence would be, to prevent the borrowing of merchants; to



raise interest so high as to extinguish trade; and to destroy



industry; and these resources coming to fail, foreign commodities



would be brought in, while exportation would be stopped, money



would disappear, and all would fall into decay.



    This, I believe, is a case which seldom happens; because the



rise of interest (as states are now formed) has so much the



effect of depreciating the value of every species of solid



property, that spendthrifts are quickly stripped of it, by the



growing accumulation of that canker worm, interest; their ruin



terrifies many from following so hurtful an example, and their



property falling into the hands of the other class, who spend



less than their income; these new possessors introduce, by their



example, a more frugal set of manners. This may be the case in



countries where trade and industry have been introduced; and



where the operations of credit have been able to draw into



circulation a large quantity of solid property, according to the



principles deduced in the chapter above referred to. But in



nations of idleness, who circulate their coin only, and who are



deprived of the resource of credit; high interest prevents them



from emerging out of their sloth, and the little trade they have,



continues to produce great profits, which are incompatible with



foreign commerce: this may, indeed, make the coin they have to



circulate for home-consumption, but it can bring no augmentation



of wealth from abroad.



    On the other hand, when trade and industry flourish, and when



a monied interest is formed, in consequence of the melting down



of solid property, and still more in consequence of a State's



contracting great debts; were the money-lenders to attempt to



raise the rate of interest to the standard of the spendthrift,



the demands of trade, etc, would soon be cut off: the stagnation



would then swell so fast in their hands, that it would in a



manner choak them, and in a little time interest would fall to



nothing. Whereas by contenting themselves with the standard of



trade, the largest supplies (provided for the borrowers) easily



find a vent, without raising the rate of interest so high as to



be hurtful to any interest within the state.



    Add to this, that the advantage of realizing, into lands, so



unstable a property as money, must naturally throw the



proprietors of the money into a competition for the lands which



dissipation brings to market; thus, by rising the value of lands,



the monied men, with their own hands, defeat the consequences of



the dissipation of spendthrifts, and hurt their own interest, to



wit, the rise of the price of money. From a combination of these



circumstances, lenders become obliged to part with their money at



that rate of interest which is the most consistent with that good



of commerce.



    We have hitherto preserved our combinations as simple as



possible. We have suggested no extrinsic obstacle to borrowing



and lending. If money be to be lent, and if people be found who



incline to borrow, we have taken it for granted, that circulation



will go on; and that the stagnations in the hands of the lenders,



will find a ready vent by the dissipation of the other class: we



must now make still a step farther.



    The spendthrifts must have credit; that is, they must have it



in their power to repay with interest what they have borrowed:



any impediment to credit, will have the effect either of



diminishing the demand for money, and consequently of lowering



the rate of interest, or of introducing unlawful usury. If we



suppose the rate of interest well determined, and usury prevented



by a regular execution of good laws, it is very certain, that a



statesman by hurting the credit of extravagant people, will keep



the rate of interest within due bounds.



    If, therefore, the laws of any country, in our days, appear



defective, as to the regulation of securities for money lent upon



the mortgage of solid property, while the rate of interest stands



higher than is consistent with the good of trade, and with public



credit; we should be slow in finding fault with such a defect.



The motives of statesmen lie very deep; and it is not always



proper to explain them. An example of such defects are entails



upon lands, and the want of proper registers for mortgages.



    Did the dissipation of landed men tend to promote foreign



trade, such clogs would be pernicious: but if the tendency of



dissipation be to promote domestic luxury only, and thereby to



raise the price of labour and industry, the case is widely



different. This observation is merely incidental: our object at



present extends no farther than to shew, that the dissipation of



landed men, and the credit they have to borrow money, influence,



not a little, the rate of interest in every modern state.



    These are the general principles which, arising from things



themselves, without the interposition of a statesman, tend to



regulate the rate of interest in commercial nations.







Chap. V







Of the Regulation of Interest by Statute







    From the principles deduced the preceding chapter, we have



seen how, without the aid of any law, the interest of money, in a



trading nation, becomes determined, from natural causes, and from



the irresistible effects of competition.



    But as there is no country in the world so entirely given to



commerce, as not to contain great numbers of people, who are



totally unacquainted with it, some regulation with respect to the



rate of interest becomes necessary in order to restrain, on one



hand, the frenzy of those, who, listening to nothing but the



violence of their passions, are willing to procure money at any



rate for the gratification of them, let the political



consequences of their dissipation prove ever so hurtful to the



state; and on the other, to protect those who, from necessity,



may be obliged to submit to the heavy oppression of their



usurious creditors.



    Laws restraining usury, are directly calculated for the sake



of those two classes, not engaged in commerce, and indirectly



calculated for commerce itself; which otherwise might receive a



wound through their sides.



    In entering upon the subject mentioned in the title of this



chapter, I think we may agree in this, that hitherto all



regulations made concerning interest, have been calculated either



for bringing it down, or for preventing its rise. The distress



which may come upon a state, by its falling too low, is a



phaenomenon which has not yet manifested itself in any modern



state, by any symptom I can at present recollect.



    Now if it be true, as I think it has been proved, that the



operations of demand and competition work irresistible effects in



determining the rate of interest in commercial states; the



statesman who is about to make a regulation, must keep these



principles constantly in his eye.



    If we examine the writings of those who have treated of this



subject with intelligence (among whom, I think, Sir Josiah Child



has a right to stand in the foremost rank), we shall find very



little attention bestowed upon that most necessary and ruling



principle, competition.



    He lays it down as an axiom, that low interest is the soul of



trade, in which he is certainly right; but he seems to think,



that it is in the power of a legislature, by statute, to bring



interest down to that level which is most advantageous to trade;



and in this I differ from him. I must do him the justice to say,



that he no where directly affirms this proposition; but by



suggesting none of the inconveniences which may follow upon an



arbitrary reduction of interest by statute, he leaves his reader



at liberty to suppose, that the lowering of it is solely in the



hands of a statesman.



    It is very plain, from the history he has given us of the



successive rates of interest in England, from 10 to 6 per cent



that without the interposition of statutes, such diminutions



would not, in that period, have taken place, from the principle



of competition: but I am not so clear that, at this time, when



trade is so well understood, and credit so generally established



in many nations of Europe, that a like administration would work



effects equally advantageous.



    It is with great diffidence I presume to differ from Child



upon this subject; and I find a sensible satisfaction in



perceiving that upon the whole, my principles bring me so very



near to his sentiments on this matter.



    The strong arguments in favour of Child's opinion, are



grounded upon facts. He says, that when interest was brought down



by statute, 1625, from 10 to 8 per cent instead of producing any



bad effect, it had that of bringing it still lower immediately



afterwards; and the same thing happened, anno 1650, when it was



reduced a second time by statute, from 8 to 6 per cent, at which



rate it stood at the time he wrote. These facts I give credit to,



and shall now account for them, from the consequences of sudden



revolutions.



    When a law is made for the reduction of interest, all debtors



immediately profit by it. Upon this, the creditors must either



submit, or call in their capitals. If they submit, land



immediately rises in its value. If they call in their capitals,



they must have an outlet for lending them again, beyond the



limits of the jurisdiction of the legislature. Now this outlet



was not then to be found; because credit was no where well



established, except in Holland, where interest was still lower.



    They were, therefore, obliged to submit, and thus interest



was violently brought down by statute; and a great advantage



resulted from it to the commercial interests of England.



    The subsequent fall of interest, in the natural way, is thus



easily accounted for.



    The consequence of lowering the interest, was, that the price



of land rose several years in purchase: the landed men, who had



long groaned under the heavy interest of 10 per cent finding



their lands rise from 12 years' purchase to 15, upon reducing the



interest to 8 per cent sold off part of their lands, and cleared



themselves. The natural consequence of this was, to make money



regorge in the hands of the monied men; to diminish the number of



borrowers; and consequently, to bring the rate of interest still



lower.



    One sudden revolution produces another. When interest is



brought down by statute, the price of land must rise by a jerk;



and landed men will suddenly profit of the change in their



favour. When it falls gently, by a natural revolution in the



state of demand, the effects are more insensible; the sharper



sighted only profit of it; others, from expectation of a still



greater rise in the price of their lands, neglect to sell in the



proper point of time; and may perhaps be disappointed from a new



fluctuation in favour of money. This is at present actually the



case in Great Britain, since the peace of 1762. I write in 1764.



    These facts speak strongly in favour of Child's opinion,



namely, that it is expedient to have recourse directly to the



statute, whenever there is a prospect of advancing the interests



of trade by a reduction of interest.



    It is impossible to reply to matters of fact: all, therefore,



I have to allege in favour of my own opinion, is, that it is more



consistent with the very principles in which both Child and I



agree; it implies no sudden revolution, and will, in a short



time, operate the same effect.



    The method of proceeding, according to my principles, is



shortly this:



    Since it is agreed on all hands, that low interest is the



soul of trade, and the firmest basis of public credit; that it



rises in proportion to the demand of borrowers, and sinks in



proportion as money is made to regorge in the hands of the monied



interest;



    The statesman should set out by such steps of administration



as will discourage borrowing in those who employ their money in



prodigality and dissipation, as far as may be consistent with the



interest of the lower classes employed in supplying home



consumption, according to the principles laid down in the second



book. He should abstain from borrowing himself, and even from



creating new outlets for money, except from the most cogent



motives. By this he will, in a short time, gently reduce the rate



of interest. Then by statute he may bring it down a little, but



not so very low as the foregoing operations may have reduced it;



contenting himself with having farther restricted the extent of



the ordinary fluctuations.



    As for example: let us suppose interest limited by law to 5



per cent. and that by good management the state may be enabled to



borrow easily at 3 per cent. I believe there would result a



notable advantage, in reducing the legal rate to 4 per cent and



were it brought down to 3 per cent there might follow a very



great inconvenience to landed men, in case a war should suddenly



occasion a revolution in favour of money.



    The difference then between Child and me, is, that I am more



scrupulous than he, in introducing restraint into political



oeconomy; and my only reason against applying the statute, as he



proposes, is for fear of the immediate bad effects which might



follow (in many ways impossible to be foreseen) upon a sudden and



violent revolution, in a point so excessively delicate as public



credit.



    In his days, credit was not so well established, nor was it



stretched as at present: it was more accustomed to violent



shocks, and could bear a rougher treatment. But in order to come



the better to a thorough knowledge of this matter, let us examine



what might be the consequence, if Great Britain should, at this



time, bring down, by statute, the rate of interest below the



level of the stocks, which I take to be the best rule for



determining the present value of money; and this is also the best



method of examining the expediency of Child's method of reducing



interest, under the present state of all our political



circumstances.







Chap. VI







What would be the Consequence of reducing, by a British Statue,



the legal Interest of Money below the present level of the



Stocks?







    When Great Britain borrows money upon the public faith, the



rate of interest is always stipulated, and these stipulations



must be religiously fulfilled, or credit will be at an end.



    The regulations then proposed to be made, must refer to



contracts of loan entered into by private parties only.



    The current value of money, I think, is best to be determined



by the price of stocks. If a 4 per cent sells at par, money may



be said to be then at 4 per cent. If the same stock fall to 89,



then the value of money rises to near 4 1/2: if the same stock



rise to 114, then the value of money falls to about 3 1/2; and so



in proportion.



    According, therefore, as stock is found to rise, the price of



money falls, and vice versa.



    Suppose, then, the price of money to be at 4 per cent and



that government should pass a law, forbidding any man to lend at



above 3 per cent what would be the consequence? This is exactly



the expedient proposed by Child: money then was at 6 per cent and



he proposes, by a law, to bring it, all at once, to 4 per cent



without alleging that money was then commonly got by private



convention at so low a rate.



    Would not the consequence be, that the creditors of private



people would demand their money, in order to get 4 per cent in



buying stock, and would not this additional demand for stocks



make them rise? I answer in the affirmative, unless money could



be employed abroad, so as to produce at least 4 per cent to the



lenders, free of all charge of commission, etc. If it could not,



I have little doubt, but that money would soon fall to the legal



interest of 3 per cent land would rise to 40 years purchase; and



landed men would profit of the rise, as Child says was the case



in his time. The whole inconvenience would be limited to the



immediate effects of the sudden revolution; which would occasion



so great a demand upon the landed interest for the capitals due



by them as to reduce them to an utter incapacity of answering it.



This might be, in some measure, prevented, by a clause in the



act, allowing a certain time for the liquidation of their debts.



But who will pretend to foretell the immediate consequences of so



great a stagnation of credit, and borrowing on land security? The



purses of all monied people, would, for some time at least, be



fast shut against their demand. What a shock again, would this be



to all inland trade, what a discouragement to all the



manufacturing interest, what distress upon all creditors for



accounts furnished, and upon those who supply daily wants! I



think, that although in a year or two, the first effects might



come to disappear, and a notable advantage result, in the main,



to the commercial interest of Great Britain, yet the distress in



the interval might prove so hurtful, as to render it quite



intolerable. The common people who live by the luxury of the



rich, in the city of London, and who are constantly actuated by



the immediate feelings of present inconveniences, might lose all



patience; and being blown into a ferment, by the address of the



monied interest (whose condition would be made to suffer by the



scheme) might throw the state into confusion, and even impress



the nation with a belief, that high interest for money, instead



of being hurtful, was essential to their prosperity.



    I have said above, that if we suppose that the money drawn



from debtors, could not be placed abroad, free of all deductions,



at a rate equal to the then value of money (supposed for the sake



of an example, to be at 4 per cent), then money would fall to 3



per cent and the stocks would rise in proportion.



    But let us suppose (what perhaps is the matter of fact) that



the extensive operations of trade and credit, do actually fix an



average for the price of stocks, from the value of money in other



nations in Europe. Would not then the consequence of bringing



down the rate of legal interest, below this level, be, to send



out of the kingdom all the money now circulating on private



security, real and personal? Would not this destroy all private



credit at one blow? Would it not have the effect of preventing,



among individuals, the loan upon interest altogether? What would



become of the bank of England, and all other banks, whose paper



in circulation is all in the hands of private people? Is not



every man who has a bank note, a creditor on the bank? And would



not the same interest which moved other creditors to exact their



debts, under such circumstances, also move many holders of bank



notes to demand payment of them? Would not a run of this nature,



for a few weeks only, throw the whole nation into the most



dreadful distress? May we not even suppose, that upon such an



occasion, the monied interest (from a certainty of disappointing



the intention of government in making the law) might form a



concert among themselves to lock up their money, even although it



should remain dead in their hands for a few months? What would



then become of the improvement of land? Is there an industrious



farmer any where to be met with, who does not borrow money, which



he can so profitably turn to account upon his farm, even though



he receive it at the highest legal interest? These and many more



inconveniences might manifest themselves, were government to



force down the value of money, beyond the ordinary operations of



demand and competition: and to what purpose have recourse to



authority, when it is most certain, that without any such



expedient the same end may be compassed?



    If it be true, as I believe it is, that the funds, or public



debts of a state where credit is well established, are commonly



negotiated abroad; there must, from such negotiations result an



average for the value of money, by the operations of credit over



the commercial world: and if it be true, that no law can be



framed so as to restrain mercantile people, and those who trade



in money, from turning it to the best account; then all that



should be proposed by government, is, to preserve the value of it



at home, within this standard. For which purpose, nothing more is



necessary than to prevent the competition of the dissipating



class of inhabitants, from disturbing the rate which commerce may



establish from time to time. This is accomplished by the methods



above hinted at, and which in the next chapter shall be more



largely insisted on. If, by prudent management, the conventional



rate of interest, can thus be brought below the legal, then there



may be no harm in diminishing the latter by statue, not however



quite so low as the conventional standard; but so as to leave a



reasonable latitude for gentle fluctuations above it. From what I



have said, I still think I had reason to object to Child's plan



for forcing down the interest of money by statute: and had he



lived to the present time, I am persuaded he would have come into



this opinion.







Chap. VII







Methods of bringing down the Rate of Interest, in Consequence of



the Principles of Demand and Competition







    I hope the arguments used in the foregoing chapter will not



be construed as an apology for the high interest of money.



    I entirely agree with Sir Josiah Child, that low interest is



the soul of trade; the most active principle for promoting



industry, and the improvement of land; and a requisite, without



which it is hardly possible that foreign commerce can long be



supported.



    This proposition I take to be at this time universally



admitted to be true; and did there remain, concerning it, the



least doubt in the mind of any one, the writings of many, much



better qualified than I can pretend to be, and among the rest



those of the author just now cited, are sufficiently capable to



remove it. I shall not therefore trouble my reader with a chapter



upon this head, but only observe, that the terms high and low are



constantly relative. Here the relation must be understood to



regard other states, because when we speak of a rate of interest,



we are supposed to mean something general in the country we are



speaking of: accordingly, if we could suppose that, within the



same state, the rate of interest should be lower in one city than



any where else, this circumstance would give an advantage to such



a city in all its mercantile operations.



    I must farther observe, for the sake of connecting this part



of our subject with our general plan, that the low interest for



money is most essential to such states as carry on the most



extensive foreign commerce.



    In the infancy of industry, and before trade comes to be



established, it is very natural that the coin of the country



should be found in a great measure locked up in treasures: high



interest tends to bring it forth, and in this respect works a



good effect.



    In proportion as alienation augments, money may be



multiplied, by the melting down of solid property, as has been



explained; and then the business of a statesman will be to



contrive expedients for bringing the rate of it as low as



possible, in order to support foreign trade, and to rival all



neighbouring nations, where interest is higher. When foreign



trade again comes to decline, from the multiplication of abuses



introduced by luxury, low interest still continues to be useful,



for supporting public credit, so necessary for defending a nation



against her enemies.



    If money consisted merely in the precious metals, which are



not to be found in every country, but must be purchased with the



produce of industry, and brought from far; and if no other



expedient could be fallen upon to supply their place for the uses



of circulation; then the possessors of these metals would in a



manner be masters to establish for the use of them what rate of



interest they thought fit.



    But if this be not the case, and if money can be made of



paper, to the value of all the solid property of a nation, (as



far as occasion is found for it, by the owners of that property,)



the use of the metals will be in a manner reduced to that of



serving as a standard, for ascertaining the value of the



denominations of money of accompt; perhaps for facilitating the



circulation of small sums, and for paying a balance of trade to



other nations.



    When this comes to be the case, a statesman has it in his



power to increase or diminish the extent of credit and paper



money in circulation, by various expedients, which greatly



influence the rate of interest.



    The progress of credit has been very rapid since the



beginning of this century. This has been almost entirely owing to



the mechanical contrivances of trading men. Lawgivers have



hitherto had but imperfect notions concerning the nature of it;



and there still remains, in the womb of nature, some mighty



genius, born to govern a commercial nation, who alone will be



able to set it on its true principles. Let us in the mean time



speculate concerning them.



    We have said, and every one feels, that interest falls in



proportion to the redundancy of money to be lent.



    Now what is this money but property, of one kind or other,



thrown into circulation? I speak of trading nations, who are not



confined to the quantity of their specie alone.



    When a man of property wants money, may he not go to a bank,



which lends upon mortgage, and by pledging his security, receive



money, which is in the same instant created for his use? Do not



those notes circulate as long as they are found necessary for



carrying on the affairs of the nation? that is to say, the



accompts of debtors and creditors of all denominations; and as



soon as the quantity of them exceeds this proportion, they



stagnate, and return on the debtors in them, (the bank,) who is



enabled to realize them, because the original security is still



in their hands, which was at first pledged when the notes were



issued. This realization is commonly made in the metals; because



they are the money of the world: they are real and true riches,



as much as land; and they have this advantage over land, that



they are transportable everywhere.



    Now, does it not appear evident, that what we have been



describing is a round-about operation, which it is possible to



shorten?



    I beg of my reader, to attend to one thing; namely, that I am



not here treating of, or proposing a plan, but labouring to



deduce principles in an intricate subject.



    I say, when landed men go to such a bank, and receive paper



for a land security, that this operation may be shortened.



    Do not the notes he gets stand (though this be not expressed)



upon the security of his land? Now, can any man assign any other



reason but custom, why his own notes, caring expressly in their



bosom the same security, might not be issued, without his being



obliged to interpose the bank between the public and himself: And



for what does he pay this interest? Not because he has



gratuitously received any value from the bank, since in his



obligation he has given a full equivalent for the notes; but the



obligation he has given carries interest, and the notes carry



none. Why? Because the one circulates like money, the other does



not. For this advantage, therefore, of circulation, not for any



additional value, does the landed man pay interest to the bank.



    Had landed men, and not merchants, invented this method of



turning their property into circulation, and had they been all



assembled in one body, with a legislative authority, I imagine



they would have had wit enough to find out that a land bank was a



thing practicable in its nature.



    Suppose they should agree that all their lands should be let



by the acre, and that land property should be esteemed at a



certain number of years purchase, in proportion to the rate of



interest at the time, where would be the great difficulty in



paying in lands?



    This is merely a hint, to which a thousand objections may be



made, as matters stand: all I say, is, that there is nothing here



against principles; and though inconveniences might result to the



landed interest, in every way such a plan could be laid down; yet



still these inconveniences would hardly counterbalance that of



landed men's being obliged to pay interest for every penny they



borrow.



    It is demanded, what advantage would result to the nation



from such a regulation?



    I answer, that by it all the borrowings of landed men would



be struck out of the competition at the money-market. The monied



interest alone would borrow among themselves for the purposes of



trade, (for monied men do not borrow to squander,) and landed men



would consequently pay with their own paper, in every case, where



now they borrow in order to pay. Thus interest would be regulated



by the demands of trade, and the rate of it would not be



disturbed by the competition of spendthrifts.



    Who can say how far the consequences of such a scheme might



reach? Might not landed men begin in time to issue notes by way



of loan, at a very inconsiderable interest? But I am not disposed



to carry my speculations farther: perhaps what has been said may



appear sufficiently aerial.



    If a statesman shall find every modification of this idea



impracticable; either from his own want of power, or of skill,



or, which is more probable, from the opposition of the monied



interest; he must take other measures for striking out, as much



as possible, the competition of spendthrifts in the money-market.



Entails, and lame securities, are good expedients; though they



are productive of many inconveniences. His own frugal oeconomy in



state affairs will go much farther than any such trifling



expedients.



    Did a nation enjoying peace, although indebted perhaps 140



millions sterling, begin by paying off but 2 per cent of their



capital yearly, besides the current interest; while no



neighbouring state was borrowing any; what would interest fall to



in a short time! It may be answered, that the consequence would



be, to enrich other nations; because the money regorging at home,



would be sent abroad. To which I reply, by asking how any state



can be enriched by their borrowing? And in what does such lending



to foreigners differ from the nation's paying off their foreign



creditors? Will not the return of interest from abroad



compensate, pro tanto, the sums sent out for the like purpose?



    But if it be said, that the consequence will be to enable



other nations to bring down their own rate of interest; I allow



it to be so; and so much the better, as long as it remains



proportionally lower with us; which it must do, as long as we can



lend abroad. We have said, and I believe with truth, that as



credit is now extended, a general average is struck every where



upon the value of money well secured, consequently, the lower



that interest is reduced abroad, the lower still will it remain



at home, as long as merchants and exchangers do subsist.



    From this circumstance of the average on the rate of



interest, the Dutch must, I think, have lost the great advantage



they formerly enjoyed, from the low rate of it in Holland,



relatively to other nations.



    In Child's time, the Dutch were familiarly buying up sugars



in London, above the price paid by English sugar-bakers; and,



notwithstanding the additional freight and charges, they grew



rich by their trade, while the others were hardly making any



profit. This he accounts for from the low rate of their interest.



He supposes both Dutch and English to have carried on this trade



with borrowed money; for which the first paid 3 per cent and the



other 6 per cent.



    But at present, were it possible to get 6 per cent for money



in London, what Dutchman would lend his father a shilling at 3



per cent? The English stocks are as currently bought and sold,



nay, all the stockjobbing tricks are practised with the same



subtlety at Amsterdam as in Change-Alley: from which I conclude,



that a great part of the advantage of low interest is now lost to



that nation; and I conclude farther, that it is the common



interest of all trading nations to bring interest as low as



possible every where.



    Another cause of high interest proceeds from certain clogs



laid upon circulation, which flow merely from custom and



prejudice. Of this nature is the obligation laid upon debtors to



pay in the metals, nothing but coin being a legal tender.



    The only reason for such a regulation was the precariousness



of credit in former times. Were all the circulating paper in a



nation secured by law, either upon the lands or revenue of the



country appropriated for that purpose, there could be no



injustice or inconvenience in making paper (so secured) a legal



tender in all payments. Again, how extraordinary must it appear



to any reasonable man, that the same paper which passes on one



side of a river, running through the same country, should not



pass on its opposite bank?



    The reason of this is indeed very plain: the subaltern



jurisdictions on each side are different; and the debtors in the



paper are different: but if the paper of both stood upon a



security equally good, what is to hinder both to be received as a



legal tender in all payments over the kingdom? Should not little



private objects of profit among bankers (who are the servants of



the state, and who are so well paid for their service) be



over-ruled, when the consequences of their disputes are found to



be so hurtful? But of this more, when we come to speak of banks.



    The only occasion where a large quantity of coin is necessary



in the liquidation of paper, is for payment of the balance of



trade with foreign nations. Of this also we shall treat more at



large, when we come to the doctrine of exchange. But surely



nothing can be so ill judged, as to create an imaginary balance



within the same state; or rather, to permit money-jobbers to



create it; at the expence of raising interest, and hurting trade,



in the very places where it stands most in need of encouragement.



    From these principles, and others which naturally flow from



them, may a statesman steer a very certain course, towards



bringing the rate of interest as low as the prosperity of trade



requires, or the principles of double competition between



borrowers and lenders will permit.







Chap. VIII







Is the Rate of Interest the certain measure of the State of



Commerce?







    Some political writers are fond of every expedient to reduce



within a narrow compass many questions, which being involved in



combinations, cannot be reduced to one principle. This throws



them into what I call systems; of which we have an example in the



question now before us.



    There is nothing more difficult than to determine how far



commerce runs favourably, and how far unfavourably for a nation.



This would not be the case, were the rate of interest the certain



measure of it. I have found it however advanced, that nothing



more is necessary to be known, in order to estimate the relative



profits upon the foreign trade of two nations, than to compare



the common rate of interest in both, and to decide the preference



in favour of that nation where it is found to be lowest.



    We may say concerning this proposition, as concerning the



course of exchange; that the lowness of interest and of the price



of exchange are both exceedingly favourable to trade; but they



are no adequate measure of the profits arising from it.



    The best argument in favour of this opinion with regard to



interest is, that the nation which sells the cheapest at foreign



markets is constantly preferred; and, consequently, where the use



of money is the lowest, the merchant can sell the cheapest.



    I answer, that this consequence would be just, were all trade



carried on with borrowed money, were the difference of the price



of the materials or first matter, the ease of procuring them, the



promptitude of payments, the industry of the manufacturer, and



his dexterity, all reckoned for nothing. But such advantages are



frequently found in these articles, as to be more than sufficient



to counterbalance the additional interest which may be paid for



the money employed in trade. This is so true, that we see the



dexterity alone of the workman (living in an expensive capital,



where the charge of living may be double of what it is in the



country) enabling him to undersell his competitors every where:



the same may be true with regard to the other articles. Farther,



how absurd is it to say, that all trade is carried on with



borrowed money? A very inconsiderable part of trade is carried on



with borrowed money, in any country in Europe; and that part,



which is carried on with borrowed money, is not so much clogged



by the high rate of interest, as by want of punctuality in



payments. A merchant who can turn his money in three months,



borrows as cheaply at 6 per cent as another who turns his in six



months, when he borrows at 3 per cent.



    The object of trade is produce and manufacture. These are



prepared for the market by farmers and tradesmen. Let us compare



the value of them, when sold at market to the merchant, with the



interest of the money borrowed by the farmers and tradesmen, in



order to carry on their industry, and we shall find that the



interest paid by them, bears hardly any proportion at all, to the



value of what they produce. Example. A sheep borrows no money in



order to produce wool; spinners and weavers borrow no money in



order to enable them to spin and to weave. Thus the whole



manufacture comes to market without any charge for interest.



    Do we not see every day, that ingenious workmen, who obtain



credit for very small sums, are soon enabled, by the means of



their own industry, to produce a surprising value in



manufactures, and not only to subsist, but to increase in riches?



The interest they pay for the money borrowed is inconsiderable,



when compared with the value, created (as it were) by the proper



employment of their time and talents.



    If it be said, that this is a vague assertion, supported by



no proof; I answer, that the value of a man's work may be



estimated by the proportion between the manufacture when brought



to market, and the first matter. Nothing but the first matter,



and the instruments of manufacture, can be considered as the



objects of borrowed money; unless we go so far as to estimate the



nourishment, and every expence of the manufacturer, and suppose



that these are also supplied from borrowed money. To affirm this,



would be turning arguments into cavil.



    The object, therefore, of borrowed money for carrying on



trade, is more relative to the merchant than to the manufacturer.



Borrowing is necessary for collecting all this product and



manufacture into the hands of merchants. This, no doubt, is very



commonly the operation of credit: interest of money, here, comes



in, to indemnify the giver of credit, for the use of his money:



but this interest is due from the time only, when the borrower



pays those from whom he collects, to the time he receives payment



from those to whom he sells. This interval it is of the highest



importance to the merchant to shorten. In proportion as it is



long, and in proportion to the rate of interest, he must raise



his profits; and in proportion as payments are quick and regular,



and interest low, he may diminish them. Whether merchants do



regulate their profits, in all commercial nations, according to



the exact proportion of the respective rates of interest, and



promptitude of payments among them; or whether these are



determined by the circumstances of demand and competition in the



several foreign markets where the trade is carried on, I leave to



merchants to determine. All I shall remark is, that a well



founded credit, and prompt payments, will do more service to



trade, than any advantage trading men can reap from the different



rate of interest in different countries.



    It must not be concluded from this, that low interest is not



a very great advantage to trade; all I contend for, is, that it



is not the measure of it.



    Another circumstance which puts nations, in our days, much



more on a level than they were in former times, I have already



hinted at. It is that general average which the great loads of



national debts, and the extension of credit, through the several



nations of Europe, who pay annually large sums of interest to



their creditors, has established. Let me suppose the Dutch, for



example, to have fixed, by placard, the rate of their interest at



3 per cent. I say, that as soon as the general average of



interest comes to stand above this rate, from the price of public



funds in England and France, we may safely conclude, that their



trade can no longer be carried on with any very considerable sum



of money borrowed at 3 per cent. The consequence then must be, to



send the money which regorges in the hands of the frugal Dutch,



into other countries, where it can produce a better return,



exclusive of all expences of remitting and drawing. What the



consequences of this lending to foreigners may be to Holland,



shall be afterwards examined.



    To conclude; I reckon it will be found, that what had led



some to believe that low interest is the measure of commerce, has



been owing to this; that in some of the most commercial countries



and cities interest has been found to be lower than in great



kingdoms: but this, I imagine, is entirely owing to the frugality



of their manners, which cuts off the borrowing of the rich for



the sake of dissipation. When this is accomplished, trade alone



will absorb the stagnations of the frugal, and the price of



interest will fall to that rate which is the best proportioned to



the profits upon commerce; but this also will be less and less



the case every day, in proportion to the credit and circulation



of public funds in different nations.







Chap. IX







Does not Interest fall in Proportion as Wealth increases?







    I answer in the affirmative: provided it be supposed that



dissipation do not increase in proportion to the wealth. Now in a



general proposition, such as this which stands at the head of our



chapter, this very necessary proviso is apt to be overlooked, and



thus people are led to error. The manners of a people, not their



external circumstances as to riches, are that which renders them



frugal or extravagant. What, therefore, depends upon the spirit



of a people, cannot be changed, but in consequence of a change of



that spirit.



    If the rate of interest be high, from a taste of dissipation,



let foreign trade throw in what loads of money it may, interest



will stand high, until manners do change. Every class of a people



has their peculiar spirit. The frugal merchant will accumulate



wealth, and the prodigal lord will borrow it. In this situation,



internal circulation will be rapid, and lands will shift hands.



If this revolution should prove a corrective to dissipation, by



vesting property in those who have contracted a firm habit of



frugality, then an augmentation of wealth may sink the rate of



interest. But if, on the contrary, the laws and manners of the



country do distinguish classes by their manner of living, and



mode of expence, it is ten to one but the industrious and frugal



merchant will put on the prodigal gentleman, the moment he gets



into a fine country seat, and hears himself called your Honour.



In certain countries, the memory of past industry carries a dreg



along with it, which nothing but expensive living has power to



purge away.



    Let this suffice at present upon the subject of interest: it



is so connected with the doctrine of credit, that it will recur



again at almost every step as we go along.







NOTES:







1. In France particularly.







2. The terms regorging and stagnating, are the best I can fall



upon to express the idea here defined; and therefore I shall take



the liberty to use them in this sense wherever I shall have



occasion to speak concerning a superfluity of coin or of money.











Part II







Of Banks







Chap. I







Of the various Kinds of Credit







    We have already pointed out the nature of credit, which is



confidence; and we have deduced the principles which influence



the rate of interest, the essential requisite for its support.



    We come now to treat of domestic circulation; where we are to



deduce the principles of banking. This is the great engine



calculated for carrying it on.



    That I may, with order, investigate the many combinations we



shall here meet with, I must point out wherein banks differ from



one another in point of policy, as well as in the principle upon



which their credit is built.



    If they be considered relatively to their policy, they may be



divided into banks of circulation, and banks of deposit.



    If they be considered relatively to the principles upon which



their credit is built, they may be divided into banks upon



private credit, banks upon mercantile credit, and banks upon



public credit.



    It is to this last division only I must attend, in the



distribution of what is to follow; and therefore it is proper to



set out by explaining what I understand by the terms I have here



introduced.



    First, private credit. This is established upon a security,



real or personal, of value sufficient to make good the obligation



of repayment both of capital and interest. This is the most solid



of all.



    Secondly, mercantile credit. This is established upon the



confidence the lender has, that the borrower, from his integrity



and knowledge in trade, may be able to replace the capital



advanced, and the interest due during the advance, in terms of



the agreement. This is the most precarious of all.



    Thirdly, public credit. This is established upon the



confidence reposed in a state, or body politic, who borrow money



upon condition that the capital shall not be demandable; but that



a certain proportional part of the sum shall be annually paid,



either in lieu of interest, or in extinction of part of the



capital; for the security of which, a permanent annual fund is



appropriated, with a liberty, however, to the state to free



itself at pleasure, upon repaying the whole; when nothing to the



contrary is stipulated.



    The solidity of this species of credit depends upon



circumstances.



    The difference between the three kinds of credit lies more in



the object of the confidence, and the nature of the security,



than in the condition of the borrower. Either a private man, a



merchant, or a state, may pledge, for the security of a loan, a



real or a moveable security, with an obligation to refund the



capital. In this case, the obligation stands upon the solid basis



of private credit.



    Either a private man, a merchant, or a state, may strike out



projects which carry a favourable appearance of success, and



thereupon borrow considerable sums of money, repayable with



interest. In this case, the obligation stands upon a mercantile



credit.



    Either a private man, a merchant, or a state, may pledge (for



the security of money borrowed) a perpetual annual income, the



fund of which is not their property, without any obligation to



refund the capital: such obligations stand upon the principles of



public credit.



    I allow there is a great resemblance between the three



species of credit here enumerated: there are however some



characteristic differences between them.



    First, in the difficulty of establishing and supporting them.



    Private credit is inseparable, in some degree, from human



society. We find it subsisting in all ages: the security is



palpable, and the principles on which it is built are simple and



easy to be comprehended. Public credit is but a late invention:



it is the infant of commerce, and of extensive circulation. It



has supplied the place of the treasures of old, which were



constant and ready resources to statesmen in cases of public



distress: the security is not palpable, nor readily understood,



by the multitude; because it rests upon the stability of certain



fundamental maxims of government. Mercantile credit is still more



difficult to be established; because the security is the most



precarious of any; it depends upon opinion and speculation, more



than upon a determinate fund provided for repayment of either



capital or interest.



    Secondly, they differ in the nature of the security and



object of confidence.



    Private credit has a determinate object of confidence, viz.



the real existence of a value in the hands of the debtor,



sufficient to acquit both capital and interest. Public credit has



the visible security of a fund appropriated for the perpetual



payment of the interest. Mercantile credit depends wholly upon



the integrity, capacity, and good fortune of the debtor.



    The third difference is with regard to the ease of transfer.



    All public debts stand generally on the same bottom. No part



of the same fund is better than another: the price of them is



publicly known, and the securities are laid in the most



convenient way for transfer, that is, for circulation, without



consent of the debtor. This is far from being the case in private



securities. Nor is it the case in the mercantile, except in bills



payable to order or to bearer; in which cases alone, the creditor



can effectually transfer without the consent of the debtor.



    The fourth difference is discovered in the stability of the



confidence.



    Nothing can shake private credit, but an appearance of



insolvency in the very debtor. But the bankruptcy of one



considerable merchant, may give a shock to mercantile credit all



over Europe: and nothing will hurt public credit, as long as the



stipulated interest continues regularly to be paid, and as long



as the funds appropriated for this payment remain entire.



    From what has been said, I hope the three species of credit



have been sufficiently explained; and, from what is to follow, we



shall feel the utility of this distribution.







Chap. II







Of private Credit







    Private credit is either real, personal, or mixed.



    Real security, every body understands. It is the object of



law, not of politics, to give an enumeration of its different



branches. By this term, we understand no more than the pledging



an immoveable subject for the payment of a debt. As by a personal



security we understand the engagement of the debtor's whole



effects for the relief of his creditor. The mixed, I have found



it necessary to superadd, in order to explain with more facility,



the security of one species of banks. The notes issued by banks



upon private credit, stand upon a mixed security: that is, both



real and personal. Personal, as far as they affect the banker,



and the banking stock pledged for the security of the paper: and



real, as far as they affect the real securities granted to the



banker for the notes he lends, which afterwards enter into



circulation.



    The ruling principle in private credit, and the basis on



which it rests, is the facility of converting, into money, the



effects of the debtor; because the capital and interest are



constantly supposed to be demandable. The proper way, therefore,



to support this sort of credit to the utmost, is to contrive a



ready method of appretiating every subject affectable by debts;



and secondly, of melting it down into symbolical or paper money.



    In former times, when circulation was inconsiderable, the



scheme of melting down the property of debtors, for the payment



of creditors, was impracticable; and accordingly we see that



capitals secured on land property were not demandable. This



formed another species of credit, different from any we have



mentioned; which differed from public credit in this only, that



the solid property producing the income, was really in the hands



of the debtor; whereas the fund which produces the public revenue



is not in the hands of the state. This subdivision we have



omitted, as its basis, in both cases, rests solely upon the



regular payment of the interest. Of this nature are the contracts



of constitution in France, and the old investments of annual rent



in Scotland. There are few nations, I believe, in Europe, where



some traces, at least, of this kind of security do not remain.



    In order, then, to carry private credit to its greatest



extent, all entails upon lands should be dissolved; all



obligations should be regularly recorded in public registers; the



value of all lands should be ascertained, the moment any security



is granted upon them; and the statesman should interpose between



parties, to accelerate the liquidation of all debts, in the



shortest time, and at the least expence possible.



    Although this method of proceeding be the most effectual to



secure, and to extend private credit, yet it is not, at all



times, expedient to have recourse to it: this has been abundantly



explained in the 27th chapter of the second book; and therefore I



shall not here interrupt my subject with a needless repetition.







Chap. III







Of Banks







    In deducing the principles of banks, I shall do the best I



can to go through the subject systematically.



    I have divided credit into three branches, private,



mercantile, and public. This distribution will be of use on many



occasions, and shall be followed as far as it will go,



consistently with perspicuity: but, as has been often observed,



subjects of a complex nature cannot be brought under the



influence of a few general principles, without running into the



modern vice of forming systems, by wire-drawing many relations in



order to make them answer.



    The great operations of domestic circulation may be better



discovered by an examination into the principles upon which we



find banking established, than by any other method I can



contrive. It has been by inquiring into the nature of those banks



which are the most remarkable in Europe, that I have gathered the



little knowledge I have of the theory of domestic circulation.



This induces me to think that the best way to communicate my



thoughts on this subject, is to lay down the result of my



inquiries relatively to the very object of them.



    After comparing the operations of different banks in



promoting circulation, I find I can divide them, as to their



policy, into two general classes, viz. those which issue notes



payable in coin to bearer; and those which only transfer the



credit written down in their books from one person to another.



    Those which issue notes, I call banks of circulation; those



which transfer their credit, I call banks of deposit.



    Both indeed may be called banks of circulation, because by



their means circulation is facilitated; but, as different terms



serve to distinguish ideas different in themselves, these I here



employ will answer the purpose as well as any others, when once



they are defined; and circulation undoubtedly reaps far greater



advantages from banks which issue notes transferable every where,



than from banks which only transfer their credit on the very spot



where the books are kept.



    I shall, according to this distribution, first explain the



principles upon which the banks of circulation are constituted



and conducted, before I treat of the others.



    This will lead me to avail myself of the division I have made



of credit, into private, mercantile, and public; because,



according to the purposes for which a bank is established, the



ground of confidence, that is, the credit of the bank, comes to



rest upon one or other of them.



    In countries where trade and industry are in their infancy,



credit can be but little known; consequently, they who have solid



property, must find great difficulty in turning it into money;



without money, again, industry cannot be carried on, as we have



abundantly explained in the 26th chapter of the second book;



consequently without credit the whole plan of national



improvement will be disappointed.



    Under such circumstances, it is proper to establish a bank



upon the principles of private credit. This bank must issue notes



upon land and other securities, and the profits of it must arise



from the permanent interest drawn for the money lent.



    Of this nature are the banks of Scotland. To them the



improvement of this country is entirely owing; and until they are



generally established in other countries of Europe, where trade



and industry are little known, it will be very difficult to set



these great engines to work.



    Although I have represented this species of banks, which I



shall call banks of circulation upon mortgage, as peculiarly well



adapted to countries where industry and trade are in their



infancy, their usefulness to all nations, who have upon an



average a favourable balance upon their trade, will sufficiently



appear upon an examination of the principles upon which they are



established.



    It is for this reason that I have applied myself to reduce to



principles the many operations of the Scotch banks, during the



time they were in the greatest distress imaginable, from the



heavy balance the country owed during the last years of the late



war, and for some time after the peace in 1763. By this I flatter



myself to do a particular service to Scotland, as well as to



suggest hints which may prove useful, not to England only, but to



all commercial countries, who, by imitating this establishment,



will reap advantages of which they are at present deprived.



    For these reasons, I hope the detail I shall enter into with



regard to Scotland, will not appear tedious, both from the



variety of CUriOus combinations it will contain, as also from the



lights it will cast upon the whole doctrine of circulation, which



is the present object of our attention.



    In countries where trade is established, industry



flourishing, credit extensive, circulation copious and rapid, as



is the case with England, banks upon mortgage, however useful



they may prove for other purposes, would not answer the demands



of the trade of London, and the service of government, so well as



the bank of England.



    The ruling principle of this bank, and the ground of their



confidence, is mercantile credit. The bank of England does not



lend upon mortgage, nor personal security: their profits arise



from discounting bills; loans to government, upon the faith of



taxes, to be paid within the year; and upon the credit cash of



those who deal with them.



    A bank such as that of England, cannot therefore be



established, except in a great wealthy mercantile city, where the



accumulation of the smallest profits amount, at the end of the



year, to very considerable sums.



    In France, under the regency of the Duke of Orleans, there



was a bank erected upon the principles of public credit. The



ground of confidence there, and the only security for all the



paper they issued, were the funds appropriated for the payment of



the interest of the public debts.



    It is for the sake of order and method, that I propose to



explain the principles of banking, according to this



distribution. I must however confess, that although I represent



each of the three kinds of banks as having a cause of confidence



peculiar to itself, to wit, either private, mercantile, or public



credit; yet we shall find a mixture of all the three species of



credit entering into the combination of every one of them.



    Banking, in the age we live, is that branch of credit which



best deserves the attention of a statesman. Upon the right



establishment of banks, depends the prosperity of trade, and the



equable course of circulation. By them(1*) solid property may be



melted down. By the means of banks, money may be constantly kept



at a due proportion to alienation. If alienation increase, more



property may be melted down. If it diminish, the quantity of



money stagnating, wil1 be absorbed by the bank, and part of the



property formerly melted down in the securities granted to them,



will be, as it were, consolidated anew. Banks must pay, as agents



for the country, the balance of their trade with foreign nations.



Banks keep the mints at work; and it is by their means,



principally, that private, mercantile, and public credit are



supported. I can point out the utility of banks in no way so



striking, as to recal to mind the surprising effects of Mr Law's



bank, established in France, at a time when there was neither



money or credit in the kingdom. The superior genius of this man



produced, in two years time, the most surprising effects



imaginable; he revived industry; he established confidence; and



shewed to the world, that while the landed property of a nation



is in the hands of the inhabitants, and while the lower classes



are willing to be industrious, money never can be wanting. I must



now proceed in order, towards the investigation of the principles



which influence this intricate and complicated branch of my



subject.







Chap. IV







    Banks of circulation upon mortgage or private credit, are



those which issue notes upon private security, payable to bearer



on demand, in the current coin of the nation. They are



constituted in the following manner.



    A number of men of property join together in a contract of



banking, either ratified or not by public authority, according to



circumstances. For this purpose, they form a stock which may



consist indifferently of any species of property. This fund is



engaged to all the creditors of the company, as a security for



the notes they propose to issue. So soon as confidence is



established with the public, they grant credits, or cash



accompts, upon good security; concerning which they make the



proper regulations. In proportion to the notes issued in



consequence of these credits, they provide a sum of coin, such as



they judge to be sufficient to answer such notes as shall return



upon them for payment. Nothing but experience can enable them to



determine the proportion between the coin to be kept in their



coffers, and the paper in circulation. This proportion varies



even according to circumstances, as we shall afterwards observe.



    The profits of the bank proceed from the interest paid upon



all the money advanced by the bank, in consequence of credits



given.(2*)



    Out of these profits must be deducted, first, the charge of



management; secondly, the loss of interest for all the coin they



preserve in their coffers, as well as the expence they are put to



in prodding it; and thirdly, the expence of transacting and



paying all balances due to other nations.



    In proportion, therefore, as the interest upon the money



advanced by the bank in consequence of the securities, exceeds



the loss of interest on the coin in the bank, the expence of



management, and of prodding funds abroad to pay balances, in the



same proportion is their profit; which they may either divide,



accumulate, or employ, as they think fit.



    Let it be observed, that I do not consider the original bank



stock, or the interest arising from that, as any part of the



profits of the bank. So far as it regards the bank, it is their



original property; and so far as it regards the public, it serves



for a collateral security to it, for the notes issued. It becomes



a pledge, as it were, for the faithful discharge of the trust



reposed in the bank: without such a pledge, the public could have



no security to indemnify it, in case the bank should issue notes



for no permanent value received. This would be the case, if they



thought fit to issue their paper either in payment of their own



private debts, or for articles of present consumption, or in a



precarious trade.



    When paper is issued by a bank for no value received, the



security of such paper stands upon the original capital of the



bank alone; whereas when it is issued for value received, that



value is the security on which it immediately stands, and the



bank stock is, properly speaking, only subsidiary.



    I have dwelt the longer upon this circumstance, because many,



who are unacquainted with the nature of banks, have a difficulty



to comprehend how they should ever be at a loss for money, as



they have a mint of their own, which requires nothing but paper



and ink to create millions. But if they consider the principles



of banking, they will find that every note issued for value



consumed, instead of value received and preserved, is neither



more or less, than a partial spending either of their capital, or



profits on the bank. Is not this the effect of the expence of



their management? Is not this expence paid in their notes? But



did ever any body imagine that this expence did not diminish the



profits of banking? Consequently, such expence may exhaust these



profits, if carried far enough; and if carried still farther,



will diminish the capital of the banking stock.



    As a farther illustration of this principle, let me suppose,



an honest man, intelligent, and capable to undertake a bank. I



say that such a person, without one shilling of stock, may carry



on a bank of domestic circulation, to as good purpose as if he



had a million; and his paper will be every bit as good as that of



the bank of England. Every note he issues will be secured on good



private security; this security carries interest to him, in



proportion to the money which has been advanced by him, and



stands good for the notes he has issued. Suppose then that after



having issued for a million sterling, all the notes should return



upon him in one day. Is it not plain, that they will find, with



the honest banker, the original securities, taken by him at the



time he issued them; and is it not true, that he will have,



belonging to himself, the interest received upon these



securities, while his notes were in circulation, except so far as



this interest has been spent in carrying on the business of his



bank? Large bank stocks, therefore, serve only to establish their



credit; to secure the confidence of the public, who cannot see



into their administration; but who willingly believe, that men



who have considerable property pledged in security of their good



faith, will not probably deceive them.



    This stock is the more necessary, from the obligation to pay



in the metals. Coin may be wanting, upon some occasions, to men



of the greatest landed property. Is this a reason to suspect



their credit? Just so of banks. The bank of England may be



possessed of twenty millions sterling of good effects, to wit,



their capital; and the securities for all the notes they have



issued; and yet that bank might be obliged to stop payment, upon



a sudden demand of a few millions of coin.



    Runs upon a bank well established, betray great want of



confidence in the public; and this want of confidence proceeds



from the ignorance the greatest part of men are in, with regard



to the state of their affairs, and to the principles upon which



their trade is carried on.



    From what has been said, we may conclude, that the solidity



of a bank which lends upon private security, does not so much



depend upon the extent of their original capital, as upon the



good regulations they observe in granting credit. In this the



public is nearly interested; because the bank securities are



really taken for the public, who are creditors upon them in



virtue of the notes which circulate through their hands.







Chap. V







Such Banks ought to issue their Notes on private, not mercantile



Credit







    Let me, therefore, reason upon the example of two bankers;



one issues his notes upon the best real or personal security;



another gives credit to merchants and manufacturers, upon the



principles of mercantile credit, which we have explained above;



the notes of the one and of the other enter into circulation, and



the question comes to be, which are the best? If we judge by the



regularity of the payment of notes on presentation, perhaps the



notes of the one are as readily paid as those of the other. If we



judge by the stock of the two bankers, perhaps they may be equal,



both in value and solidity; but it is not upon either of these



circumstances that the question depends. The notes in circulation



may far exceed the amount of the largest bank stock; and



therefore, it is not on the original stock; but on the securities



taken at issuing the notes, that the solidity of the two



currencies is to be estimated. Those secured on private credit,



are as solid as lands and personal estates; they stand upon the



principles of private credit. Those secured on the obligations of



merchants and manufacturers, depending upon the success of their



trade, are good or bad in proportion to such success. Every



bankruptcy of one of their debtors, involves the bank, and



carries off either a part of their profits, or of their stock.



Which way, therefore, can the public judge of the affairs of



bankers, except by attending to the nature of the securities upon



which they give credit.







Chap. VI







Use of subaltern Bankers and Exchangers







    Here it may be urged, that the great use of banks is to



multiply circulation, and to furnish the industrious with the



means of carrying on their traffic: that if banks insist upon the



most solid sureties before they give credit, the great utility of



them must cease; because merchants and manufacturers are never in



a situation to obtain credit upon such terms.



    This argument proves only, that banks are not, alone,



sufficient for carrying on every branch of circulation. A truth



which nobody will controvert. But as they are of use in carrying



on the great branches of circulation, it is proper to prevent



them from engaging in schemes which may destroy their credit



altogether.



    I have observed above, that this method of issuing notes upon



private security, was peculiarly well adapted to countries like



Scotland, where trade and industry are in their infancy.



    Merchants and manufacturers there, have constant occasion for



money or credit; and at the same time, they cannot be supposed to



have either real or personal estates to pledge, in order to



obtain a loan directly from the banks, who ought to lend upon no



other security.



    To remove this difficulty, we find a set of merchants, men of



substance, who obtain from the banks very extensive credits upon



the joint real and personal security of themselves and friends.



With this assistance from the bank, and with money borrowed from



private people, repayable on demand, something below the common



rate of interest, they support the trade of Scotland, by giving



credit to the merchants and manufacturers.



    To this set of men, therefore, are banks of circulation upon



mortgage to leave this particular branch of business. It is their



duty, it is the interest of the country, and no less that of



banks, that they be supported in so useful a trade; a trade which



animates all the commerce and manufactures of Scotland, and which



consequently promotes the circulation of those very notes upon



which the profits of the banks do arise.



    These merchants are settled in all the most considerable



towns: they are well acquainted with the stock, capacity,



industry, and integrity of all the dealers in their district:



they are, many. and by this are able to go through all the detail



which their business requires; and their profits, as we shall see



presently, are greater than those of banks, who lend at a stated



interest.



    The common denomination by which they are called in Scotland,



is that of bankers; but, to avoid their being confounded with the



bankers in England (whose business is very different) we shall,



while we are treating of the doctrine of banks, call them by the



name of exchangers, since their trade is principally carried on



by bills of exchange.



    As often as these exchangers give credit to dealers in any



way, they constantly state a commission of 1/2 per cent or more,



according to circumstances, over and above the interest of their



advance; these are profits, which greatly surpass those of any



bank. One thousand pounds credit given by a bank, may not produce



ten pounds in a year for interest: whereas were a like credit



given by a banker, to a merchant, who draws it out, and replaces



it forty times in a year, there will arise upon it a commission



of 20 per cent or 200 l.



    This set of men are exposed to risks and losses, which they



bear without complaint, because of their great profits; but it



implies a detail, which no bank can descend to.



    These exchangers break from time to time; and no essential



hurt is thereby occasioned to national credit. The loss falls



upon those who lend to them, or trust them with their money, upon



precarious security; and upon merchants, who make allowances for



such risks. In a word, they are a kind of insurers, and draw



premiums in proportion to their risks.



    To this set of men, therefore, it should be left to give



credit to merchants, as the credit they give is purely



mercantile; and to banks alone, who give credit on good private



security, it should be left to conduct the great national



circulation, which ought to stand upon the solid principles of



private credit.



    From this example we may discover the justness of the



distinction I have made between private and mercantile credit:



had I not found it necessary, I should not have introduced it.







Chap. VII







Concerning the Obligation to pay in Coin, and the Consequences



thereof







    In all banks of circulation upon mortgage, the obligation in



the note is to pay in coin, upon demand: and in the famous bank



of Mr Law, there was a very necessary clause added to the note;



to wit, that the coin was to be of the same weight, fineness and



denomination, as at the date of the note. This was done, in order



to prevent the inconveniences which might result to either party,



by the king's arbitrarily raising or sinking the denominations of



the coin; a practice then very familiar in France.



    This obligation to pay in coin, owes its origin to the low



state of credit in Europe at the time when banks first began to



be introduced; and it is not likely that any other expedient will



soon be fallen upon to remove the inconveniences which result



from it in domestic circulation, as long as some persons of the



most acute understanding in many things, consider all money,



except, coin to be false and fictitious.



    I have already thrown out abundance of hints, from which it



may be gathered, that, in my opinion, coin is not absolutely



necessary for carrying on domestic circulation, and more will be



said on this subject, as we go along. But I am here to examine



the nature and consequences of this obligation, contracted by



banks, to discharge their notes in the current coin of the



country.



    In the first place, it is plain, that no coin is ever (except



in very particular cases) carried to a bank, in order to procure



notes. The greatest part of notes issue from the banks,



concerning which we are treating, either in consequence of a



loan, or of a credit given by the bank, to such as can give



security for it. This loan is made in their own notes; which are



quickly thrown into circulation by the borrower; who borrowed



them, because he had occasion to pay them away. In like manner,



when a credit is given, the bank pays (in her notes) all the



orders she receives from the person who has the credit: in this



manner are notes commonly issued from a bank.



    Coin, again, comes to a bank, in the common course of



circulation, by payments made to it, either for the interest upon



their loans, or when merchants and landed men throw the payments



made to them into the bank, towards filling up their credits; or



by way of a safe deposit for their money. These payments are made



to the bank in the ordinary circulation of the country. When



there is a considerable proportion of coin in circulation, then



the bank receives much coin; and when there is little, they



receive little. Whatever they receive is laid by to answer notes



which are offered for payment; but whenever a draught is made



upon them for the money thrown in as above, they pay in paper.



    As we are here searching after principles, not after facts,



it is out of our way to inquire what may be the real proportion



of coin preserved by banks of circulation, for answering the



demand for it.



    Mr Megens, a very knowing man, and a very judicious author,



lately dead, who has written a small treatise in the German



tongue, translated into English, under the title of The Universal



Merchant, delivers his sentiments concerning the proportion of



coin preserved in the bank of England, which I shall here



transcribe in the translator's words. Sect. 60.



    'The bank of England consists of two sorts of creditors, the



one of that set of men, who, in King William's time, when money



was scarce and dear, lent the public 1,200,000 pounds, at 8 per



cent interest, and 4000 pounds were allowed them for charges,



amounting in whole to 100,000 pounds a year, an exclusive right



of banking as a corporation for 13 years, under the denomination



of the proprietors of the bank; and which, for obtaining



prolongation of their privileges, has been since increased by



farther loans to the public at a less interest, to near the sum



of 11,000,000 pounds, which if we compute the interest at 3 per



cent (as what they have more on some part answers incident



charges) it produces 330,000 pounds a year; and as they divide



annually 5 per cent to their proprietors, which is 550,000



pounds, it is evident that they make a yearly profit of 220,000



pounds, out of the money of the people who keep cash with them,



and these are the other sort of creditors: and as for what money



the bank lends to the government, they have for the most part but



3 per cent interest, I conclude that the credit cash they have in



their hands may amount to 11,000,000 pounds, and thereout is



employed in loans to the government, in the discounting of bills,



and in buying gold and silver 7,333,333 1/3 pounds, which, at 3



per cent interest or profit, will amount to the above 220,000



pounds, and remains 3,666,666 2/3 pounds in cash, sufficient for



circulation and current payments. And experience has evinced,



that whenever any mistrust has occasioned any run upon the bank



for any continuance, and the people not finding the treasure so



soon exhausted as they surmised, it flowed in again faster on the



one hand than it was drawn out on the other.'



    This gentleman lived long in England. He was very intelligent



in matters relating to commerce; and his authority may, I



believe, be relied on as much as any other person's, except that



of the bank itself; which, it would appear, has some interest in



keeping such affairs a secret.



    We see by his account, that the bank of England keeps in coin



one third part of the value of all their notes in circulation.



With this quantity, business is carried on with great smoothness,



owing to the prosperity of that kingdom, which seldom owes any



considerable balance to other nations.



    But the consequence of the obligation to pay in coin, is,



that when the nation comes to owe a foreign balance, the notes



which the bank had issued to support domestic circulation only,



come upon it for the payment of this balance; and thereby the



coin which it had provided for home demand only, is drawn out.



    It is this circumstance, above all others, which distresses



banks of circulation. Were it not for this, the obligation to pay



in coin might easily be discharged; but when in virtue of this



pure obligation, a heavy national balance is demanded from the



bank, which has only made provision for the current and ordinary



demand at home, it requires a little combination to find out, at



once, an easy remedy.



    This combination we shall, in the following chapters,



endeavour to unfold: it is by far the most intricate, and at the



same time the most important in the whole doctrine of banks of



circulation.



    Another inconveniences resulting from this obligation to pay



in coin, we have explained in the third book. It is, that the



confusion of the English coin, and the lightness of a great part



of it, obliges the bank of England to purchase the metals at a



price far above that which they can draw back for them after they



are coined. We have there shewn the great profit that might be



made in melting down and exporting the heavy species. This profit



turns out a real loss to the bank of England, which is constantly



obliged to provide new coin, in proportion as it is wanted. This



inconvenience is not directly felt by banks, in countries where



there is no mint established.



    Here then is another bad consequence of this obligation to



pay in the metals, which a proper regulation of the coin would



immediately remove. In countries which abound in coin, banking is



an easy trade, when once their credit is well established. It is



principally when either a foreign war, or a wrong balance of



trade has carried off the metals, that the weight of this



obligation to pay in coin is severely felt.







Chap. VIII







How a wrong Balance of Trade affects Banks of Circulation







    It is commonly said, that when there is a balance due by any



nation upon the whole of their mercantile transactions with the



rest of the world, such balance must be paid in coin. This we



call a wrong balance. Those who transact the payment of this



balance, are those who regulate the course of exchange; and we



may suppose, without the least danger of being deceived, that the



course is always higher than the expence of procuring and



transporting the metals; because the overcharge is profit to the



exchanger, who without this profit could not carry on his



business.



    These exchangers, then, must have a command of coin; and



where can they get it so easily, and so readily, as from banks



who are bound to pay in it?



    Every merchant who imports foreign commodities, must be



supposed to have value in his hands from the sale of them; but



this value must consist in the money of the country: if this be



mostly in bank paper, he must give the bank paper for a bill to



the exchanger, whose business it is to place funds in those parts



upon which bills are demanded. The exchanger again (to support



the fund which he exhausts by his draughts) must demand coin from



the banks, for the notes he received from the merchant when he



gave him the foreign bill.



    Besides the wrong balances of trade transacted in this



manner, which banks are constantly obliged to make good in coin,



every other payment made to foreigners has the same effect. It is



not because it is a balance of trade, but because it is a payment



which cannot be made in paper currency, that a demand is made for



coin. Coin we have called the money of the world, as notes may be



called the money of the society. The first then must be procured



when we pay a balance to foreigners; the last is full as good



when we pay among ourselves.



    It is proper, however, to observe, that there is a great



difference between the wrong balance of trade, and the general



balance of payments. The first marks the total loss of the



nations when her imports exceed the value of her exports; the



second comprehends three other articles, viz. 1. the expence of



the natives in foreign countries; 2. the payment of all debts,



principal and interest, due to foreigners; 3. the lending of



money to other nations.



    These three put together, make what I call the general



balance of foreign payments: and these added to the wrong balance



of trade may be called the grand balance with the world.



    Now as long as the payment of this grand balance is



negotiated by exchangers, all the coin required to make it good,



must be supplied by banks, while they have one note in



circulation.



    How then is this coin to be procured by nations who have no



mines of their own?







Chap. IX







How a grand Balance may be paid by Banks, without the assistance



of Coin







    Did all the circulation of a country consist in coin, this



grand balance as we have called it, would be paid out of the



coin, to the diminution of it.



    We have said that the acquisition of coin, or of the precious



metals, adds to the intrinsic value of a country, as much as if a



portion of territory were added to it. The truth of this



proposition will now soon appear evident.



    We have also said, that the creation of symbolical money,



adds no additional wealth to a country, but only provides a fund



of circulation out of solid property; which enables the



proprietors to consume and to pay proportionally for their



consumption: and we have shewn how by this contrivance trade and



industry are made to flourish.



    May we not conclude, from these principles, that as nations



who have coin, pay their grand balance out of their coin, to the



diminution of this species of their property, so nations who have



melted down their solid property into symbolical money, must pay



their grand balance out of the symbolical money; that is to say,



out of the solid property of which it is the symbol?



    But this solid property cannot be sent abroad; and it is



alleged that nothing but coin can be employed in paying this



grand balance. To this I answer, that in such a case the credit



of a bank may step in, without which a nation which runs short of



coin, and which comes to owe a grand balance must quickly be



undone.



    We have said that while exchangers transact the balance, the



whole load of providing coin lies upon banks. Now the whole solid



property melted down, in their paper, is in their hands; because



I consider the securities given them for their paper, to be the



same as the property itself. Upon this property, there is a



yearly interest paid to the bank: this interest, then, must be



engaged to foreigners by the bank, in lieu of what is owing to



them by the nation; and when once a fund is borrowed upon it



abroad, the rest is easy to the bank. This shall be farther



explained as we go along.



    I do not pretend that the common operation of providing coin,



when the grand balance is against a nation, is as simple as I



have represented it. I know it is not: and I know also, that I am



not in any degree capable to explain the finite combination of



mercantile operations necessary to bring it about; but it is no



less true, that these combinations may be shortened: because when



the whole of them have been gone through, the transaction must



end in what I have said; to wit, that either the grand balance



must be paid out of the national stock of coin, or it must be



furnished by foreigners upon a loan from them; the interest of



which must be paid out of that part of the solid property of the



nation which has been melted down into paper. I say farther, that



were not all this solid property (so melted down) in the hands of



banks, who thereby have established to themselves an enormous



mercantile credit; there would be no possibility of conducting



such an operation: that is to say, there would be no possibility



for nations to run in debt to nations, upon the security of their



respective landed property.







Chap. X







Insufficiency of temporary Credits for the Payment of a wrong



Balance







    I have said, that when the national stock of coin is not



sufficient to provide banks with the quantity demanded of them,



for the payment of the grand balance, that a loan must take



place. To this it may be objected, that a credit is sufficient to



procure coin, without having recourse to a formal loan. The



difference I make between a loan and a credit consists in this,



that by a credit we understand a temporary advance of money,



which the person who gives the credit expects to have repaid in a



short time, with interest for the advance, and commission for the



credit; whereas by a loan we understand the lending of money for



an indefinite time, with interest during non-payment.



    Now I say, the credit, in this case, will not answer the



purpose of supplying a deficiency of coin; unless the deficiency



has been accidental, and that a return of coin, from a new



favourable grand balance, be quickly expected. The credit will



indeed answer the present exigency; but the moment this credit



comes to be replaced, it must be replaced either by a loan, or by



a supply of coin; or by a renewal of the former credit; but, by



the supposition, coin is found to be wanting for paying the grand



balance; consequently, nothing but a loan, made by the lenders



either in coin, in the metals, or in a liberty to draw upon them,



can remove the inconvenience; and if recourse be had to a new



credit, instead of the loan, the same difficulty will recur,



whenever this credit again comes to be made good by repayment.



    Upon the whole, we may conclude, that nations who owe a



balance to other nations, must pay it either with their coin, or



with their solid property; consequently, the acquisition of coin



is, in this particular, as advantageous as the acquisition of



lands; but when coin is not to be procured, the transmission of



the solid property to foreign creditors is an operation which



banks must undertake; because it is they who are obliged either



to do this, or to pay in coin.







Chap. XI







Of the Hurt resulting to Banks, when they leave the Payment of a



wrong Balance to Exchangers







    We have seen in a former chapter, how exchangers and banks



are mutually assistant to one another: the exchangers by swelling



and supporting circulation; the bank by supplying them with



credit for this purpose. While parties are united by a common



interest, all goes well: but interest divides, by the same



principle that it unites.



    No sooner does a nation incur a balance against itself, than



exchangers set themselves to work to make a fortune, by



conducting the operation of paying it. They appear then in the



light of political usurers to a spendthrift heir, who has no



guardian. This guardian should be the bank, who upon such



occasions (and upon such only) ought to interpose between the



nation and her foreign creditors. This it may do, by constituting



itself at once debtor for the whole balance, and by taking



foreign exchange into its hand, until such time as it shall have



distributed the debt it has contracted for the nation, among



those individuals who really owe it. This operation performed,



exchange may be left to those who make this branch their



business, because then they will find no opportunity of combining



either against the interest of the bank or of individuals.



    When a national bank neglects so necessary a duty, as well as



so necessary a precaution, the whole class of exchangers become



united by a common interest against it; and the country is torn



to pieces, by the fruitless attempt it makes to support itself,



without the help of the only expedient that can relieve it.



    Those exchangers having the grand balance to transact with



other nations, make use of their credits with the bank, and of



its notes, in order to draw coin from the bank, which they



export. This throws a great load upon the bank, which is



constantly obliged to provide a sufficient quantity of coin for



answering all demands; for we have laid it down as a principle,



that whatever coin or bills are necessary to pay this grand



balance, in every way it can be transacted, it must ultimately be



paid by the bank; because whoever wants coin for any purpose, and



has bank notes, can force the bank to pay them in coin, or stop



payment.



    It cannot, therefore, be said, that exchangers do wrong; nor



can they be blamed for drawing from the bank whatever is wanted



for the purpose of paying to foreigners what is their due; that



is, what is justly owing to them. If they do more, they must hurt



themselves; because whatever is sent abroad more than what is



due, must constitute the rest of the world debtors to the country



which sends out their coin. The consequence of this would be to



turn exchange against foreigners, and to make it favourable for



the nation which is creditor. In this case, were the creditors



still to continue sending coin abroad, they would lose by this



operation, for the same reason that they gain, by that of sending



it out when they are debtors.



    It is very common for banks to complain, when coin is hard to



be procured, and when large demands are made upon them; they then



allege unfair dealings against exchangers; they fall to work to



estimate the balance of trade, and endeavour to show that it is



not in reality against the country.



    But alas! this is nothing to the purpose; the balance of



trade may be very favourable, although the balance of payments be



greatly against the country; and both must be paid, while the



bank has a shilling of cash, or a note in circulation. So soon



again as the grand balance is fairly paid off, it is impossible



that any one can find an advantage in drawing coin from a bank;



except in the single case of melting down the heavy species, in



nations which give their coinage gratis. Of this we have treated



at sufficient length in another place.



    Banks may indeed complain, that men of property sometimes



send their money out of the country, at a time when it is already



drained of its coin; because this raises exchange, and hurts the



trading interest.



    Exchange must rise, no doubt, in proportion as the grand



balance is great, and difficult to be paid: But where does the



blame lie? Who ought to provide the coin, or the bills for paying



this grand balance? Have we not shewn that it is the bank alone



who ought to provide coin for the ready answering of their notes?



Have we not said, that the method of doing this is to sacrifice a



part of the interest due upon the obligations in their hands,



which are secured upon the solid property of the country, and to



appropriate this sum of interest for a fund to pay regularly the



interest of the foreign loans, which will procure either the



metals themselves, or a power to draw on those places where the



nation's creditors reside?



    Which of the two has most reason to complain, the bank,



because the inhabitants think fit to send their effects out of



the country, being either forced so to do by their creditors, or



choosing so to do for their private advantage; or the creditors



of the bank, and the country in general, when (from the



obstructions the bank throws in the way, when required to pay its



notes) exchange is forced up to an exorbitant height; the value



of what private merchants owe to strangers is raised; and when,



by discouraging trade in their hands, a stop is put to



manufactures and credit in general?



    In a word, the bank has no reason to complain, unless they



can make it appear, how any person, exchanger or other, can find



an advantage in sending coin out of the country, at a time when



there is no demand for it; or when there is no near prospect of a



demand which is the same thing? To say that a principle of public



spirit should prevent a person from doing with his property what



is most to his advantage, for the sake of saving some money to a



bank, is supposing the bank to be the public, instead of being



the servant of the public.



    Another argument to prove that no profit can be made by



sending out coin, except when the balance is against a country,



is, that we see all runs upon banks stop, the moment exchange



becomes favourable. Were there a profit to be made upon sending



off coin, independently of the debts to be paid with it, which



cannot be paid without it, the same trade would be profitable at



all times. As this is not the case, it follows, that the



principle we have laid down is just; to wit, that the balance due



to foreigners must be paid by banks, while they have a note in



circulation; and when once it is fairly paid by them, all



extraordinary demands must cease.



    We now proceed to another point, to wit, What are the



consequences to circulation, when a great balance draws away a



large quantity of coin from the bank, and sends it out of the



country?







Chap. XII







    That I may communicate my ideas with the greater precision, I



must here enter into a short detail of some principles, and then



reason on a supposition.



    It has been said, that the consequence of credit and



paper-money, secured on solid property, was to augment the mass



of the circulating equivalent, in proportion to the uses found



for it.



    These uses may be comprehended under two general heads. The



first, payment of what one owes; the second, buying what one has



occasion for: the one and the other may be called by the general



term of ready-money demands.



    Whoever has a ready-money demand upon him, and property at



the same time, ought to be furnished with money by banks which



lend upon mortgage.



    Now the state of trade, of manufactures, of modes of living,



and of the customary expence of the inhabitants, when taken



altogether, regulate and determine what we may call the mass of



ready-money demands, that is, of alienation. To operate this



multiplicity of payments, a certain proportion of money is



necessary. This proportion again may increase or diminish



according to circumstances; although the quantity of alienation



should continue the same.



    To make this evident, let us suppose the accounts of a whole



city kept by one man; alienation may go on without any payment at



all, until accounts be cleared; and then nothing will be to be



paid, except general balances upon the whole. This however is



only by the bye. The point in hand is to agree, that a certain



sum of money is necessary for carrying on domestic alienation;



that is, for satisfying ready-money demands: let us call this



quantity (A).



    Next, in most countries in Europe (I may say all), it is



customary to circulate coin, which, for many uses, is found



fitter than paper (no matter for what reason); custom has



established it, and with custom even statesmen must comply.



    The paper-money is generally made payable in coin; from



custom also. Now, according to the manners of the country, more



or less coin will be required for domestic circulation. Let it be



observed, that hitherto we have not attended to foreign



circulation, of which presently: and I say, that the manners of a



country may make more or less coin necessary, for circulating the



same quantity of paper; merchants, for instance, circulate much



paper and little coin; gamesters circulate much coin and little



paper: one example is sufficient.



    Let this quantity of coin, necessary for circulating the



paper-money, be called (B), and let the paper-money be called



(C); consequently (A) will be equal to the sum of (B) and (C).



Again, we have said, that all balances owing by nation to nation,



must be paid either in coin, or in the metals, or in bills; and



that bank paper can be of no use in such payments. Let the



quantity of the metals, coin, or bills, going out or coming into



the country for payment of such balance, be called (D).



    These short designations premised, we may reason with more



precision. (A) is the total mass of money (coin and paper)



necessary at home: (A) is composed of (B) the coin, and of (C)



the paper-money, and (D) stands for that mass of coin, or metal,



or bills, which goes and comes according as the grand balance is



favourable or unfavourable with other nations.



    Now, from what has been said, we may determine that there



should at all times remain in the country, or in the bank, a



quantity of coin equal to (B); and if this be ever found to fall



short, the bank does not discharge its. duty It is unnecessary to



determine what part of (B) should be locked up in the bank, and



what part should remain in circulation: banks themselves cannot



determine this question: all we need to say is, that it is the



profit of banks to accustom people to the use of paper-money as



much as possible; and therefore they will draw to themselves as



much coin as they can.



    When a favourable balance of trade brings the price of



exchange below par, and brings coin into the country, the



consequence is, either to animate trade and industry, to augment



the mass of payments, to swell (A), and still to preserve (C) in



circulation; or else to make (A) regorge, so as to sink the



interest of money below the bank lending price: in this case



people will carry back the regorging part of (C) to the bank, and



withdraw their securities; which is consolidating, as we have



called it, the property which had been formerly melted down, for



want of this circulating equivalent (money).



    This is constantly the consequence of a stagnation of paper,



from an overcharge of it, thrown into circulation. It returns



upon the bank, and diminishes the mass of their securities, but



never the mass of their coin.



    From this we may conclude, that the circulation of a country



can only absorb a determinate quantity of money (coin and paper);



and that the less use they make of coin, the more use they will



make of paper, and vice versa.



    We may also conclude, that when trade and alienation



increase, caeteris paribus, so will money; that is, more solid



property will be melted down; and when trade and alienation



diminish, caeteris paribus, so will money; that is, some of the



solid property formerly melted down, will consolidate, as we have



called it.



    These vicissitudes in the mass of circulation are not



peculiar to paper currency. In countries where nothing circulates



but the metals, the case is the same; the operation only is more



awkward and expensive. When coin becomes scarce, it is hardly



possible, in remote provinces, to find any credit at all; and in



the centre of circulation, the use of it (interest) must rise



very considerably, and must stand high for some time, before even



intelligent merchants will import bullion to the mint; which is



the only bank they have to fit it for circulation. When the metal



is coined, then men of property are enabled to borrow, or to sell



their lands. On the other hand, when a favourable balance pours



in a superfluity of coin, which at the same time cuts off the



demands of trade for sending it abroad, it frequently falls into



coffers; where it becomes as useless as if it were in the mine;



and this clumsy circulation, as I may call it, prevents coin from



coming into the hands of those who would have occasion for it,



did they but know where to come at it. Paper-money, on the other



hand, when banks and trade are well established, is always to be



found. Thus, in an instant, paper-money either creates or



extinguishes an interest equal to its value, in favour of the



possessor. No part of it lies dead, not for a day, when employed



in trade: it is not so of coin.



    Let us now suppose a bank established in a country which owes



a balance to other nations.



    In this case, the bank must possess, or be able to command, a



sum of coin or bills equal to (B) and (D); (B) for domestic, and



(D) for foreign circulation.



    Those who owe this balance (D), and who are supposed to have



value for it, in the currency of the country, must, in order to



pay it, either exhaust a part of (B), by sending it away, or they



must carry part of (C) to the bank, to be paid for in coin. If



they pick up a part of (B) in the country, then the coin in



circulation, being diminished below its proportion, the



possessors of (C) will come upon the bank for a supply, in order



to make up (B) to its former standard. Banks complain without



reason. If they carry part of (C) to be changed at the bank, for



the payment of (D), they thereby diminish the quantity of (C);



consequently there will be a demand upon the bank for more notes,



to support domestic circulation; because those notes which have



been paid in coin by the bank are returned to the bank, and have



diminished the mass of (C); which therefore must be replaced by a



new melting down of solid property.



    Now I must here observe, that this recruit of notes, supposed



to be issued by the bank, in order to fill up (C) to the level,



really implies an addition made to the mass of securities



formerly lodged with the bank: and represents, not improperly,



that part of the landed property of a country which the bank must



dispose of to foreigners, in order to procure from them the coin



or bills necessary for answering the demand of (D).



    When notes, therefore, are carried to the bank for payment of



debts due to the bank, they then diminish the mass of solid



property melted down in the securities lodged in the bank: but



when notes are carried to the bank, to be converted into coin or



bills, for foreign exportation, they do not diminish the mass of



the securities: on the contrary, the consequence is, to pave the



way for the augmentation of them; because I suppose that these



notes, so given in to the bank, and taken out of the circle, are



to be replaced by the bank, to domestic circulation, to which



they belonged; and the bank must be at the expence of turning



into coin or foreign bills, the value of these additional



securities granted for this new recruit of notes.



    Is not this quite consistent with reason, fact, and common



sense? If a country contract debts to foreigners, are not the



consequences just the same as when one man contracts a debt to



another in the same society? Must not the ultimate consequence of



such debts be, that they must be paid, either with the coin, with



the moveables, or with the solid property of the debtor,



transferred to the creditor, in lieu of the money owing?



    When a nation can pay with its coin, or with its effects



(that is to say, with its product and manufactures), the



operation is easily and mechanically performed by the means of



trade: when these objects are it, not sufficient; then land, or



an annual and perpetual income out of must make up the



deficiency; in which case more skill and expence is required; and



this expence falling upon banks, makes their trade less lucrative



than in times when commerce stands at par, or is bringing in a



balance.



    Were trade to run constantly against a country, the



consequence would be, that the whole property of it would, by



degrees, be transferred to foreigners. But in this case, banks



never could neglect laying down a plan whereby to avoid a



constant loss similar to what they casually sustain, when such a



revolution comes suddenly or unexpectedly upon them.



    The method would be, to establish an annual subscription



abroad, for borrowing a sum equivalent to the grand balance; the



condition being to pay the interest of the subscriptions out of



the revenue of the country.



    If the security offered be good, there is no fear but



subscribers will be found, while there is an ounce of gold and



silver in Europe.



    The bank of England has an expedient of another nature, in



what they call their bank circulation; which is a premium granted



to certain persons, upon an obligation to pay a certain sum of



coin upon demand. This is done with a view to answer upon



pressing occasions. But England being a prosperous trading



nation, which seldom has any considerable grand balance against



her (except in time of war, when the public borrowings supply in



a great measure the deficiency, as shall be afterwards



explained), this bank circulation is turned into a job; the



subscriptions being lucrative, are distributed among the



proprietors themselves, who make no provision for the demand; and



were the demand again to come upon them (as has been the case)



the subscribers would, as formerly, make a call on the bank



itself, by picking up their notes, and pay their subscriptions



with the bank's own coin.



    To obviate this inconvenience, which was severely felt in the



year 1745, the bank of England should have opened a subscription



for a perpetual loan in some foreign country; Holland, for



example; where she might have procured large quantities of



foreign coin: such a seasonable supply would have proved a real



augmentation of the metals; the supply they got from their own



domestic subscribers was only fictitious.(3*)



    But banks in prosperous trading nations sit down with casual



and temporary inconveniences; and exchangers carry on a



profitable trade, whether the nation be gaining or losing all the



while. For such nations, and such only, are banks advantageous.



Were banks established in Spain, Portugal, or any other country



which pays a constant balance from the produce of their mines,



they would only help on their ruin a little faster.



    In the infancy of banking, and in countries where the true



principles of the trade are not well understood, we find banks



taking a general alarm, whenever a wrong balance of trade



occasions a run upon them. This terror drives them to expedients



for supporting their credit, which we are now to examine, and



which we shall find to have a quite contrary tendency.



    The better to explain this combination, we must recall to



mind, that the payment of the grand balance in coin or bills is



unavoidable to banks. We have said that this balance is commonly



paid by exchangers, who pick up the coin in circulation; a thing



the bank cannot prevent. This we have called exhausting a part of



(B). the consequence of this is, to make the proprietors of (C)



come upon the bank, and demand coin for filling up (B): to this



the bank must also agree. But by these operations (C) comes to be



diminished, below the level necessary for carrying on trade,



industry, and alienation: upon which I have said there commonly



comes an application to the bank to give more credit, in order to



support domestic circulation, which if complied with, more solid



property is consequently melted down.



    This swells the mass of securities, and raises (A) to its



former level. But here the bank has a choice, and may refuse to



grant more credit: in the former operations it had none. Now if



the bank, from a terror of being drained of coin, should refuse



to issue notes upon new credits, for the demands of domestic



circulation; in this case, I say, they fail in their duty to the



nation, as banks, and hurt their own interest. As to their duty



to the nation, I shall not insist upon it; but I think I can



demonstrate that they fail in their manner of reasoning, with



respect to their own interest, and that is enough.



    I say, then, that as long as there is one single note in



circulation, and any part of a grand balance owing, this note



will come upon the bank for payment, without a possibility of its



avoiding the demand. Refusing therefore credit, while any notes



remain in the hands of the public, is refusing an interest which



may help to make up the past losses: but of this more hereafter.



    In the next place, I think I have demonstrated, that as soon



as the grand balance is paid, it is impossible that any more



demands for coin can come upon the bank for exportation. Why then



should a bank do so signal a prejudice to their country, as to



refuse to lend them paper, which the ready-money demands of the



country must keep in circulation? And why do this at so great a



loss to themselves? It has been said above, and I think with



justice, that this recruit, issued to fill up circulation, adds



to the mass of bank securities, and very properly represents that



part of the income of the solid property of the country, which



the bank must dispose of to foreigners, in order to procure from



them the coin or bills necessary for answering the demand for



payment of a grand balance.



    In this light nothing can appear more imprudent, than to



refuse credit.



    A bank is forced to pay to the last farthing of this balance;



by paying it, the notes that were necessary for domestic



circulation are returned to them; and they refuse to replace



them, for fear that their supplying circulation should create a



new balance against them! This is voluntarily taking on



themselves all the loss of banking, and rejecting the advantages



of it.



    Such management may be prudent when the circulating notes of



a bank are very few, and when the balance is very great. In this



case, indeed, were the thing possible, it might be prudent to



give over banking for a while, till matters took a favourable



turn. But if we suppose their circulating notes to exceed the



balance due, then all the hurt which can be done is done already;



and the more notes that are issued, and the more credit that is



given, must be so much the better for the bank; because the



interest due upon all that are issued above the balance, must be



clear profit to the bank.



    To bring what has been said within a narrower compass, and to



lay it under our eye at once, let us call the sum of money



necessary for carrying on the domestic circulation of a country,



where a bank is established, (A).



    The specie itself, to carry it on, (B).



    The balances to other nations, (D).



    The bank must be able to command coin and credit equal to the



sum of (B) and (D). If they have in credit the value of (D) in



any foreign place, where a general circulation of exchange is



carried on, then they have occasion only for (B) at home, and can



furnish bills to the amount of (D).



    But in furnishing bills to the amount of (D), those who



receive the bills from the bank, must pay to the bank the value



of these bills in bank notes; and the notes with which they pay



for the bills, must be taken out of (A), which (A) we suppose to



be necessary for carrying on domestic circulation. This



diminution upon the value of (A), will occasion a new demand for



notes in order to carry (A) to its former extent; and the bank at



issuing the notes demanded, will receive new securities from



those who demand them. Farther, the interest paid upon these new



securities, will answer for the payment of the interest of the



money owing to foreigners, in consequence of the bills drawn upon



them to the order of those who bought the bills from the bank for



the payment of (D).



    This transaction concluded, the consequence will be: that (A)



will be made up to the complete sum necessary for domestic



circulation; and that the interest of the money borrowed from



foreigners, in order to acquit the balance (D), will be paid out



of the interest paid upon the new securities.



    As soon as (D) is thus completely paid off, were coin drawn



from the bank, and sent away by private people, (exchangers,



etc.) it would, form a balance due to the country; which balance



would render exchange favourable, and would occasion a loss to



those who sent away the coin. During this period, the more credit



the bank gives, so much more will its profits increase, and no



demand can be made upon it for coin.



    To conclude: Let banks never complain of those who demand



coin of them, except in the case when it is demanded in order to



be melted down, or for domestic circulation, which may as well be



carried on with paper.



    And so soon as a demand for coin to pay a foreign balance



begins, it is then both the duty and interest of all good



citizens to be as assistant as possible to banks, by contenting



themselves with paper for their own occasions, and by throwing



into the bank all the coin which casually falls into their hands.



As for duty, I shall offer no argument to enforce it. But I say



it becomes a national concern to assist the bank; because the



loss incurred by the bank in procuring coin, falls ultimately on



every individual, by raising exchange; by raising prices; by



raising the interest of money to be borrowed; and, last of all,



by constituting a perpetual interest to be paid to foreigners,



out of the revenue of the solid property of the country. Upon



such occasions, a good citizen ought to blush at pulling out a



purse, when his own interest, and that of his country, should



make him satisfied with a pocket book.







Chap. XIII







Continuation of the Same Subject; and of the Principles upon



which Banks ought to borrow Abroad, and give credit at Home.







    In every question relative to this subject, we must return to



principles. This is the only sure method of avoiding error. The



more intelligent reader, therefore, must excuse short



repetitions, and consider them as a sacrifice he is making to



those of slower capacities, to whom they are useful.



    The principle of banking upon mortgage, is to lend paper



money, and to give credit to those who have property, and a



desire to melt it down. This is calculated for the benefit of



trade, and for an encouragement to industry. If such banks,



therefore, borrow, it must be done consistently with the



principles upon which their banking is founded. If the borrowing



should tend to destroy those advantages which their lending had



procured, then the operation is contrary to principles, and



abusive. So much for recapitulation.



    While trade flourishes and brings in a balance, banks never



have occasion to borrow; it is then they lend and give credit.



This, I believe, we may take for granted.



    When the country where the bank is established begins to owe



a balance to other nations, the bank, as we have seen in the last



chapter, is obliged to pay it off in coin or in bills. We have



there shewn, that in such cases it is inconsistent with their



principles and interest, to withhold lending and giving credit,



as far as is necessary for keeping up the fund of domestic



circulation to that standard which alienation and ready-money



demands require.



    To refuse credit, and at the same time to borrow at home,



must then, at first sight, appear to be doubly inconsistent. But



in order to set this point in the clearest light I am capable, I



shall reason upon a supposition analogous to the situation of the



Scotch banks, and by this means avoid abstract reasoning as much



as I can.



    Let me then suppose that Scotland, during the last years of



the war, ended in 1763, and ever since (I write in 1764), from



the unavoidable distress of the times, was obliged, first, to



import considerable quantities of grain in some bad years;



secondly, to refund the English loans of money settled there in



former times; thirdly, to furnish some of the inhabitants with



funds, which they thought fit to place in England; fourthly, to



pay the amount of additional taxes imposed during the war; while,



at the same time, several of the ordinary resources were



withdrawn; such as, first, a great part of the industrious



inhabitants who went to supply the fleets and armies; secondly,



the absence of the ordinary contingent of troops; and thirdly,



the cutting off of several beneficial articles of commerce. Let



me suppose, I say, that from the total of these losses incurred,



and advantages suspended, Scotland has lost annually, for eight



years past, two hundred thousand pounds. I am no competent judge



of the exactness of this estimate, it is of no consequence to the



argument; but I think I have carried it, as I wish to do, rather



beyond the truth.



    On the other hand, let me suppose that the sum of currency in



paper, sufficient (with the little coin there was) to circulate



the whole of the alienations in Scotland (that is to say, the



whole domestic circulation, supposing no balance to be owing to



England or other countries) to be one million sterling. I am



persuaded I am here below the true estimate, but no matter.



    Is it not evident, from this supposition, and from the



principles we have been deducing, that unless the banks of



Scotland had borrowed every year 200,000 l. sterling, and



alienated annually in favour of England, a fund for paying the



interest of two hundred thousand pounds capital; the million of



Scots currency would have been diminished in proportion to the



deficiency: and would not the consequence of this be, caeteris



paribus, to bring the currency below the demand for it; and,



consequently, to hurt trade, industry, and alienation?



    Now supposing the banks, instead of borrowing in England a



fund equal to this grand balance (as I have said they should do),



to remain in consternation and inactivity, giving the whole of



their attention to the providing of coin and bills to supply the



demand of exchangers, whose business it is to send out this



annual balance; what would the consequence be?



    I answer, that if the banks, in such a case, do not follow



the plan I have proposed, the consequence will be, that two



hundred thousand pounds of their paper will be, the first year,



taken out of the domestic circulation of Scotland; will be



carried to the bank, and coin demanded for it. If the coin is



found in the bank, it is well: it goes away, and leaves the paper



circulation of Scotland at 800,000 l. This void must occasion



applications to the bank for credits to supply it. Is it not then



the interest of the bank to supply it? We have said in the former



chapters that it is. But now let us suppose it to be objected,



that if banks should issue notes at such a time, their cash



having been exhausted, they would be obliged to stop altogether,



upon a return of those notes issued upon additional credits.



    To this I repeat again, because of the importance of the



subject, that notes issued to support the demand of circulation



never can return upon the bank, so as to form a demand for coin;



and if they do return, it must be in order to extinguish the



securities granted by those who have credit in banks (I except



always that regular demand for coin, at all times necessary for



circulating the paper for domestic uses); and if those notes



return of themselves, without being called in, this phaenomenon



would be a proof that circulation is diminishing of itself: but



supposing such a case to happen, it is plain that such return can



produce no call for coin; because when the notes return it is not



for coin, but for acquitting an obligation or mortgage, as has



been often repeated.



    Notes are paid in, I say, because circulation has thrown them



out. Now if circulation has thrown them out as superfluous, it



never can have occasion for coin in their stead; because coin



answers the same purpose.



    But then it is urged that they do not return, because



circulation has thrown them out, but because coin is wanted: be



it so. Then we must say, that circulation is not diminished, as



we at first supposed; but that the return of another year's



balance, makes a new demand for coin necessary.



     Now I ask, how the withholding of this 200,000 l. from



circulation, after the first year's drain, can prevent the



balance from returning? There are by the supposition still



800,000 l. of notes in the country; will not exchangers get hold



of two hundred thousand out of this fund, as well as out of the



million? For he who owes, must pay, that is, must circulate. It



is the circulation of the industrious only, and of the rich; in



short, it is buying, that is to say, voluntary circulation, which



is stopped for want of currency: paying, that is, involuntary



circulation, never can be stopped; debtors must find money, as



long as there is any in the country, were they to give an acre



for a shilling, or a house for half a crown. Now those who owe



this foreign balance are debtors; consequently, they must draw



200,000 l. out of circulation, the second year as well as the



first, whether the standard million be filled up or not. The



withholding, therefore, the credits demanded upon the first



diminution, has not the least effect in preventing the demand for



coin the year following: it only distresses the country, raising



exchange, and the interest of money, by rendering money scarce;



and, what is the most absurd of all, it deprives the bank of



10,000 l. a year interest, at 5 per cent upon 200,000 l. which it



may issue anew.



    Suppose again, that a second year's demand for a balance of



200,000 l. comes upon the bank: if the coin is out, as we may



suppose that after the first year's drain it will not be in great



plenty, expedients must be fallen upon. In such a case, if the



bank do not at once fairly borrow at London (without any



obligation to repay the capital) a sum of 200,000 l. and pay for



it a regular interest, according to the rate of money, as



government does, half yearly, on the change of London, it will be



involved in expedients which will create a monstrous circulation



of coin in the bank, perhaps double of the sum required, and all



these operations will end (as to the bank) in paying this sum out



of the mass of its securities or stock. If the bank should borrow



this 200,000 l. in London, in the manner we have said, the



circulating fund of coin will be noise diminished; there will be



no call extra-ordinary for coin, no rising of exchange; the bank



will have this in its hands; and if it rise, it will be the bank,



not the exchangers who will profit by it.



    But let us suppose that instead of this, it should have



recourse to temporary credits upon which the capital is



constantly demandable, or to other expedients still less



effectual for answering the call which is to come upon it for the



second year's balance; what will be the consequence? To this I



answer, that those merchants, or others who owe the balance, will



apply to exchangers for bills, for which they must pay a high



exchange: these bills will be bought from the exchangers with



notes (taken out of circulation), and will reduce this to 600,000



l. the exchangers ill carry these to the bank and demand coin. If



the bank should make use of an optional clause, to pay in six



months, with interest at 5 per cent the exchangers ill obtain six



months' credit at London, and in consequence of this, their bills



will be honoured and paid. This credit, however, costs them



money, which is added to the exchange: the bank, at the end of



six months, must pay 200,000 l. sterling in coin, which in the



interval it must provide from London. It must pay also six



months, interest upon the paper formerly presented by the



exchanger: add to the account, that bringing down the coin must



cost the bank at least 12 shillings per hundred pounds, and as



much more to the exchanger who receives it in order to send it



back again; and after all these intricate operations which have



cost so much trouble, ill blood, stagnation and diminution of



circulation, expence in exchange to the debtors of the balance,



stress of credit upon exchangers for procuring so large advances



with commission, etc. expence to the bank in providing coin,



expence to the exchangers in returning it: after all, I say, the



operation ends in this; that 200,000 l. of notes, taken out of



the circulation of Scotland returns to the bank, who must have



provided at last, either coin, or credit at London for them. This



return of 200,000 l. of notes does not diminish the mass of those



obligations lodged in the bank, in virtue of which they are



creditors upon the proprietors of Scotland: consequently the bank



has constituted itself debtor to England for those funds which



have been torn from it in the manner above described:



consequently, had it, by a permanent loan, constituted itself



voluntarily debtor to England from the beginning, it would have



paid no more, nay less than it has been obliged to pay;



circulation would not have lost 200,000 l. and the bank would



have had the interest of 200,000 l. added to its former



securities, which would compensate (pro tanto at least) the



expence of borrowing this sum in England upon a permanent fund.



Instead of which it compensates the interest taken out interest



of a temporary loan, with the same sum of of the securities in



its hand. If, therefore, from an ill-grounded fear of issuing as



much paper as is demanded, it shall withhold it, there will



result to itself a loss equal to the interest of what it refuses



to lend; that is to say, there will be a lucrum cessans to the



bank of the interest of this 200,000 l. at 5 per cent or 10,000



l. a year; which other banking companies will fill up, and



thereby extend their circulation.



    If, besides refusing credits, it should call in any part of



those credits already given, it will still more diminish



circulation: but then by this operation it will diminish the mass



of its securities, and so diminish the sum of the interest



annually paid to itself. If it go farther and borrow money at



home, such loans will be made in its own paper, which will



diminish farther the mass of circulation; and if it go on



recalling its credits and mortgages, it will soon draw every bit



of its paper out of circulation, and remain creditor upon



Scotland for the balance only it has paid to England on her



account. Such are the consequences, when a bank which lends upon



private security withholds credit, at a time when a national



balance is due, and when applications are made to it for new



credits, to fill up the void of circulation occasioned by the



operations used for the payment of the balance: such also are the



additional fatal consequences, when to this it adds so



inconsistent an operation as that of borrowing its own notes, or



recalling the credits it had formerly given.



    By the first step, namely, by refusing credit, it appears



passive only in allowing natural causes to destroy both the bank



and the nation, as I think has been proved.



    By the second, namely, by borrowing its own notes, it is



active in destroying both itself and the country.



    What benefit can ever a bank which lends upon private



security reap by borrowing within the country of which it is the



centre of circulation; nay, what benefit can it ever reap from



withholding its notes from those who can give good security for



them!



    Every penny it borrows, or calls in, circumscribes its own



profits, while it distresses the country. After considering all



circumstances, I can discover but one motive which (through a



false light) may engage a bank to this step, to wit, jealousy of



other banks.



    As this speculation is designed to illustrate the principles



of circulation, from circumstances relative to the present state



of the Scotch banks, let us call things by their names.



    The banks of Edinburgh resemble, more than any other in



Scotland, a national bank. Let me then suppose all that can be



supposed, viz. that the abundance of their paper has given



occasion to smaller banks to pick up from them every shilling of



coin which these smaller banks have ever had; and that these have



had the address also to throw the whole load of the balance upon



those of Edinburgh: let this be supposed, more cannot, and let us



allow farther, that this must ever continue to be the case. In



these circumstances, what motive can the banks of Edinburgh have



for withholding credit from those who are able to give security?



What motive can they have for borrowing their own notes?



    Indeed I can account for this plan of management in no other



way than by supposing, that, disgusted at the long continuance of



an unfavourable balance of trade against their country, and vexed



to find the whole load of it thrown upon themselves, they have



taken the resolution to abandon the trade, and are taking this



method to recall their paper altogether.



    Let me suppose the contrary, and I shall not be able to



discover how it is possible that such a conduct can turn to their



own advantage, throwing out all consideration for the public



good, which for some time, no doubt, must be greatly hurt by it.



    As long as any considerable quantity of their notes is in



circulation, and while the principal exchangers reside at



Edinburgh, they never can avoid the loss of paying the balance;



consequently, by refusing to fill up the void occasioned by the



return of their notes, they deliver the whole profit of replacing



them to the other banks, their rivals.



    Let me next estimate the loss they sustain by furnishing coin



to the other banks for the payment of the balance; and then



compare this with what they lose by not keeping circulation full.



    I shall suppose the balance to cost them two hundred thousand



pounds per annum; and I shall suppose that all the smaller banks



put together have occasion for two hundred thousand pounds in



their chests: Is not this computation far above what can possibly



be supposed?



    Will it be allowed that if the banks of Edinburgh willingly



submit to pay the whole of the bills of exchange demanded on



London, for this balance, they will have at least the preference



in replacing this sum to circulation?



    If they pay the balance of 200,000 l. a like sum of their



notes must come in to them, without diminishing one shilling of



the interest paid upon the securities lodged in their banks;



consequently, the only loss incurred is the difference between



the interest they receive, which is 5 per cent and what it would



cost them to borrow a like sum in London, and to remit the



interest of this sum twice a year.



    Now the value of a 4 per cent is at present about 96; so in



paying 40 s. half yearly on the change of London, the Edinburgh



banks may have at London a capital of 96 l. Let me call it only



94 l. supposing their credit not to be quite so good as that of



the funds. I think it as good to the full; and I am sure it is



so. At this rate, the 200,000 l. will cost them an interest of



8510 l. instead of the 10,000 l. which they will receive for the



like sum added to their former securities. Now let me suppose



that they shall have recourse to exchangers to remit this



interest, and that they shall pay for it 5 per cent (which is an



absurd supposition, as they will have the exchange entirely in



their own hands) and that they give all the bills for the 200,000



l. at par (also a ridiculous supposition); the 5 per cent on 8510



l. is 425 l. 10 s. which added to the interest, makes 8935 l. 10



s. so that after all, they will have upon the whole transaction



1064 l. 10 s. of profit.



    Next, as to the loss incurred in furnishing 200,000 l. to the



other banks: If this coin be demanded of them by those banks, the



demanders must, for this purpose, draw 200,000 l. of Edinburgh



notes out of the circulation of Scotland; which I have supposed



may be replaced in some little time by the Edinburgh-banks;



consequently, if this sum also be borrowed at London, there will



result upon this operation, as well as upon the last, a profit of



1064 l. 10 s. But then indeed they must be at the expence of



bringing down the coin borrowed, at 12 s. per 100 l. because



those banks will insist upon having coin, and refuse bills on



London. This will cost 1200 l. from which deduct the profit of



1064 l. 10 s. gained by the first operation, remains of loss upon



this last transaction 135 l. 10 s. no great sum.(4*) Does it not



follow from this reasoning, that the banks of Edinburgh will have



the whole business of exchange in their own hands? What exchanger



then will enter into competition with them? The domestic



transactions with the merchants and manufacturers of Scotland



will be their only business. Farther:



    What prevents the banks of Edinburgh to have offices in every



trading town in Scotland, where their notes may be regularly paid



on presentation, and new credits given as circulation demands



them?



    The only objection I can find to this plan of banking, is the



difficulty of finding credit at London to borrow such large sums.



    This, I think, may also be removed, from the plain principles



of credit. If the banks of Edinburgh enter into a fair coalition,



as they ought to do, I think, in order to form really a national



bank, totally independent of that of England; may they not open a



subscription at London, and establish a regular fund of their



own, as well as any other company, such as the India, or South



Sea? By borrowing in the beginning at a small advance of interest



above the funds, and paying as regularly as government does, will



not all those who make a trade of buying and selling stock fill



their loan, rather than invest it in any other carrying a less



interest? And if the whole land securities, and stocks of those



banks at Edinburgh be pledged for this loan, will it not stand on



as good a bottom as any fund upon earth? And can it be doubted



but parliament will encourage such a scheme, upon laying the



affairs of Scotland and the banks properly before them?



    By this means they will really become a national bank:



because England seems at present to be to Scotland, what all the



rest of the world is to England. Now, the bank of England has no



such fund of credit on the continent, that I know; and were that



country to fall into as great distress, by a heavy balance, as



Scotland has, she would find as many difficulties in extricating



herself by domestic borrowings, bank circulation, etc. as



Scotland has found by the like domestic expedients. She would



then be obliged, for her relief, to have recourse to a fund



opened in Holland, Spain, or Portugal, like to what I propose for



Scotland with respect to England.



    I have heard it alleged, that the whole distress occasioned



to the banks and circulation of Scotland, was occasioned by a



false step taken by them, some years ago; at the time when the



lowness of the English funds, and a prospect of a peace,



occasioned great remittances from Scotland, and a withdrawing of



the large capital of, perhaps, 500,000 l. owing in Scotland to



English persons of property.



    At that time, it is said, the banks imprudently launched out



in giving extensive credits to the debtors of those capitals, and



to those who wanted to remit the funds they had secured in the



hands of people who could not pay them; that this threw a load of



paper into circulation, which it could not vent, being far beyond



the extent of it; and that, consequently, the paper came back



upon the bank, produced a demand for coin, which soon exhausted,



in a manner, all that was in Scotland; and that the country has



never been able to recover itself since.



    This representation is plausible, and has an air of being



founded on principles: in order therefore to serve as a further



illustration of the subject of circulation, I shall point out



where the fallacy of it lies.



    It is said the banks did wrong in giving those credits. I



say, they did right; but they did wrong in not providing against



the consequences.



    Had they refused the credits, the English and other creditors



would have fallen directly upon their debtors, and obliged them



to pay, by a sale of their lands, at an under value; which, I



think, would have been an infinite loss to Scotland. In this way



the price would have been paid in bank paper, taken out of



circulation; for we have said, that he who owes must pay, be the



consequence what it will. This paper would have come upon the



banks at any rate: and being a balance due to strangers, must



have been paid by the banks. The banks therefore did right to



supply the credits demanded; but then they might have foreseen



that the whole load of paying those debts would fall upon them;



which they being in no capacity to do, should have immediately



pledged in England, the interest of the credits they had given



out, after supplying the want of Scots circulation, and when the



notes came in, they would have had at London the capital of that



interest prepared for paying them off, and no inconvenience would



have been found.



    The only thing then the banks seem to have misjudged, was the



granting those credits too hastily, and to people who perhaps



would not have invested their funds in England, had it not been



from their facility in giving credit.



    Banks therefore should well examine the state of circulation,



and of the grand balance, in difficult times, before they give



credit. If circulation be full, they may, with justice, suspect



that the credits are demanded with a view of expediency, to



transport property out of the country, which otherwise may



remain. But in favour of circulation, or in favour of what may be



exacted by foreign creditors, banks never can misjudge it in



giving credit; because, if they should refuse to do it, they in



the first place incur a loss themselves; and in the second place,



they diminish the fund of circulation, and thereby hurt the



country. Now when, at such times, a credit is asked or given,



that demand is a warning to banks to prepare; and by preparing



they are ready, and nO loss is incurred.



    Upon the whole, it is an unspeakable advantage to a nation to



have her foreign debts paid by her bank, rather than to remain



exposed to the demands of private foreign creditors; because,



when a bank pays them, I suppose her to do it upon a loan in the



funding way, where the capital is not demandable by the creditor;



whereas when private citizens are debtors to strangers, the



capitals are always demandable; and when a call comes suddenly



and unexpectedly, the country is distressed. What would become of



Great Britain, were all her debts to strangers demandable at any



time? It is the individuals who owe, in effect, all that is due



to foreigners; because they pay the interest: but they pay this



interest to the public; and the public appears as the debtor to



all strangers, who have no right to exact the capital, although



the state may set itself free by making payment of it whenever it



is convenient.



    I have said above, that after all my reasonings, I could



discover but one motive to induce a bank to withhold credit at a



time when it was demanded for the use of domestic circulation,



viz. jealousy of other banks. What my combinations could not then



discover, my inquiries have since unfolded.



    It is said, that the banks finding so great a propensity in



the inhabitants of Scotland to consume foreign manufactures and



produce, fell upon this expedient for calling in the old, and for



refusing new credits, in order to cut off such branches of



hurtful luxury and expence.



    Could the execution of such a plan prove a remedy against the



vice complained of, this circumstance alone would more clearly



demonstrate the utility of banks upon mortgage, than all I have



been able to say in favour of this establishment.



    Let us therefore have recourse to our principles, in order to



discover what influence a bank can have in this particular.



    We have distinguished between necessary and voluntary



circulation: the necessary has the payment of debts; the



voluntary has buying for its object.



    We have said that he who owes is either a bankrupt, or must



pay, as long as there is a shilling in the country.



    But he who buys, or inclines to buy, must have money, or he



can buy nothing; for if he buys on credit, he then falls



immediately into the former category, and must pay.



    By withholding money for the uses of circulation, which banks



may do for some time, buying may be stopped; paying never can.



    Now if the mass of money in circulation be brought so low, as



that the higher classes of the people, who consume foreign



productions, cannot find money to buy with, what are we to



suppose will be the case with manufacturers, and with the



merchants who buy up their work? Could this operation of the bank



affect the higher classes only, by curbing their anti-patriot



expences, without affecting the lower classes, by curbing their



industry, I should think it an admirable discovery. If it even



could be made to affect those merchants and shopkeepers only, who



deal in foreign commodities, so as to discourage them from



carrying on that business, there would result from it a notable



advantage.



    But alas! wherein are they hurt? They trade in such



commodities, not because they are bad citizens, but because they



are freemen, and seek for profit wherever the laws permit.



    Perhaps, they find more difficulty than other people in



forcing coin from the bank, as matters stand: perhaps, they are



loaded with opprobrious appellations for extorting such payments



from the bank: perhaps, their credits with the bank are recalled.



But must not those who buy from them, pay them? And must not the



bank give coin, or bills, for the notes they receive, when



presented for payment? Why, therefore, throw difficulties in the.



way? All the world knows, that no human engine can prevent a



merchant from laying all the expences of his trade upon the



consumer. Correct the taste of the consumers, and you may stop



the trade: no other restraint will be of any consequence. But in



order to correct the taste of consumers, do not deprive them



absolutely of money; because the money the extravagant landlord



receives, comes from the industrious farmer, for the price of his



grain, etc. Would it be a good scheme for preventing soldiers



from drinking brandy, to cut off their subsistence-money? Give a



drunkard but a penny a day, it will go for liquor; and those who



are fond of foreign clothing, will take the price of it from



their bellies, to put it on their backs.



    If this scheme of the bank's withholding credit, prove, at



present, any check to those dealers in English goods, it will be



but for a very short time. They have been taken by surprize; and



perhaps, thrown into inconveniences from an unexpected change of



bank management; but as long as there is a demand for such



commodities, there will be a supply of them; and when people owe,



they must pay. No operation of a bank can prevent this.



    I must, therefore, according to principles, disapprove of



this public-spirited attempt in the banks of Edinburgh; because,



if it should succeed, it will have the effect of ruining all the



trade and industry of Scotland, in order to prevent the sale of



English goods: and if it does not succeed, which is more than



probable, from the assiduity of other banks in supplying credit,



it will have the effect of ruining the banks of Edinburgh



themselves.



    This step, of calling in the bank credits, and opening a



subscription for a loan, is represented by others in a light



somewhat different.



    By these it is alleged, that in the beginning of the year



1762, when the Edinburgh banks withdrew 1/4 of all their cash



accompts, and opened a subscription for borrowing their own



notes, at an interest of 4, and even 5 per cent the demand for



money, to send to England, was not occasioned by the great



balance owing by Scotland, but to the high premium money then



bore at London; because says the author of a letter to J...



F...... Esq; published at that time,



    'This demand arises from a profit on carrying money to



London, as a commodity, and not as a balance of trade.'



    It is not easy to comprehend how there could be much profit



in carrying money to London at 3 per cent loss by exchange, from



Scotland, where it bore 5 per cent interest.



    It is true, that at certain times, there were considerable



profits made upon stock-jobbing; by which some won, and others



were ruined. I agree, that the country was greatly hurt by the



folly of those who played away their own property, and by the



roguery of others, who borrowed that of their neighbours, with an



intention of gaming at their risk. But is this a vice which any



bank can correct, while it has a note in circulation?



    Had it therefore been a sentiment of patriotism which moved



the banks to such a plan of conduct, I say they thereby did more



hurt to industry, by contracting circulation, than good to



Scotland, by attempting a thing which was beyond their power to



accomplish.



    If they were moved to it by a principle of self-preservation,



I say they lost their aim, by cutting off their own profits,



which would have done much more than indemnify them for the loss



of borrowing at London, at the time when money there was hardest



to be got: for whatever exorbitant expence of exchange gamesters



may incur, to procure ready money to play with, the rate of the



stocks at that time never was so low, as to afford a profit upon



money remitted at 3 per cent loss by exchange, while that money



was bearing 5 per cent interest at home.



    The lowest rate of stocks was in January 1762. Towards the



end of that month 3 per cents fell to 63 1/4: this makes the



value of money to be about 4 l. 12 s. per cent. In these funds,



certainly, no body could invest, with profit, money sent from



Scotland.



    After the new subscription had been open for some time, scrip



indeed, or 4 per cent fell in this month so low as 74 1/2, that



is, money rose to 5.4 per cent whereas had scrip stood at the



proportion of the 3 per cents it should have been worth about 84:



but at the beginning of a war with Spain, when the minds of men



were depressed, and filled with apprehensions, and when a new



loan was perhaps expected at a higher interest than ever



government had given, was it natural for people to be fond of



investing in a 4 per cent stock, which was to fall to 3 per cent



in a few years?



    Besides, let us examine the profit to be made by investing



even in this fund. 100 l. produced in Scotland 5 l. interest,



this capital remitted to London at 3 per cent exchange, was



reduced to 97 l. now if 74.5 l. produced 4 l. the produce of 97



l. would be about 5 l. 4 s. Would any man for the sake of 1/5 per



cent advance of interest on money remitted, ever think of sending



large sums to London to be invested in a falling stock?



    I allow that, upon opening subscriptions, great profit was



sometimes made by those who contracted with government, and who



received the subscriptions at prime cost. But this profit



depended entirely upon the subsequent rise of the subscription,



when the original subscribers brought it first to market; as also



from the small sums they had advanced: this operation was over



before the end of January 1762. The smallness of the sum



advanced, upon which the profit was made, and the ministerial



interest which was necessary to obtain a share in those



subscriptions, rendered it extremely difficult for people in



Scotland to share in the profit by remitting large sums in the



proper point of time.



    Farther, might not the banks, in the short period during



which such large profits were made, had they had the exchange in



their hands, have raised it so high as to frustrate the attempts



of our Scots gamesters? If it be said, that exchangers would have



disappointed them, by giving it, lower. I answer in the negative:



because with this set of men exchange will rise, of itself, in



proportion to the value of money in the place to which people



incline to remit it. And could money at any time bring in, at



London, 20 per cent interest, exchange upon that place would rise



universally in proportion.



    The only motive, not already mentioned, for sending money to



London at this time, under so great disadvantages, was the



prospect of a great rise upon the stocks, in the event of a



peace. Upon which I observe, that the value of that probability



was included in the then price of stock; and had the probability



of a peace, in January 1762, been great, stocks would have risen



in proportion: he, therefore, who vested his money in stock, by



remitting from Scotland at that time, upon an expectation



peculiar to himself, I consider as a gamester, and as an ignorant



gamester too; because he was giving odds upon an equal bett. This



every man does, who, without any prospect of a profit peculiar to



himself, pays a high exchange to bring money to a market, where



he buys at the same price with those who pay no exchange at all.



    From these considerations, I am led to differ from the



ingenious author of the letter to J. F. Esq; who says, 'That in



the present case' (the circumstances operating in January 1762,)



'the demand' (for money to remit to London) 'is unlimited, and no



provision the banks can make can be of use; on the contrary,



could they find a treasure, suppose of a million, it would only



serve to increase it; because this demand arises on a profit on



carrying money to London as a commodity, and not as the balance



of trade.'







Chap. XIV







Of optional Clauses contained in Bank Notes







    As we are examining the principles upon which banks of



circulation upon mortgage, which issue notes payable in coin, are



established in Scotland, it is proper to take notice of every



circumstance which may arise from the extensive combination of



the interests of trade and circulation, especially when we find



such circumstances influencing the political welfare of society.



    An optional clause in a bank note is added to prevent a



sudden run upon banks, at a time when more coin may be demanded



of them than they are in a capacity to pay.



    Banks not regulated by statute, are private conventions, in



which the parties may include what conditions they think fit.



Banks, therefore, may insert in their notes, the conditions they



judge most for their own advantage. Thus, they may either promise



peremptory payment in coin upon demand, or they may put in an



alternative, that in case they do not choose to pay in coin, they



may pay in bills, or in transfer of their stock, or in other



circulating paper not their own; or they may stipulate payment at



a certain time after the demand, with interest during the delay.



All these alternatives are inserted, in order to avoid the



inconvenience of running short of coin, and of being obliged to



stop payment altogether.



    We have said above, that the profits of banks consist in



their enjoying the same interest for the notes they lend, as if



the loan had been made in gold or silver. This is a very great



object, no doubt; but the policy of nations has established it,



and therefore we shall suppose it to be an incontroverted



principle.



    In which ever way, therefore, an optional clause is inserted,



it should be such as to cut off all profit from the bank, upon



all paper presented for payment, from the time of presentation;



and every artifice used to suspend the liquidation of the paper,



to the advantage of the bank, and prejudice of the bearer, should



be considered as unfair dealing in the bank, and prohibited by



law.



    When the optional clause has no tendency to procure an



advantage to the bank, in prejudice of the holder of the paper



(except as far as the holder is thereby deprived of the use of



the coin, which on certain occasions cannot be supplied by the



paper), it becomes the duty of a statesman to examine how far it



is expedient to suffer such stipulations to be inserted in a



money, which is calculated to carry on the mercantile interest of



the nation.



    Banks, we have said, are the servants of the public, and they



are well paid for their services. Although the notes issued by



them are not commonly made a legal tender in payment; yet the



consequence of a well established bank, is to render them so



essential to circulation, that what is not a legal obligation



becomes one, in fact, from the force of custom.



    Let us therefore examine the advantages which result to banks



from this optional clause, and the loss which results to a nation



from their using it, and then compare the advantages with the



inconveniences, in order to determine whether it be expedient to



permit such obstructions in the circulation of paper.



    The advantage which banks reap is confined to that of gaining



time, at the expence of paying interest. The interest paid by



them is an aukward operation. They receive interest for the note;



because they have in their possession the original security given



for the notes when they were first issued; and they begin to



refund this interest to the holder of the note from the time they



avail themselves of the optional clare. Could banks, therefore,



borrow coin in a moment, at the same interest which they pay to



the holder of the note, they would certainly never make use of



this optional clause. But this coin can not be found in a moment;



and the banks, to save themselves the trouble, and the expence of



augmenting their fund of coin, or of procuring a fund in another



country, upon which they might draw for the payment of that



national balance, which, by becoming banks, they tacitly engage



to pay for the nation; render the credit of individuals



precarious with strangers, and raise a general distrust in the



whole society which they ought to serve. Here then is a very



great loss resulting to a nation from the establishment of banks.



Were no bank established, no merchant would contract a debt to



strangers, without foreseeing the ready means of discharging it



with the coin circulating in the country. In proportion as this



coin came to diminish, so would foreign contracts of debt



diminish also. Thus credit, at least, might be kept up, although



trade might be circumscribed, and manufactures be discouraged.



Now when, in order to advance trade and encourage manufactures, a



statesman lends his hand towards the melting down of solid



property, and countenances banks so far as to leave this



operation to them, with the emolument of receiving interest for



all their paper; and when, in order to facilitate the circulation



of this paper, the very inhabitants concur in throwing all their



specie into a bank, is it reasonable to indulge banks so far as



to allow them to add an optional clause, which disappoints the



whole scheme, which stops trade, ruins manufactures, raises the



interest of money, and renders the operation of melting down



property quite ineffectual for the purposes which it was intended



to answer. Farther:



    The loss a bank may be at, in providing coin, is susceptible



of estimation, let it be brought from ever so distant a country;



because we know that the quantity to be provided never can exceed



the value of the grand balance. But who can estimate the loss a



nation sustains, when an interruption is put to the carrying on



of trade and manufactures? When the industrious classes of



inhabitants are forced to be idle for a short time, the



consequences are hardly to be repaired: they starve, they desert;



the spirit of industry is extinguished: in short, all goes to



ruin.



    Besides, when banks do not lay down a well digested plan for



paying regularly, and without complaining, this grand balance due



to strangers, they are forced to have recourse to expedients for



preserving their credit, more burdensome, perhaps, than what is



required of them; and not near so effectual for removing the



inconveniences complained of.... This being the case, the



shortest and the best method for preventing such abuses, is to



oblige banks to pay upon demand, in coin or bills, at the option



of the holders of the note. This will force them into the method



for providing them; to wit, fairly to borrow money from nations



to whom we owe, and to pay a regular interest for it, without an



obligation to refund the capital, until the grand balance shall



take a favourable turn; in which case, the banks will regorge



with coin drawn from strangers; and these strangers will then



find as great an interest in being repaid, as the bank found in



borrowing from them, while the balance was in their favour.







Chap. XXII







Of the Bank of England and of the Banks of Circulation



established on Mercantile Credit







    I have examined, with all the care I am capable of, the



nature of banks calculating for the melting down of solid



property, and the converting of it into paper for the use of



circulation.



    The nature of such banks is but little known in countries



where they have not been established; therefore a distinct



account of them may suggest hints, which in time may prove



useful.



    People who do not employ their thoughts on the theory of



trade and credit, are apt to overlook objects of real utility;



and those who do, have seldom the opportunity of being informed



of the customs of different nations. Were my experience greater,



or had I more opportunities to dive into the recesses of this



great object, the work I now present to the public would better



deserve its attention.



    I now proceed to a deduction of the principles upon which are



founded those banks which are chiefly calculated for the use of



commerce; and as the ground-work of my inquiry, I shall trace



some of the principal operations of the bank of England.



    The establishment of this great company was formed about the



year 1694. Government at that time having great occasion for



money, a set of men was found who lent to it about 1,200,000 l.



sterling, at 8 per cent for the exclusive privilege of banking



for 13 years: with this additional clause, that 4000 l. sterling,



per annum, should be given them to defray the expence of the



undertaking. This sum of 1,200,000 l. sterling, was the original



bank stock. It has been since increased to 11,000,000 l. by



farther loans to government, for the prolongation of their



privileges; as has been taken notice of in the 16th chapter of



the second part.



    This stock, as in banks of circulation upon mortgage, is to



be considered only as a subsidiary security to the public for the



notes they issue: were it the principal and only security for



their paper, this bank would then be founded on the principle of



public, not of mercantile credit; under which last denomination



we are going to point out in what the nature of it differs from



those we have already explained.



    It is a rule with the bank of England to issue no notes upon



mortgage, permanent loan, or personal security. The principal



branches of their business may be comprehended under four



articles, viz. 1. The circulation of the trade of London: 2. The



exchequer business of Great Britain: 3. The paying of the



interest of all the funds transferable at the bank: 4. Their



trade in gold and silver. I shall now shortly explain the nature



of these four great operations; and first as to the circulation



of the trade of London.



    When we speak of the circulation of trade, we understand the



circulation of money paid on the account of trade.



    The great occupation of the London merchants engages them to



simplify their business as much as possible. For this they commit



to brokers every operation which requires no peculiar talents or



ingenuity in the merchant himself; and, for a like reason, they



commit to the bank and private bankers the care of their cash.



    A Scots merchant begins by drawing money from the bank, or



from an exchanger, for which he pays interest: a London merchant



begins by putting money into the bank, for which he draws no



interest at all.



    A London merchant, therefore, can give no order upon the



bank, unless at a time when he has money lodged in it.



    If he has occasion for money at any time, he sends to the



bank the bills he has before they become due, and the bank



discounts them at certain rates, according to their nature.



    If it be a foreign bill, the bank, in discounting it, retains



of the sum, at the rate of 4 per cent per annum, for the time the



bill has to run; but if the bill be at a longer day than 6o days



they will not discount it. So in this case the merchant must keep



his bill until it is within 6o days of the term of payment.



    The reason for this is evident: the security upon which such



bills stand, is purely mercantile. The nearer, therefore, the



payment is, the less risk the bank incurs from the failure of



those who are bound in it.



    The intention of this operation of discounting hills, is



plainly to employ the cash of the bank in a way to draw an



interest for it; but as merchants allow their money to lie dead



for as short a time as they possibly can, the bank must have



quick returns for what they advance upon discount, in order to be



constantly ready to answer all demands. This is no loss to the



bank, and a prodigious advantage to trade, as I shall briefly



explain.



    The bank is constantly receiving cash from every person who



keeps their cash with it. This occasions a constant fluctuation



of payments, which of course must leave at all times a



considerable sum of other people's money in the bank; because it



never is in advance to any one.



    By long practice in the trade, this sum of money becomes



determinate: let us call it the average-money in the hands of the



bank. It is then with this average-money alone, that the bank can



discount bills. Now if the trade of London do afford bills to be



discounted at different dates within 60 days, sufficient to



absorb the whole average-money of the bank, appropriated for



discounting; this branch of business would not go forward with



the celerity required for the trade of London, did the bank



indulge merchants so far as to discount at a longer day.



    From this we learn another reason why the bank of England



discounts no bill which has more than 60 days to run. The first,



mentioned already, is for the greater security of payment; and



the second, which we now discover, is in order to be able to



discount more bills than otherwise they could do, did they



discount at a longer day.



    As I am here upon the subject of discounting bills of



exchange by the bank of England, an operation it has in common



with all the private bankers in the capital, I must answer a



question I have frequently heard proposed.



    How does it happen, that in a city of so great trade as



London, it is possible that people should be found even among



merchants, who allow their money to remain in the hands of



bankers without interest; when in Scotland, a place of so little



trade, interest may always be got for money for the shortest



time?



    The answer to this question is to be gathered from the very



principles of trade itself.



    The money which merchants have either in the hands of the



bank, or of bankers, though very considerable at all times, is in



perpetual fluctuation: it cannot then be lent to any but to a



banker, who would consent to pay interest for the sums in hand.



But no such banker can be found, nor ever will be found, until



all the bankers in London consent to such a regulation. The



reason is plain. One principal use the bankers make of the



average-money in their hands, is the discounting of bills. Who



then could pay interest for money, and discount, in competition



with others of the same trade, who have it for nothing?



    But suppose the bank, and all the bankers in town, should



come to the resolution of giving interest for the money in their



hands, what would be the consequence?



    I answer, that upon such an alteration, discount would rise



above the present rates, to the great prejudice of the trade of



the nation; and bankers would lend money in their hands upon a



more precarious security for the sake of a higher interest.



    All the landed men who reside in London, and many other



wealthy people, not concerned in trade, constantly keep their



money either in the bank, or in some banker's hand without



interest: this enables bankers in general to discount foreign



bills at 4 per cent as has been said, even when the rate of



interest is rather above this standard. This is, as it were, a



contribution from the rich and idle, in favour of the trade of



the nation.



    Let, therefore, gentlemen who have much idle money, think of



any other expedient than that of obtaining interest for it, from



those who discount bills in London. Not one of them can afford to



do it, and thrive by his business; and the hurt which would



result to trade in general, will constantly be a sufficient bar



against a general resolution for that purpose.



    What has been said, will, I hope, prove satisfactory as to



the resolution of the question above proposed, so far as regards



London. It remains to be answered, how those who supply the place



of bankers in Scotland, and even the banks themselves can afford



to pay interest for any sum put into their hands for a short



time.



    I answer, that as to the Scotch exchangers, as we have called



them, the profits on their trade admit of borrowing money at



interest, which that of the bank of England and private bankers



cannot do. If these last can gain 4 or 5 per cent by discounting



of bills, it is all they can honestly expect: every other



employment of the money in their hands is precarious, either as



to the security or promptitude of calling it in, to answer the



demands which are made upon them.



    As to Scotland, we have seen how directly contrary to all



principles it is, for its banks to borrow money within the sphere



of their own circulation. How this diminishes the profits upon



their own trade, and hurts the circulation of the country; but



although it diminish their profit, it carries along with it no



positive loss to them, as would be the case, were a London banker



to pay interest for all the money in his hands, when he never can



draw any back, except for that part which we have called the



average.



    Every London banker is obliged to have a certain sum of cash



constantly in his chest, the interest of which would be all lost,



did he pay for it: whereas the exchangers in Scotland never have



a shilling by them; and when any demand is made upon them, they



draw the money from the banks, in consequence of their credit by



cash accompts.



    Besides foreign bills, which the bank of England discounts at



4 per cent they also discount inland bills, and notes of hand



between merchants in London, at 5 per cent.



    The inland bills to be discounted at the bank must all be



payable in London. The bank calls in no money from any distant



quarter of the kingdom.



    As the discounting of notes of hand between London merchants



might operate the same effect, as if the bank should advance them



money upon personal security, which would be the case, were the



notes of hand drawn for obtaining credit, instead of paying money



really due between the merchants, in the course of business; the



clerks of the bank keep a watchful eye over this branch of



management, and, by examining the reciprocal draughts of



merchants between themselves, they easily acquire a knowledge of



the state of their affairs, and are thereby enabled to judge how



far it is expedient to launch out in discounting either the notes



or bills wherein they are concerned.



    I shall not pretend to assign a reason why, in the price of



discount, the bank makes a difference of 1 per cent between



foreign and inland bills of exchange. It may either be an



indulgence and encouragement to foreign trade; or it may be upon



the consideration of the better security of foreign bills, which



commonly pass through several indorsations before they are



offered to be discounted at the bank.



    I come next to the circulation between the bank and the



exchequer.



    The bank of England is to the exchequer, what a private



person's banker is to him. It receives the cash of the exchequer,



and answers its demands.



    Cash comes to the exchequer from the amount of taxes. The two



great branches of which are the excise and customs. To explain



this operation with the more distinctness, I shall take the



example of the excise.



    The excise is computed to bring in annually from London, and



the fifty two collections over all England, nett into the



exchequer, above four and a half millions sterling.



    The fifty two collectors send the amount of their collections



to London eight times a year, almost entirely in bills. As the



same may be said of the remittances of all the other taxes, we



may from this circumstance observe by the way, that London alone



must constantly owe to the country of England a sum equal to all



the bills drawn upon it; that is to say, to all the taxes which



the country pays: a circumstance not to be overlooked, from which



many things may be learned, as will be taken notice of in the



proper place.



    The bills sent by the fifty two collectors, are drawn payable



to the commissioners of excise; they indorse them to the receiver



general; he carries them to the bank as they fall due, and gets a



receipt for the amount; this receipt he carries to the exchequer,



who charge it in their account with the bank, and deliver tallies



to the receiver general for the amount of his payments; these



tallies he delivers to the commissioners of excise, who enter



them in their book of tallies. This operation is performed once



every week, and serves as a discharge from the commissioners to



the receiver general.



    The bank, again, keeps an account with the exchequer, which



is settled once every day, by two clerks, who go from the bank to



the exchequer for this purpose. When coin is wanted by the



exchequer, for payments where bank notes will not answer, the



coin is furnished by the bank; when paper will serve the purpose,



paper is issued.



    Besides this operation in the receipt of taxes, the bank



advances to government, that is to the exchequer, the amount of



the land or other taxes imposed, which are to be levied within



the year. This we see is a loan upon government security for a



short term, quite consistent with the principles upon which the



bank is established. The large sums the bank is constantly



receiving of public money, and the great assistance it obtains



from thence in carrying on the other branches of its trade,



enable it at present to make advances of money to government at 3



per cent. It observes the same rule with respect to the great



companies of the East Indies, and South Sea, for the same reason;



but no advances are made to private people; and in the



discounting of bills and notes of hand, the regulations above



mentioned are adhered to.



    Thus the whole amount of taxes is poured into the bank, in



the manner we have been describing.



    The bank also keeps the transfer books of all the funds



negotiated at the bank; and out of the public money in its hand,



it pays the interest of these funds for which government allows



to the bank a sum proportionate to the expence of this branch of



management.



    When the bank, as a company, lends to government upon a



permanent fund, the capital whereof is not demandable, this



operation is foreign to their business as a bank, and is



conducted by the company as an article of management of their



private property.



    Let us now examine by what channels their notes enter into



circulation, and the security upon which they stand.



    When issued in the discount of bills, they stand upon the



principles of mercantile credit, and depend upon the goodness of



the bills discounted. When issued upon the faith of taxes to be



paid within the year, they stand upon the security of this



payment, which is of a very complex nature, as any one may



perceive. As long as the inhabitants of England consume



exciseable goods, the excise will be paid: as long as trade goes



on, customs will be paid: and as long as government subsists, the



collateral security of the state will serve to make up all



deficiencies in the amount of taxes. No security, therefore, can



be better than the notes of the bank of England, while government



subsists. The losses that great companies meet with from bad



debts, I am informed, are very inconsiderable.



    The greatest risk the bank runs, is in discounting bad bills;



but by the extent of their business in this branch, and by



circulating the cash of all the merchants who keep accounts with



them, they acquire so perfect a knowledge of the state of their



affairs, that it rarely happens that any one can break for very



considerable sums, without the bank's having a previous notice of



it. A sudden loss may no doubt happen, without a possibility of



being foreseen; but the matter of fact proving that their losses



upon bad bills are inconsiderable, we may thence infer, that



there is but little mystery to the bank, with regard to the



credit of London merchants.



    I come now to the last branch of their management, to wit,



their trade in gold and silver.



    For the circulation of bank notes, coin is necessary. We have



seen, in treating of the Scotch banks, how coin is brought it: to



wit, in consequence of all the payments made to the bank, in



which there must be a proportion of coin equal to what is found



in common circulation. What is not paid in coin, comes in, in



their own notes, which are thereby taken out of the circle; and



consequently make place for a subsequent supply, which issues in



the manner we have described.



    In times of peace, and a favourable balance of trade, the



bank suffers little by the obligation it is under to pay in coin,



except as far as the great confusion of the present currency



affords an occasion to money-jobbers to melt down the new



guineas. The extent of this traffic I am no judge of, and the



bank no doubt has an interest in preventing it as far as the laws



have provided a remedy against it.



    But when large payments are to be made abroad, the distress



of the bank is no doubt very great.



    In Scotland, the banks, upon such occasions, are totally



drained of coin. They have no market for the metals; because they



have no mint to manufacture them into coin. It is different with



respect to the bank of England; their distress proceeds from



another cause.



    The exportation of the heavy guineas in time of war, and



during a wrong balance upon the trade of England, leaves



circulation provided with a light currency only, in which the



bank is obliged to pay their notes; and the intrinsic value of



the gold in which they pay, regulates the price of the metals



they are obliged to buy at market. If they provide them



themselves from abroad, they must pay the price of them in bills



of exchange. But then the lightness of the currency at home sinks



the value of the pound sterling, as it raises the value of the



ounce of gold and silver. So the only considerable loss they



incur, is in providing the metals, which must ever be



considerable, as long as the old guineas remain in circulation.



    The loss upon coining silver is still greater than upon gold;



because besides the loss incurred by reason of the lightness of



the gold, the metals in the silver and gold coin of Great



Britain, are not proportional to the value they bear in the



London market, where they have been bought; as has been



sufficiently explained already in another place.











Chap. XXIII







Of the first Establishment of Mr Law's Bank in France, in the



year 1716







    In deducing the principles of credit, I have it chiefly in



view, to set in a fair light, the security upon which paper money



is established: and as I imagine, this important branch of my



subject will still be rendered more intelligible, by an example



of the abuse to which this great engine of commerce is exposed, I



now propose to give my reader a short account of the famous bank



of circulation first established in France by Mr Law; but



afterwards prostituted (whether by design, or by fatality, I



shall not here determine) to serve the worst of purposes;



defrauding the creditors of the state, and a multitude of private



persons.



    So dreadful a calamity brought upon that nation, by the abuse



of paper credit, may be a warning to all states to beware of the



like. The best way to guard against it, is to be apprised of the



delusion of it, and to see through the springs and motives by



which the Missisippi bank was conducted.



    After the death of the late King of France, Louis XIV, the



debts contracted by that Monarch were found to extend to 2000



millions of livres, that is, to upwards of 140 millions sterling.



    It was proposed to the Duke of Orleans, regent of the



kingdom, to expunge the debts by a total bankruptcy. This



proposal he rejected nobly; and, instead of it, established a



commission (called the Visa) to inquire into the claims of such



of the nation's creditors as were not then properly liquidated,



nor secured by the appropriation of any fund for the payment of



the interest.



    In the course of this commission, many exorbitant frauds were



discovered; by which it appeared, that vast sums of debt had been



contracted, for no adequate value paid to the King.



    After many arbitrary proceedings, this commission threw the



King's debts, at last, into a kind of order.



    Those formerly provided for were all put at 4 per cent. The



creditors to the amount of six hundred millions, which had not



been liquidated, nor provided for, had their claims reduced, by



the commission, to two hundred and fifty millions. for which they



obtained notes of state, (Billets d'état, as they were called,)



bearing an interest of 4 per cent also.



    These operations performed, the total debts of the late King



were reduced to the sum above mentioned; to wit, two thousand



millions; bearing an interest of 4 per cent or eighty million per



annum.



    From the necessities of government, and the distressed



situation of the kingdom, this interest was ill paid; and there



hardly remained, out of an ill-paid revenue, wherewith to defray



the expence of the civil government.



    About this time, Mr Law presented to the Regent the plan of a



bank of circulation.







Chap. XXV







Continuation of the Account of Law's Bank







    The bank accordingly was established in favour of Law and



Company, by letters patent, of the 2nd of May 1716. The Company



was called, the General Bank; and the note run thus:



    The bank promises to pay to the bearer at sight livres, in



coin of the same weight and fineness with the coin of this day,



value received at Paris.



    The first fund of this bank consisted in 1200 actions (or



shares) of one thousand crowns (or 5000 livres) bank money; in



all six millions; the crown being then 5 livres, 8 to the marc;



silver coin at 40 livres per marc, as has been said: which makes



this livre just worth one shilling sterling: consequently, the



shares were worth 250 l. sterling, and the bank stock worth



300,000 l. sterling.



    By the clause in the note, by which the bank was obliged to



pay according to the then weight and fineness of the coin, those



who received their paper were secured against the arbitrary



measures common in France of raising the denomination of the



coin; and the bank was secured against the lowering of it. In a



short time, most people preferred the notes to the coin; and



accordingly they passed for 1 per cent more than the coin itself.



    This bank subsisted, and obtained great credit, until the 1st



of January 1719: at which time the King reimbursed all the



proprietors of the shares, and took the bank into his own hand,



under the name of the Royal Bank.



    Upon this revolution, the tenor of the note was changed. It



ran thus: The bank promises to pay to the bearer at sight,



livres, in silver coin, value received at Paris.



    By this alteration, the money in the notes was made to keep



pace with the money in the coin; and both were equally affected



by every arbitrary variation upon it. This was called rendering



the paper monnoie fixe; because the denominations contained in it



did not vary according to the variations of the coin: I should



have called it monnoie variable; because it was exposed to



changes with respect to its real value.



    Mr Law strenuously opposed this change in the bank notes. No



wonder! it was diametrically opposite to all principles of



credit. It took place, however; and nobody seemed dissatisfied:



the nation was rather pleased: so familiar were the variations of



the coin in those days that nobody ever considered anything with



regard to coin or money, but its denomination: the consequences



of the variations in the value of denominations, upon the



accompts between debtors and creditors, were not then attended



to; and the credit of the notes of the royal bank continued just



as good as the credit of those of Mr Law's had been; although the



livres in this contained a determinate value; and the livres in



that could have been reduced at any time to the value of



halfpence, by an act of the King's authority, who was the debtor



in them. Nay more, they in fact stood many variations during the



course of the system, without suffering the smallest discredit.



This appears wonderful; and yet it is a fact.(5*)



    Political writers upon the affairs of France at this period,



such as De Melon, Savarie, Dutot and others, abundantly certify



the incredible advantage produced by the operations of Mr Law's



Bank; and the chain of events which followed, in the years 1719,



and 1720, when it was in the King's hands, shew to what a



prodigious height credit arose upon the firm foundation laid by



Mr Law.(6*)



    But alas! the superstructure, then, became so far beyond the



proportion of the foundation, that the whole fabric fell to ruin,



and involved a nation, just emerging from bankruptcy and ruin,



into new calamities, almost equal to the former.



    As long as the credit of this bank subsisted, it appeared to



the French to be perfectly solid. The bubble no sooner bursted,



than the whole nation was thrown into astonishment and



consternation. Nobody could conceive from whence the credit had



sprung; what had created such mountains of wealth in so short a



time; and by what witchcraft and fascination it had been made to



disappear in an instant, in the short period of one day.



    Volumes have been since written in France, by men of



speculation, in order to prove, that it was a want of confidence



in the public, and not the want of a proper security for the



paper, which occasioned this downfal.



    This, if we judge by what has been written, has been the



general opinion of that nation to this day: and since it was



found impossible, in France, to create confidence in circulating



paper, which had no security for its value, many people there,



and some even among ourselves, conclude, that a great part of the



wealth of Great Britain, which consists in paper, well secured,



is false and fictitious.



    I shall now proceed to set before my reader the great lines



of the royal Missisippi bank of France, from the 1st of January



1719, to the total overthrow of all credit, upon the fatal 21st



day of May 1720. This was a golden dream, in which the French



nation, and a great part of Europe was plunged, for the short



space of 506 days.







Chap. XXVI







Account of the Royal Missisippi Bank of France, established on



Public Credit







    In order to unravel the chaos of this affair in a proper



manner, it will not be amiss to begin by giving the reader an



idea of the plan which naturally might suggest itself to the



regent of France, from the hint of Mr Law's bank. By the help of



this clue, he will be the better able to conduct himself through



the operations of this system, as the French call it.



    The Regent perceived, that in consequence of the credit of



Law's bank, people grew fond of paper-money. The consequence of



this, he saw, was to bring a great quantity of coin into the



bank. The debts of France were very great, being, as has been



said, above 2000 millions. The coin, at this time, in France, was



reckoned at about 1200 millions, at 60 livres the marc, or 40



millions sterling. The Regent thought, that if he could draw



either the whole, or even the greatest part of this 1200 millions



of coin into his bank, and replace the use of it to the kingdom,



by as much paper, secured upon his word, that he should then be



able to pay off, with it, near one half of all the debts of



France: and by thus throwing back the coin into circulation, in



paying off the debts, that it would return of itself into the



bank, in the course of payments made to the state; that credit



would be thereby supported, as the bank would be enabled to pay



in coin the notes as they happened to return, in the course of



domestic circulation.



    This was both a plausible and an honest scheme, relatively to



a Duke of Orleans, whom we cannot suppose to have been master of



the principles of credit; and very practicable in a country where



there was so great a quantity of coin as 40 millions sterling,



and a well-established credit in the bank, which prevented all



runs upon it from diffidence. Nothing but a wrong balance of



trade could have occasioned any run for coin; because, for the



reason already given, the paper bore for the most part a premium



of 1 per cent above it.



    Accordingly, during the whole year 1719, the credit of the



royal bank was without suspicion, although the regent had, by the



last day of December of that year, coined of bank paper, for no



less a sum than 769 millions, reckoning in 59 millions of paper,



which had been formerly issued by the general bank of Law and



company; for which he had given value to the proprietors, when he



took the bank into his own hands, as we have said above.



    I must here observe, that by this plan of the Regent, there



was, in one sense, a kind of security for the notes issued. So



far as they were issued for coin brought in from the advanced



value of the paper, this coin was the security: in the second



place, when the coin was paid away to the creditors of the state,



the Regent withdrew the obligations which had been granted to



them; and although I allow that the King's own obligation



withdrawn, was no security to the public, who had received bank



notes for the payment of it; yet still the interest formerly paid



to the creditors, was a fund out of which, upon the principles of



public credit, the annual interest for the notes was secured.



Had, indeed, the French nation perceived upon what bottom the



security for the paper stood, during the year 1719, perhaps the



credit of the bank might have been rendered precarious; but they



neither saw it or sought after it: and the men of speculation



were all of opinion, that as long as there was no more paper



issued by the bank than there was coin in the kingdom, there



could be no harm done. Of this, any person who has read Dutot, De



Melon, Savarie, and others, will be perfectly satisfied. And I



desire no farther proof of the total ignorance of the French in



matters of this kind, than to find them agreeing, that bank paper



must always be good, provided there be coin in the nation to



realize it, although that coin be not the property of the bank.



(Dutot, p. 132, 133.) On the contrary, it is very evident from



what has been said, that although there should be a thousand



times more coin in a country than the bank paper, still that bank



paper must be a mere delusion, and, in fact, of no value



whatsoever, except so far as the bank is possessed of the value



of it in one species of property or another.



    And on the other hand, let the bank paper exceed the quantity



of coin in the proportion of a thousand to one, yet still it is



perfectly good and sufficient, provided the bank be possessed of



an equivalent value in any species of good property. This I throw



in here to point out how far the French were, at least at that



time, and many years after, when Dutot and Melon wrote, from



forming any just notion of the principles of banking. And, I



believe, I may venture to say, that the only reason why banks



have never been established in France, is, because the whole



operation is still a mystery to them. I ground this conjecture



upon an opinion of M. de Montesquieu, who thinks that banks are



incompatible, with pure monarchy; a proposition he would never



have advanced, had he understood the principles upon which they



are established.



    The next remarkable and interesting revolution made upon this



famous bank, was by the arret of February 22, 1720; which



constituted the union of the royal bank with the company of the



Indies.



    By this arret, the King delivered to that company the whole



management of the bank with all the profits made by him since the



first of January 1719, and to be made in time to come.



Notwithstanding this cession, the King remained guarantee for all



the notes, which were not to be coined without an order of



council: the company was to be responsible to the King at all



times for their administration; and, as a security for their good



management, they engaged to lend the King no less than sixteen



hundred millions of livres.



    Here is the aera and beginning of all the confusion. From



this loan proceeded the downfal of the whole system.











Chap. XXIX







Continuation of the Account of the Royal Bank of France, until



the time that the Company of the Indies promised a Dividend of



200 Livres per Action







    These things premised, what follows will, I hope, be easily



understood.



    As soon as the Regent of France perceived the wonderful



effects produced by Law's bank, he immediately resolved to make



use of that engine, for clearing the King's revenue of a part of



the unsupportable load of 80 millions of yearly interest, due,



though indeed very irregularly paid, to the creditors.



    It was to compass this end, that he bestowed on Law the



company of the West Indies, and the farm of the tobacco.



    To absorb 100 millions of the most discredited articles of



the King's debts, 200,000 actions or shares of this company were



created. These were rated at 500 livres each, and the



subscription for the actions was ordered to be paid in billets



d'état, so much discredited by reason of the bad payment of the



interest, that 500 livres, nominal value in these billets, would



not have sold upon change for above 160 or 170 livres. In the



subscription they were taken for the full value. As these actions



became part of the company's stock, and as the interest of the



billets was to be paid to the company by the King, this was



effectually a loan from the company to the King of 100 millions



at 4 per cent.



    The next step was to pay the interest regularly to the



company. Upon this the actions which had been bought for 170



livres, real value, mounted to par, that is, to 500 livres.



    This was ascribed to the wonderful operations of the bank;



whereas it was wholly owing to the regular payment of the



interest.



    In May following 1719, the East India company was



incorporated with the West India company: and it was stipulated



that the 200,000 actions formerly created, were to be entitled to



a common share of the profits of the joint trade.



    But as the sale of the first 200,000 actions had produced no



liquid value which could be turned into trade (having been paid



for in state billets), a creation of 50,000 new actions was made



in June 1719, and the subscription opened at 550 livres payable



in effective coin.



    The confidence of the public in Mr Law, was at this time so



great, that they might have sold for much more: but it was judged



expedient to limit the subscriptions to this sum; leaving the



price of the actions to rise in the market, according to demand,



in favour of the original subscribers.



    This money amounting to 27,500,000 livres in coin, was to be



employed in building of ships, and other preparations for



carrying on the trade.



    The hopes of the public were so much raised by the favourable



appearance of a most lucrative trade, that more actions were



greedily demanded.



    Accordingly in a month after (July 1719) another creation was



made of 50,000 actions; and the price of them fixed at 1000



livres.



    It must be observed, that all actions delivered by the



company of the Indies, originally contained an obligation on the



company for no more than 4 per cent upon the value of 500 livres,



with a proportion of the profits on the trade; so that the rise



of the actions proceeded entirely from the hopes of those great



profits, and from the sinking of the rate of interest; a



consequence of the plenty of money to be lent.



    But besides the trade, what raised their value at this time,



was, that just before the last creation of actions,June 10, 1719,



the King had made over the mint to the company for a



consideration of 50 millions of livres; and this opened a new



branch of profit to every one interested.



    The sale of the last coined actions taking place at 1000



livres each, so great a rise seems to have engaged the Regent to



extend his views much farther than ever. To say that he foresaw



what was to happen, would be doing him the greatest injustice. He



foresaw it not, most certainly; for no man could foresee such



complicated events. But had he conducted himself upon solid



principles; or by the rules which, we now say, common honesty



required, he certainly never would have countenanced the



subsequent operation.



    The fourth creation of actions was in the beginning of



September 1719.



    In the interval between the third and the fourth creation,



the Regent made over the general farms to the company, who paid



three millions and a half advanced rent for them. And the company



obliged themselves to lend the King (including the 100 millions



already lent upon the first creation of actions) the immense sum



of 1600 millions at 3 per cent that is, for 48 millions interest.



Now it is very plain, that before the month of September 1719, it



was impossible they could lend the King so great a sum.



    They had already lent him, in September 1718, 100 millions,



by taking the billets d'état for the subscription of the first



creation of actions; the second creation had produced coin, laid



out in mercantile preparations; and the third creation of



actions, at the standard value, was worth no more than 50



millions of livres: this was their whole stock. Where then could



they find 1500 millions more to lend?



    I therefore conclude, that at this time, the scheme which I



am now to unfold, must have more or less, taken place between the



Regent and this great company.



    The public was abundantly persuaded of the prodigious profits



of the company, before they got possession of the general farms.



No sooner had they got this new source of riches into their



hands, than they promised a dividend of no less than 200 livres



on every action, which was ten times more than was divided on



them when at first created.



    The consequence of this was, that (supposing the dividend to



have been permanent and secure) an action then became as well



worth 5000 livres as at first it was worth 500 livres;



accordingly to 5000 did it rise, upon the promise of this new



dividend.



    But what could be the motive of the company to promise this



dividend, three months only after their establishment? Surely,



not the profits upon a trade which was not as yet opened. Surely,



not the profits upon the King's farms; for these profits it was



greatly their interest to conceal.



    Their views lay deeper. The Regent perceived that the spirit



of the nation was too much inflamed, to suffer people to enter



into an examination of the wonderful phaenomena arising from the



establishment of the bank, and company of the Indies. If the



company promised 200 livres dividend, the public concluded that



their profits would enable them to pay it; and really in this



particular the public might be excused.



    The plan, therefore, concerted between the Regent and the



company seems to have been, to raise the actions to this great



value, in order to keep up a greater quantity of notes in



circulation.



    This was to be accomplished, first by the Regent's purchasing



the actions himself from the company; secondly, by borrowing back



the notes he had paid for them, in order to fill up the loan



which the company had agreed to make; thirdly, to pay off all the



public creditors with those notes so borrowed back; and fourthly,



when the nation was once filled with bank paper, to sell at an



adequate price, the actions he had purchased from the company, to



withdraw his own paper, and then to destroy it.



    By this operation the whole debts of France were to be turned



into actions; and the company was to become the public debtor,



instead of the King, who would have no more to pay but 48



millions of interest to the company.



    By this operation also, the Regent was to withdraw all the



bank notes which he had issued for no other value but for the



payment of debts; which notes were demandable at the bank: and



for the future, he was to issue no more (I suppose) but for value



preserved.







Chap. XXX







Inquiry into the Motives of the Duke of Orleans in concerting the



Plan of the Missisippi







    Now if we examine the motives of the Regent, with regard to



this plan, and suppose that he forsaw all that was to happen in



consequence of it; and if we also suppose that he really believed



that the company never could be in a situation to make good the



dividend of 200 livres, which they had promised upon their



actions; in a word, if we put the worst interpretation upon all



his actions, we must conclude that the whole was a most



consummate piece of knavery.



    But as this does not appear evidently, either by the



succeeding operations, or ultimate consequences of this scheme, I



am loth to ascribe, to that great man, a sentiment so opposite to



that which animated him, on his entrance upon the regency, when



he nobly rejected the plan proposed to him for expunging the



debts altogether.



    I may therefore suppose, that he might believe that the



company to whom he had given the mint, the tobacco, the farms,



and the trade of France, and to whom he soon after gave the



general receipt of all the revenue, might by these means be



enabled to make good their engagements to the public. I say, this



may be supposed; in which case justice was to be done to



everyone; and the King's debts were to be reduced to 48 millions



a year, instead of 80 millions.



    That this is a supposeable case, I gather from Dutot, who



gives us an enumeration of the revenue of the company, Vol. I, p.



162, as follows:







 Revenue of the Company of the Indies.







Interest paid to the company per annum......    48,000,000



Profits upon the general farms.........         15,000,000



Ditto upon the general receipt of other taxes... 1,500,000



Ditto upon the tobacco............               2,000,000



Ditto upon the mint..............                4,000,000



Ditto upon their trade............              10,000,000







 In all of yearly income............            80,500,000











    Now if we suppose the interest of money at 3 per cent this



sum would answer to the capital of 2664 millions, which was more



than all the debts of the kingdom, for which they were to become



answerable.



    Upon this view of the matter, I say, it was possible, that



the Regent might form this plan, without any intention to defraud



the creditors; and more I do not pretend to affirm.



    I have said that he purposely made the company raise the



price of their actions, in order to draw more notes into



circulation.



    To this it may be objected, that he might as well have paid



off the creditors with bank notes, without going this round-about



way to work; and have left them to purchase the actions directly



from the company.



    I answer, that such an operation would have appeared too



barefaced and might have endangered the credit of the bank.



Whereas in buying the actions, which were sought after by



everybody, the state appeared desirous only of acquiring a share



of the vast profits to be made by the company. Farther:



    As the company appeared willing to accept of bank notes from



the state, in payment of their actions, this manoeuvre gave an



additional credit both to the actions, and to the notes; a thing



very necessary to be attended to, in a scheme which was



calculated to bring about a total transformation of the security



for the King's debts.



    I must however observe, that at the period concerning which



we are now speaking (viz. at the time the company promised the



dividend of 200 livres per action) the plan we have been



describing could not have been carried into execution.



    There were at that time no more than 400,000 actions created,



rated at 777 millions: of these were already disposed of at least



250,000, to wit, the original 200,000; and the second creation of



50,000, sold for coin. Besides, there were then only coined in



bank notes for 520 millions. So there was not a possibility of



executing the plan I have mentioned, as matters then stood.



    It is from the subsequent operations of the system, that it



appears evident that this and this only could be the intention.



    We shall see how the number of actions were multiplied,



without any other view than to make the public imagine, that the



funds necessary for carrying on the trade of the company were



immense.



    The number of the actions sold to the public was very



inconsiderable, compared with those sold to the Regent, and found



in his hands at the blowing up of the system.



    Besides, at the period when the number of actions was carried



to the utmost, viz. to 624,000, the bank notes bore no proportion



to their value; for, on the 4th of October 1719, when the last



creation of actions was made, the bank notes did not exceed the



sum above specified, to wit, 520 millions.



    But in tracing the progress of the system upon the preceeding



table, we perceive, that after the actions were once carried to



their full number (October 4th 1719), the coining of bank notes



went on at a most prodigious rate: so much that by the month of



May 1720, they were increased from 520 millions, to above 2696



millions; and on the 21st of that month, all this sum, except 461



millions, were found in circulation.



    Farther: We shall see, that when the Regent and the company



made out their accompts, there were found in the Regent's hands



no less than 400,000 actions, which were burnt; and in



consequence of this 25 millions of interest upon the sum of money



due by the King to the company, were extinguished.



    These facts prove beyond a doubt, that these 400,000 actions



had been bought with the notes coined posterior to the 4th of



October 1719; otherwise the actions could not have become the



property of the state.



    Besides, it was acknowledged publicly, that the notes were



coined for this purpose. (See Dutot, Vol. I, p. 144.) In the next



place, it is evident, that the notes which had been given by the



state in payment for these actions, must have been paid back to



the state, by the company, in order to fill up the loan of 1600



millions of livres; which the company never could have otherwise



lent to the King. And in the last place, it is certain that the



public debts were paid off with these notes, so borrowed back



from the company: because we shall find the notes in circulation



at the blowing up of the system, on the 21st of May 1720; and we



shall see how they were paid and withdrawn in October following.



    This detail is, I confess, a little long, and perhaps too



minute: but I thought it necessary to prove the solidity of my



conjectures concerning the Regent's motives in concerting this



plan; which no French author, that ever I saw, has pretended to



unfold, except by hints too dark to be easily comprehended.



    What is now to follow, will still set my conjectures in a



fairer light. We have seen already from the table, with what



rapidity the creation of actions went on from the 13th of



September to the 4th of October 1719. No less than 324,000 were



created in this interval.



    Yet Dutot, vol. ii, p. 169, et seq. positively says, that on



the 4th of October, the company had not sold for more than



182,500,000 livres of their actions. Now the total value, as they



were rated when created, extended to 1,797,500,000; so there was



little more than one tenth part of the value sold off.



    Why therefore create such immense quantities of actions, and



so far beyond the demand for them, but to throw dust in the eyes



of the public; to keep up the spirit of infatuation; and to pave



the way for the final execution of the plan?



    The actions being brought, by four successive creations, of



the 13th and 28th of September, the 2nd and 4th of October, to



their full number, the company, during this interval, obtained



the general receipt of the whole revenue. Thus, says Dutot, vol.



ii, p. 197, the company was intrusted with the whole revenue,



debts and expenses of the state, and all unnecessary charge was



avoided in collecting and administering it.



    In the month of November 1719, the credit of the bank, and of



the company, was so great, that the actions rose to 10,000



livres. Notwithstanding, says Dutot, vol. ii, p. 198, that the



company did what they could to keep down the price, by throwing



into the market, in one week, for no less than 30 millions. He



assigns seven different reasons for this, which, all put



together, are not worth one; to wit, that the Regent was ready to



buy up every one that lay upon hand, in concert with the company.



    If the company had been inclined to keep down the price of



the actions, they had nothing more to do than to deliver part of



the vast number they still had unsold, at the standard value of



5000 livres, at which they were rated when created; and this



would have effectually prevented their rising to 10,000 livres.



    But it was the interest of the Regent, who was at that time



well provided with actions, to stock-job, and to buy with one



hand, while he was selling with the other: these operations were



then as well known in the street called Quinquempoix, as now in



Change-alley.



    As a proof of the justness of my allegation, that the Regent



was doing all he could to raise the price of the actions, Dutot



informs us, in the place above cited, that the bank, at this very



time, was lending money, upon the security of actions, at 2 per



cent. Since this was the case, how was it possible that an



action, with 200 livres dividend, should sell for less than



10,000 livres, which is the capital corresponding to 200 livres,



at 2 per cent?



    This is evident; and were it necessary, it may be proved to



demonstration, that the rise of the actions was merely the



consequence of a political contrivance.



    But if money, at that time, came to bear no more than 2 per



cent and if the company were able to afford 200 livres upon the



action; where was the iniquity of raising the actions to 10,000



livres? I confess I can see none, nor do I perceive either the



impossibility or improbability of the two postulata, had matters



been rightly conducted.



    As to money's falling to 2 per cent any man of 20 years old



may expect to see it, without a Missisippi: and as for the



payment of the dividends, there never were in the hands of the



public, nor ever could be, had all the creditors of the 2000



millions of public debts invested in actions at 10,000 a-piece,



one half of 624,000 actions disposed of: consequently, the 200



livres dividend would not have amounted, upon 312,000 actions, to



more than 62,400,000 livres; and the revenue of the company, as



we have seen, exceeded 80 millions a year.



    This still tends to justify the Regent from the gross



imputation of fraud, in the conduct of the Missisippi.



    But what should still more exculpate this Prince, in the eyes



of every impartial man who examines the whole conduct of the



affair, is the uniform sentiments of the most intelligent men in



France concerning the doctrine of money and credit.



    When we find Dutot, who wrote against the arbitrary change of



the coin; and De Melon, the Regent's man of confidence and



secretary, who wrote in favour of it, two persons considered in



France as most able financiers, both agreeing, that during the



operations of the system, money never was to be considered but



according to denominations; that there was nothing against good



policy in changing the value of these denominations; and that



paper-money, whether issued for value, or for no value, or for



the payment of debts, was always good, provided there was coin



enough in France for the changing of it; and this, although the



coin itself did not belong to the debtors in the paper: when



these principles, I say, were adopted by the men of penetration



in France; when we find them published in their writings, many



years after the Regent's death, as maxims of what they call their



credit public; I think it would be the highest injustice to load



the Duke of Orleans with the gross imputation of knavery, in the



Missisippi scheme.



    Law no doubt saw its tendency. But Law saw also, that credit



supported itself on those occasions, where it stood on the most



ticklish bottom; he saw bank notes to the amount of more than two



thousand millions, issued in payment of the King's debts, without



occasioning any run upon the bank, or without suggesting an idea



to the public that the bank should naturally have had some fund,



to make them good: he saw people, who were in possession of a



value in paper exceeding 6000 millions of livres, 60 to the marc,



(Dutot, vol. i, p. 144.) look calm and unconcerned, when, in one



day, the coin was raised in its denomination to 80 livres in the



marc; by which operation, the 6000 millions of the date before



lost 25 per cent of their real value. He saw that this operation



did not in the least affect the credit of the bank paper; because



people minded nothing but denominations.



    He saw farther, that by the operation proposed, the whole



debt of the King would be transferred upon the company. He saw



that these debts, being turned into bank notes, would not be



sufficient to buy above 200,000 actions, at the value they then



sold for. He knew that the Regent, who had bought 400,000 of



these actions at 5000 livres apiece, that is, at half price,



would remain in possession of 200,000 actions, after selling



enough to draw back the whole of the bank notes issued for the



payment of the debts; and he saw that the company of the Indies



had a yearly income of above 80 millions to enable them to make



good their engagements: besides, he saw a power in the King to



raise the denominations of the coin at will, without shocking the



ideas of his people; by which means he might have paid the 2000



millions with one louis d'or. Put all these circumstances



together, and I can imagine that Law's brain was turned; that he



had lost sight of all his principles; and that he might believe



that his former common sense was, at that time, become absolute



nonsense in France.



    That common sense may become nonsense, is a thing by no means



peculiar to France, but quite peculiar to man.



    I shall offer but one argument more, to prove that the Duke



of Orleans, and Law, could have no premeditated design of



defrauding the public, by these wonderful operations; which is,



that to suppose the contrary, would be to allow them an finite



superiority of understanding over all the rest of Europe.



    Until the bubble bursted nobody could know where it was to



end: everything appeared very extraordinary indeed; and the fatal



catastrophe might have been expected from the greatness of the



undertaking, merely. But had there been any roguery in the plan



itself, it must have appeared palpable long before; because the



whole of the operations in which only it could consist, were



public.



    All the notes were created by public act of council; so were



the actions: the loan of 1600 millions to the King, by the



company, was a public deed; so was the alienation in their



favour, of 48 millions for the interest of this sum. Notes were



avowedly coined in order to purchase actions, (Dutot, Vol I, p.



144.) the creditors were avowedly paid with bank notes, at a time



when it was forbidden to have 500 livres in coin in any person's



custody; consequently, it was also forbidden to demand coin for



bank notes.



    Now all this was going on in the months of February, March,



April and the beginning of May 1720; without any suspicion of any



failure of credit. The coin also was sometimes raised, sometimes



diminished in its value, and still the fabric stood firm.



    Under these circumstances, to say there was knavery, is to



say that all the world were absolutely blockheads, except the



Regent and John Law: and to this opinion I never can subscribe.



    It may seem surprising that I should take so much pains to



justify the two principal conductors of this scheme. My intention



is not so much to do justice to their reputation, which has been



grossly calumniated by many, who have written the history of



those times, as to prove, that an ill-concerted system of credit



may bring ruin on a nation, although fraud be out of the



question: and if a nation be plunged into all the calamities



which a public bankruptcy can occasion, it is but a small



consolation to be assured of the good intentions of those who



were the cause of it.







Chap. XXXI







Continuation of the Account of the Royal Bank of France, until



the total Bankruptcy on the 21st of May 1720







    I now resume the thread of my story. We left off at that



period when the credit of the company and of the bank was in all



its glory (November 1719); the actions selling at 10,000 livres,



dividend 200 livres a year per action, and the bank lending at 2



per cent: all this was quite consistent with the then rate of



money.



    In this state did matters continue until the 22nd of February



1720, when the bank was incorporated with the company of the



Indies.



    The King still continued guarantee of all the bank notes;



none were to be coined but by his authority: and the



comptroller-general for the time being, was to have, at all



times, together with the Prevot des marchands of Paris, ready



access to inspect the books of the bank.



    As the intention, at the time of the incorporation, was to



coin a very great quantity of notes, in order to buy up the



actions, and to borrow back the money, in order to pay off the



creditors, it was proper to gather together as much coin as



possible, to guard against a run upon the bank: for which



purpose, the famous Arret de Conseil, of the 27th of February



1720, was published, forbidding any person to keep by them more



than 500 livres in coin.



    This was plainly annulling the obligation in the bank paper,



to pay to the bearer on demand the sum specified, in silver coin.



    Was it not very natural, that such an arret should have, at



once, put an end to the credit of the bank? No such thing however



happened. The credit remained solid after this as before; and



nobody minded gold or silver any more than if the denomination in



their paper had had no relation to these metals. Accordingly,



many, who had coin and confidence, brought it in, and were glad



to get paper for it.



    The coin being collected in about a week's time, another



Arret de Conseil, of the 5th of March, was issued, rising the



denomination from 60 livres to 80 livres the marc. Thus, I



suppose, the coin which the week before had been taken in at 60



livres, was paid away at 80: and the bank gained 33 1/3 per Cent.



upon this operation. Did this hurt the credit of the bank paper?



Not in the least.



    As soon as the coin was paid away, which was not a long



operation, for it was over in less than a week; another Arret de



Conseil, of the 11th of the same month of March, came out,



declaring that, by the first of April, the coin was to be again



reduced to 70 livres the marc, and on the first of May to 65



livres. Upon this, the coin, which had been paid away the week



before, came pouring into the bank, for fear of the diminution



which was to take place the first of April. In this period of



about three weeks, the bank received in coin about 44 millions of



livres; and those who brought it in thought they were well rid of



it.



    It was during the months of February, March, and April 1720,



that the great operations of the system were carried on.



    We may see by the chronological anecdotes in the 28th



chapter, what prodigious sums of bank notes were coined, and



issued during that time. It was during this period also, that a



final conclusion was put to the reimbursing all the public



creditors with bank notes: in consequence of which payment, the



former securities granted to them by the King, under the



authority of the parliament of Paris, were withdrawn and



annulled.



    Here then we have conducted this scheme to the last period.



    There remained only one step to be made to conclude the



operation; to wit, the sale of the actions, which the Regent had



in his custody to the number of 400,000.



    These were to be sold to the public, who were at this time in



possession of bank notes to the value of 2,235,083,590 livres.



See the foregoing table.



    Had the sale of the actions taken place, the notes would all



have returned to the bank, and there have been destroyed: by



which operation, the company would have become debtor to the



public for the dividends of all the actions in their hands, and



to the King for all those which might have remained in the hands



of the Regent. These proportions we cannot bring to any



calculation, as it would have depended entirely on the price of



the actions during so great an operation; and on the private



conventions between the parties, the Regent and the company.



    But alas! all this is a vain speculation. The system, which



hitherto had stood its ground in spite of the most violent



shocks, was now to tumble into ruin from a childish whim.



    In order to set this stroke of political arithmetic in the



most ludicrous light possible, I must do it in Dutot's own words,



uttered with a sore heart and in sober sadness.



    He had said before, that the coin of France was equal to 1200



millions of livres at 60 livres the marc. This marc was now at 65



livres (in May 1720, as above) so the numerary value, as he calls



it, (that is the denomination,) of the coin was now risen to



1,300,000,000; but the bank notes circulating in the month of May



were carried to 2,696,400,000; then he adds,



    'The 1300 millions of coin which were in France, were very



far from 2696 millions of notes. In that case the sum of notes



was to the sum of coin, nearly as 2 2/27 are to 1; that is to



say, that 207 livres 8 sols 1 7/8 denier in notes, was only worth



100 livres in coin; or otherwise, that a bank note of 100 livres



was only worth 48 livres 4 sols 5 deniers in coin, or



thereabouts.' Would not any mortal conclude from this calculation



of Dutot's, that the whole sum of 1300 millions had been in the



bank, as the only fund for the payment of the paper?



    This is a laboured equation, and from it we have a specimen



of this gentleman's method of calculating the value of bank



paper: but let us hear him out.



    'This prodigious quantity of money in circulation', says he,



'had raised the price of every thing excessively: so in order to



bring down prices, it was judged more expedient to diminish the



denomination of the bank notes, than to raise the denomination of



the coin; because that diminished the quantity of money, this



augmented it.'



    This was the grand point under deliberation, before the



famous arret of the 21st of May was given, viz. whether it were



better to raise the value of the coin, which did not belong to



the bank, but to the French nation, to double the denomination it



bore at this time, that is, to 130 livres the marc, by which



means the 1300 millions would have made 2600 millions, or to



reduce the 2600 millions of bank notes to one half, that is, to



1300 millions, the total denomination of the coin.



    To some people it would have appeared more rational to reject



both the alternatives, and to allow matters to stand as they



were, as long as they would stand, at least until the actions had



been all sold off; but this was not thought proper. After a most



learned deliberation, it was resolved to reduce to one half, the



denomination of all the paper of France, bank notes as well as



actions, instead of raising the denomination of the coin; and



this because the prices of commodities were supposed to be in



proportion to the quantity of the denominations of money.



    The arret was no sooner published than the whole paper fabric



fell to nothing. The day following, the 22nd of May, a man might



have starved with a hundred millions of paper in his pocket.



    This was a catastrophe the like of which, I believe, never



happened: it is so ridiculous that it is a subject fit only for a



farce.



    Here Dutot's lamentations and regrets are inimitable.



    In one place he says, 'Credit was too far fetched to be



solid. It was therefore proper to sacrifice one part, to give a



soliditY to the other. Even this was done; but the consequences



did not correspond to the intention. Confidence, which is the



soul of credit, eclipsed itself, and the loss of the bank note,



drew on the loss of the action.'



    In another place he says, 'This arret of the 21st of May,



which according to some blessoit l'équit*,' (a very mild



expression!) 'destroyed all confidence in the public; because the



King had diminished one half of that paper money (the bank notes)



which had been declared fixed.'



    Is it not a thousand pities that confidence should have



disappeared upon so slight a wound given to equity, only in the



opinion of some? For Dutot thought the operation perfectly



consistent with the principles of public credit.



    He tells us, that a letter was written to calm the minds of



the people, and to shew them how absurd it was, to allow the



paper to be fixed, while the coin varied; but, says he, 'as there



was a revenue attached to the action, the value of that paper did



not depend so much upon the capital, as on the sum of the



interest.' Very just. But were the dividends to stand at 200



livres, without suffering the same diminution as the action? And



how was confidence to subsist in a county, where the



denominations of both the paper and the coin were at the disposal



of a minister?



    The diminution upon the paper, by the arret of the 21st of



May, raised a most terrible clamour; and Law became the



execration of France, instead of being considered as its saviour.



He was banished, and reduced to beggary the same day.



    What profit could either the Regent, or Law, have reaped from



the success of such an operation? Had the coin been raised to 130



livres the marc, no hurt would probably have ensued, and the same



effect would have been produced.



    Had matters been left without any change at all, no bad



consequences would have followed: these existed only in the heads



of the French theorists. There was, indeed, twice as much money



in bank notes as in coin, in the whole kingdom of France: and



what then?



    When the Regent saw the fatal effects of his arret of the



21st of May, he revoked it on the 27th of the same month. On the



29th, he raised the coin to 82 livres 10 sols in the marc, and



re-established all the paper at its former denomination: but, as



Dutot has said, confidence was gone, and was no more to be



recalled. Nothing surprises me, but that she lived so long under



such rough management.



    Dutot, in talking of this augmentation of the coin, on the



29th of May, to 82 livres 10 sols, says, 'This operation was



consistent with the principles of public credit, and



advantageous. They would have done better had they pushed the



augmentation to 135 livres the marc; which would have made the



specie of France equal to the sum of bank notes.' These are his



words, p. 165.



    Are not these very sensible principles, coming from a man who



has written a book, which indeed few people can understand, in



order to prove the great hurt of tampering with the coin of



France?







Chap. XXXII







Conclusion of the Mississippi Scheme







    The Regent, persuaded that the blunder of the 21st of May was



absolutely irreparable, fell to work next to clear accompts with



the company.



    He owed them 1600 millions capital, and 48 millions a year of



interest upon it.



    On the other hand, he had in his possession no less than



400,000 actions, which at 200 livres dividend, which the company



was obliged to pay, amounted to 80 millions a year.



    How the Regent and the company settled matters I do not know



precisely. This, however, is certain, that by the arret of the 3d



of June 1720, the number of 400,000 actions, belonging to the



Regent, were burnt; and 24,000 more, which had been created by



his particular order, the 4th of October 1719, and never



delivered to the company, were suppressed.



    On the other hand, the company ceded 25 millions a year, of



the 48 millions which had been transferred to them.



    This sum was constituted anew upon the town-house of Paris,



as a fund to be subscribed for by the proprietors of bank notes,



at the rate of 2 1/2 per cent or as the French call it at the



40th penny. (Dutot, p. 168.) In consequence of this, 530 millions



of bank notes were subscribed for, and paid in, in the month of



June 1720.



    After the destruction of the 400,000 actions, the credit of



the bank notes languished until the 10th of October 1720.



    The object for which they were created was now gone. The



whole scheme of transferring the King's debts upon the company



vanished in the conflagration of the actions. What was then to be



done?



    The bank was at an end: 2235 millions of discredited bank



notes in circulation, and a small sum of coin to make them good,



was a situation which no authority could long support.



    The resolution then was taken to put a final conclusion to



this great affair; to bid a long farewell to credit and



confidence; and to return to the old system of rents upon the



town-house of Paris; and of coming at money in the best way they



could.



    In this light I see the Missisippi scheme. I may, no doubt,



be mistaken in many things: the lights, or rather the



glimmerings, by which I have been conducted through this inquiry,



must plead my excuse.



    But it is not facts so much as principles, I have been



investigating through this whole disquisition; and the imperfect



account I have been able to give of the former, will at least



point out, I hope, the notions which the French nation, at that



time, had of the latter. If the contrast between French



principles, and those I have laid down, tend to cast any light



upon the subject of paper credit in general, my end is



accomplished: if they ever prove of use to mankind, I shall not



think my labour lost.







Chap. XXXIII







Why Credit fell, and how it might have been supported







    I shall now make a few general observations upon the total



and sudden fall of credit in France in May 1720: and I shall



suggest the means by which, I think, it might have been



sustained, even after all the preceding mismanagement.



    Was it any wonder that the French should be astonished at



this prodigious revolution, at this immense value of paper on the



21st of May, and at the total discredit of every bit of it the



very day following?



    If there had been a value, said they, what became of it? If



there never was any value, how could a nation be so deceived?



This phaenomenon has puzzled many a head; but the nature and



principles of credit furnish an easy solution of it.



    In deducing the principles of credit, we have shewn that a



permanent and well secured fund of interest is always equal in



value to a corresponding capital.



    The difference between a permanent and well secured fund, and



a precarious and ill secured fund, consists in this, that the



first never can disappear, and the other may.



    Now the fund, in this case, was at first real and did exist;



but it was rendered precarious, by a blundering administration:



then credit filed, and in that convulsion, the fund of interest



was fraudulently diminished by an act of power.



    Had the true principles of credit been understood in France,



the bank notes and actions might have been supported, even after



the arret of the 21st of May: and all the monstrous value of



paper, rised so high by the low rate of interest, might have been



preferred: consequently this value, in capital, really existed



relatively to the rate of interest.



    As the object of the present disquisition into the principles



upon which the Missisippi scheme was conducted, is only intended



as an illustration of the principles of credit in general; I



shall first account for the wonderful phaenomenon above mentioned



and then shew how, in the greatest of all the French distress,



their credit might have been reestablished in a more solid manner



than ever.



    As to the wonderful phaenomenon of the prodigious wealth



created by the system, and annihilated in one day, I answer, that



there had been no creation of wealth at all, except in



consequence of the fall of interest.



    First, We have seen that at the death of the late King of



France, the interest of his debts amounted to 80 millions. Was



not this a fund which ought to have been made solid and



permanent? Will any man say, that a regular plan of paying this



interest was a means of creating new wealth? Certainly not.



    Secondly, These debts were mostly secured by contracts of



constitution of annual rents upon the town-house of Paris: a



security taken in the name of a particular creditor, which



requires a form of law to transfer.



    By the scheme we have been explaining, all these securities



were changed: and instead of constitutions of rent, bank notes,



in which the King was equally debtor, were given.



    Will any man say, that this was the means of either



increasing or diminishing the wealth of France? Certainly not. A



man who has a good bond in his pocket is as rich before it is



paid with bank notes as after: but he has not so much money in



his hands; because the bond is not money, and the notes are.



    Thirdly, We have said that the interest of the King's debts



amounted to 80 millions a year, at 4 per cent.



    We have seen how the company of the Indies were provided with



a fund equal to this sum, arising from the 48 millions which the



King paid for the loan of the paper with which the debts were to



be paid, and from many other lucrative branches of revenue; which



instead of being burthensome to the King, were, on the contrary,



the means of augmenting his income, by the advanced rent the



company gave for the different farms which produced them.



    Had the public creditors, therefore, vested their claims in



actions, they would, in consequence of that operation, have



become sharers in the fund of 80 millions a year, administered by



themselves, (and they would then have been the company) open to



be improved by trade abroad, and by a good administration at



home.



    Had this system been carried on in a plain easy way,



consistently with common sense, the public creditors would have



been paid; the King's revenue augmented; and it would have been



put under a good and a cheap administration.



    But, when, by the absurd operations of changing the



denominations of coin and paper, and wantonly playing with every



man's property, the creditors saw themselves standing on the



brink of a precipice; and finding, instead of a good contract on



the town-house of Paris, a bank note put into their hands, which



might be diminished in its value by one half every month, while



at the same time the coin might be raised to double, it was very



natural to suppose, that the intention of the King's ministers



was to withdraw from them totally these 80 millions, to which



they were entitled: in which case, there was an annihilation



indeed of all the notes; but there was no annihilation of wealth:



for in that case, the wealth was still the same, only it was



transferred from the creditors to the King the debtor: that is,



the creditors were defrauded.



    On the other hand, stood the proprietors of the actions sold.



These had been used to make a traffic of buying and selling the



200,000 actions which had been in their hands ever since



September 1717, when they were first created. For we have shewn,



that the posterior creation of actions by the united company, was



a mere delusion, as they were all found in the custody of the



Regent. The actions, I say, were immediately put into a state of



stagnation; because of the discredit cast upon the bank notes,



with which it had been usual to buy them.



    Fourthly, I must observe, that the stagnation of a paper



which carries no interest, is equal to a temporary annihilation.



The holder then is deprived of the use of his money; and he is



not paid for the loss he sustains.



    If, therefore, it had been possible to have given a new



activity to this bank paper, without allowing it to die away, as



it were, in this temporary fit of fainting, credit would have



revived: all accompts would have been kept clear, for this is the



use of paper money, and so short a shock would hardly have been



felt.



    But the great damage resulting to the public, upon every



occasion of this kind, proceeds from the delay in applying the



proper remedy. When any paper is discredited, it immediately



falls in its value. The person then who is the original and real



creditor for the whole value, and in whose hands the paper is



when it suffers the discredit, sells at discount: this is an



irretrievable loss to him; and when the paper recovers its credit



again, either in part, or on the whole, the profit then belongs



to the person who had bought it at discount, and does not go to



indemnify the real sufferer.



    This was the case with respect to the notes of the French



bank: they were allowed to languish from the 21st of May that



they were discredited, until the 10th of October, when their fate



was decided, as has been said.



    Farther, we have seen, that this whole movement of credit had



for its basis 80 millions a year, originally paid to the



creditors for their interest. This sum answered to the capital of



2000 millions; because at the old King's death, interest was



fixed at 4 per cent.



    When, by the operations of the system, all this capital was



turned into money, that is, bank notes, the regorging plenty of



it made interest fall to 2 per cent consequently, the capital,



which constantly draws its value from the interest paid for it,



rose to 4000 millions. We have said that the total value of the



paper rose to 6000 millions, but we must reflect, that above 2000



millions of these 6000 millions was in bank notes, and employed



in buying of actions. So that both the notes and the actions must



not be reckoned as existing together.



    Had the Regent sold the actions, he would have burnt 2000



millions of bank notes, and thus the value in paper would have



remained at 4000 millions, so long as interest remained at 2 per



cent; and had interest fallen still lower, and dividends remained



at 200 livres per action, the value of actions, and consequently



of this capital of 4000 millions, would have risen in proportion,



just as the value of the capital of the debts of Great Britain



rises and falls according to the rate of money; although the same



sum of interest be paid to the creditors at all times.



    This augmentation, therefore, upon the value of all capitals,



during the Missisippi, of lands as well as actions, was in



consequence of the fall of interest, and from no other artifice



whatever. Lands in France, at that time, sold at 80 and 100 years



purchase. (Dutot, vol. II, p. 200.)



    When credit failed, and when all the circulating paper was



thrown into a state of stagnation, interest rose, in proportion



to the deficiency of the supply for the demands of borrowers. The



value of capitals then diminished. But this might have happened



from another cause, had there been no bankruptcy, or intention to



defraud the creditors: a war might have produced it; or any



circumstance which might have raised the rate of interest.



    The rise, therefore, upon capitals, from the fall of



interest, I consider here as no acquisition of wealth: I reckon



wealth to be that which is the annual produce of the capitals.



    So much for the resolution of this wonderful phaenomenon.



    I must now shew that in the height of the distress, the



confidence of the public was still to be regained, and credit



recovered, even after the fatal arret of the 21st of May 1720.



    I lay it down as a principle, that whoever has a sufficient



fund, and pays interest regularly for the money he owes, runs no



risk of losing his credit.



    So soon, therefore, as the Regent found that by his arret of



the 21st of May, all credit had disappeared; had he, upon the



27th of the same month, or at the time he raised the coin to 82



livres 10 sols per marc, ordered all bank notes presented to the



bank, either to be paid in coin, or marked in the books of the



bank as bearing interest at 2 per cent. I say, credit would not



have suffered in any comparison to what it did. Nobody then would



have sold a note at discount; and, had it been necessary, he



might have ordered the interest to be paid monthly.



    The authority I have for this opinion is Dutot, who says,



that upon opening the subscription of 25 millions in the month of



June, the notes fell in their value 11 1/2 per cent only.



    Now the rate of this subscription was at 2 1/2 per cent as we



have seen; consequently, if 100 livres of notes lost but 11 1/2



per cent they were worth 88 1/2 livres in coin; but these 100



livres in notes were worth 2 1/2 per cent because the



subscription was open at that rate: consequently 88 1/2 livres in



coin was also worth 2 livres 10 sols per annum: consequently



interest, at that time, was at 2.825 per cent that is, below 3



per cent even after the bankruptcy.



    Where then was the great harm? Where was the occasion to fly



immediately to the destruction of actions, which were in the



Regent's own hand? A little patience, and good management, would



have set all to rights.



    I should, therefore, have left the notes in circulation under



this regulation, viz. that such as should be presented to the



bank should have had a transfer of 2 per cent paid quarterly; or



a value, in actions, at 10,000 livres per action; which is the



capital answering a dividend of 200 livres at 2 per cent at the



option of the holder: and in case interest had come to fall still



lower, the price of actions might have been augmented.



    I should have set before the public a full and exact account



of the company's funds. I should have banished all mystery from



the affairs of credit. I should have registered a declaration in



parliament, setting forth,



    First, That all future changes either upon the denominations



of paper or coin, were contrary to the maims of good government.



    Secondly, That all stipulations between the King and his



creditors, were to be inviolable. And,



    Thirdly, That the parliament of Paris should for ever remain



invested with an exclusive right to watch over these regulations



in time to come; and I should have bound the parliament by a



special oath for this purpose. I should even have had the King to



take the same oath: and he might have ratified it at his



coronation in 1725.



    By these steps I should have vested a new power in the Kings



of France which they never had before: a power of having money



from their subjects, from their allies, and from their enemies: a



power they have not, nor ever will have, until the principles of



credit be better understood among them.



    Had such a plan been followed, I have not the least doubt,



but that, first, The actions would have been sold at a very great



advanced value above the standard of 5000 livres, at which the



Regent had bought them: secondly, That money would have come back



to 2 per cent and then, thirdly, Had banks been established upon



a proper plan, ease, with industry, would long ere now have



appeared in every corner of that kingdom.



    How finitely more easy would it have been to establish such a



plan in 1720 than at present? At that time the most difficult



part of the whole was executed. The creditors had taken notes for



their claims: the credit then was given and accepted. There was



nothing to be done but to support it. The creditors were then at



the mercy of the state: at present the state is at the mercy of



the creditors. Were such operations on coin to take place at



present, as were then familiar; were the King at present to



attempt to turn the constitutions of rent, perpetual and



life-annuities, into any other form than what they have, the



credit of France would be undone for a long time; and who knows



what views of ambition a situation so deplorable might not stir



up in certain courts of Europe.



    What state would pay its debts, if it durst do otherwise? And



what state can diminish its debts in any other way than by



lowering the interest upon them? But of this more in its proper



place.







Chap. XXXVI







Of Banks of Deposit and Transfer







    I now dismiss the subject of banks of circulation. The



unspeakable advantages drawn from this institution, when properly



regulated, in supplying money at all times to those who have



property for the encouragement of industry, and for improvements



of all sorts, and the bad consequences which result to society,



from the abuse they are exposed to, has engaged me, perhaps, in



too long a discussion of various circumstances relating to them.



    I now come to treat of banks of deposit or of transfer of



credit: an institution of the greatest utility for commerce.



    These two species of banks differ essentially in two



particulars.



    First, That those of circulation serve the purpose of melting



down unwieldy property into money; and of preserving the quantity



of it at the proportion of the uses found for it. Those of



deposit, are calculated to preserve a sum of coin, or a quantity



of precious moveables, as a fund for carrying on the circulation



of payments, with a proportional value of credit or paper money



secured upon them.



    Secondly, In the banks of circulation, the fund upon which



the credit is built, is not corporeally in the custody of the



bank; in the other it is.



    The fundamental principle, then, of banks of deposit, is the



faithful preservation of the fund delivered to the bank, upon



which credit, in money, is given for the value.



    If at any time a bank of deposit should lend, or should in



anywise dispose of any part of this fund, which may consist in



coin, bullion, or any other precious moveable, once delivered to



them, to the end that a credit in money may be written down for



it in their books of transfer, in favour of the depositor, and



his assigns; by this act, the bank departs from the principles



upon which it is established. And if any bank be established



which, by its regulations, may so dispose of the fund of its



credit, then such a bank becomes of a mixed nature, and



participates of that of a bank of circulation.



    These things will be better understood by reasoning from an



example of a true bank of deposit.







Chap. XXXVII







Of the Bank of Amsterdam







    Many authors have written concerning this great bank of



deposit: particularly, Davenant, Sir William Temple, Ricard, in



his Trait* de Commerce revu par Struyk, the author of the Essai



sur le Commerce, and Mr Megens, in his book, which has been



translated into English, under the title of The Universal



Merchant.



    In these authors we find a number of facts, which I shall



combine with my own informations, and here apply principles to



them; in order to communicate a distinct idea of this



establishment. A detail of its particular operations regards



practice, and falls not within my subject.



    The original intention of the States of Holland, in



establishing the bank of Amsterdam, was to collect a large



capital in coin within that city, which might there perpetually



remain, buried in a safe repository for the purposes which we are



now to explain.



    In order to accomplish this plan they established the bank



upon the 31st day of January 1609.



    The method they fell upon to collect the coin, was to order,



that all bills of exchange, for any sum exceeding 300 florins,



should be paid in specie to the bank; and that the holder of such



bills should, instead of receiving the coin, have the value of it



written down in the books of the bank to his credit, at his



command, to be transferred to any person he should appoint; but



never more to be demandable from the bank in specie.



    By this operation, the mass of coin circulating constantly



from hand to hand, between the merchants of Amsterdam, began, by



degrees, to be heaped up in the bank; and as the heap augmented,



so did the sum of credit augment upon the books of the bank.



    It is evident, from this change in the mode of circulation,



that no loss could be incurred from the locking up of the coin.



    As long as coin is in a state of constant circulation, it can



produce no interest to any person. Interest commences from the



moment the coin begins to stagnate; that is to say, so soon as it



comes into the hands of one who has no ready money demand upon



him. When this happens, the proprietor lends it at interest.



    Now the credit in the books of the bank, which is every day



transferable at the bank, answers every purpose of coin, either



for payment or loan: and the proprietor has neither the trouble



of receiving the species, nor any risk from robbery, or false



coin.



    The first advantage the city reaped from this institution,



was, to secure the residence of trade in that place.



    Capitals transferable only at the bank, laid the proprietors



under a necessity of fixing their dwelling where their funds



were, and where only they could be turned to accompt.



    It had another excellent effect in commerce: it pointed out



the men of substance. A credit in bank is no wise equivocal: it



is a fund of undoubted security.



    From the constitution of this bank we may form an estimate of



the extent of the deposit.



    It can only swallow up a sum equal to what is necessary for



circulating the payments of the city of Amsterdam. Were a sum



exceeding this to be shut up in the bank, and were the credits



written in the books of the bank to exceed this proportion, it is



plain, that the value of the bank money would sink immediately.



The reason is obvious: the credits transferable are of no use to



those who have no occasion to transfer; that is, to pay, lend, or



exchange at Amsterdam. So soon, then, as all the demand of



Amsterdam is satisfied, the proprietors of the overplus will seek



to realize their superfluous credit, in order to invest the value



arising from it, in some other place where a demand may arise.



    In order to realize, they must sell their bank credit for



coin; because the bank pays in transfer only. Coin then would be



demanded preferably to credit in bank; consequently, coin would



rise in its proportional value to bank money, or bank money would



lose, which is the same thing. This fluctuation between bank



money and coin, leads me to explain what is called the agio of



the bank.











NOTES:







1. Solid property, here, is not taken in the strictest



acceptation. In countries of commerce, where banks are generally



established, every denomination of good personal security may be



considered as solid property. Those who have personal estates,



may obtain credit from banks as well as landed men; because these



personal estates are secured either on lands, or in the funds, or



in effects which contain as real a value as lands, and these



being affected by the securities which the proprietors grant to



the bank, may with as much propriety be said to be melted down,



as if they consisted in lands. In subjects of this nature, it is



necessary to extend the meaning of our terms, in proportion to



the circumstances concerning which we reason.







2. Let it be remarked in this place, that although all persons



obtaining credit from a bank for a determinate sum, be obliged to



grant a proper security for the whole sum; yet by the nature of



the obligation, no interest becomes due to the bank in



consequence of it, except in proportion to the sums advanced, and



to the time of such advance by the bank. Example: A. Obtains a



credit from a bank for one thousand pounds. After one month he



mikes a call for one hundred pounds; the interest of this hundred



pounds commences from the day only on which the bank pays it; and



were A. to replace this sum to the bank one week after, he will



be liable for one week's interest only, of one hundred pounds



notwithstanding that his obligation lies in the hand of the bank



for one thousand pounds. When, therefore, in the course of this



subject, we shall mike mention of the interest due to the bank



upon the securities in their hand, for the credits they have



given; this is always understood to be restricted to the sums



actually advanced by the bank upon such credits.







3. At this time there was another circumstance, besides the



demand of a balance to be paid abroad, which distressed the bank,



viz. a suspicion which took place, that if the rebellion had



succeeded, the credit of the bank would have totally failed.



    This very case points out the great advantage of banks upon



mortgage of private credit.



    We have said, that the credit of such banks ought to be



established upon the principles of private securities only. If



their notes be issued upon solid property, then no rebellion can



influence them : but of this more hereafter.







4. We are not to suppose that this yearly balance of 200,000 l.



is always to continue. We have seen how it has been occasioned by



a course of unfavourable circumstances, which have run Scotland



in debt; we have seen how the banks may interpose their credit,



in order to assist the country in paying it; and we shall see,



before we dismiss this subject, how they will be enabled to repay



it, and set Scotland free, by a return of a favourable balance



upon their commerce. Let it then be remembered, that all those



contracts in England are properly the debts of Scotland, not of



the banks. Scotland, therefore, and not the banks, must be at all



the expence thereby incurred. These points shall be explained as



we go along.







5. Here the bank departed from the principles of private and



mercantile credit, upon which Law had formed it, and proceeded



upon those of public credit. Public credit in France is the



credit of the Sovereign ; the solidity of which depends upon the



maxims which he follows in the course of his administration.







6. Dutot, speaking of the great value of paper in notes and



actions, throws out several reflections, in the passage I am now



to transcribe from him, which, at the same time that they prove



the great advantages resulting to France from the establishment



of credit among them, abundantly evince how lame this author's



ideas were concerning the principles of paper credit, and of



circulation. He says, (vol. ii p. 200) 'This paper was indeed



just so much real value, which credit and confidence had created



in favour of the state: and by this sum was circulation



augmented, independently of all the coin which was then in



France.



    Upon this revolution, Plenty immediately displayed herself



through all the towns, and all the country. She there relieved



our citizens and labourers from the oppression of debts, which



indigence had obliged them to contract: she revived industry: she



restored that value to every fund, which had been suspended by



those debts: she enabled the King to free himself, and to make



over to his subjects, for more than fifty-two millions of taxes,



which had been imposed in the years preceding 1719; and for more



than thirty-five millions of other duties, extinguished during



the regency. This plenty sunk the rate of interest; crushed the



usurer; carried the value of lands to eighty and a hundred years'



purchase; raised up stately edifices both in town and country;



repaired the old, which were falling to ruin, improved the soil;



gave a value to every fruit produced by the earth, which before



that time had none at all. Plenty recalled those citizens, whom



misery had forced to seek their livelihood abroad. In a word,



riches flowed in from every quarter. Gold, silver, precious



stones, ornaments of all kinds, which contribute to luxury and



magnificence, came to us from every country in Europe. Whether



these prodigies, or marvellous effects, were produced by art, by



confidence, by fear, or by whim if you please, one must agree,



that that art, that confidence, that fear, or that whim, had



operated all these realities which the ancient administration



never could have produced.



    What a difference in the situation of France at the beginning



of the regency, and the situation in which she was in November



1719!



    Thus far the system had produced nothing but good: everything



was commendable, and worthy of admiration.' These are the



sentiments of Dutot concerning this system of paper credit.







Part III







Of Exchange







Chap. I







Of the first Principles of Exchange







    Having ended what I had to say of banks, in which most of the



principles of private credit and domestic circulation, have been



sufficiently deduced, I now proceed to the doctrine of exchange,



which is the principal operation of mercantile credit, for the



carrying on of foreign circulation.



    The security which merchants commonly take from one another



when they circulate their business, is a bill of exchange, or a



note of hand: these are looked upon as payment. When they give



credit to one another in account, or otherwise, the cause of



confidence is of a mixed nature; established partly upon the



security of their effects, partly on the capacity, integrity, and



good fortune, of the person to whom the credit is given.



    No man but a merchant has any idea of the extent and nature



of this kind of credit. It is a thing to be felt, but cannot be



reduced to principles; and merchants themselves can lay down no



certain rules concerning it. It is an operation which totally



depends upon their own sagacity.



    But when they deal by bills of exchange, the case is very



different. The punctuality of acquitting these obligations is



essential to commerce; and no sooner is a merchant's accepted



bill protested, than he is considered to be a bankrupt. For this



reason, the laws of most nations have given very extraordinary



privileges to bills of exchange. The security of trade is



essential to every society; and were the claims of merchants to



linger under the formalities of courts of law, when liquidated by



bills of exchange, faith, confidence, and punctuality, would



quickly disappear; and the great engine of commerce would be



totally destroyed.



    A regular bill of exchange is a mercantile contract, in which



four persons are concerned, viz. First, The drawer, who receives



the value: Secondly, His debtor in a distant place, upon whom the



bill is drawn, and who must accept and pay it: Thirdly, The



person who gives value for the bill, to whose order it is to be



paid: and, Fourthly, The person to whom it is ordered to be paid,



creditor to the third.



    By this operation, reciprocal debts, due in two distant



parts, are paid by a sort of transfer, or permutation of debtors



and creditors.



    (A) in London, is creditor to (B) in Paris, value 1OO l. (C)



again in London, is debtor to (D) in Paris for a like sum. By the



operation of the bill of exchange, the London creditor is paid by



the London debtor, and the Paris creditor is paid by the Paris



debtor; consequently, the two debts are paid, and no money is



sent from London to Paris, nor from Paris to London.



    In this example, (A) is the drawer, (B) is the acceptor, (C)



is the purchaser of the bill, and (D) receives the money. Two



persons here receive the money, (A) and (D), and two pay the



money, (B) and (C); which is just what must be done when two



debtors and two creditors clear accounts.



    This is the plain principle of a bill of exchange. From which



it appears, that reciprocal and equal debts only can be acquitted



by them.



    When it therefore happens, that the reciprocal debts of



London and Paris (to use the same example) are not equal, there



arises a balance on one side. Suppose London to owe Paris a



balance, value 100 l. How can this be paid? I answer, that it may



either be done with or without the intervention of a hill.



    With a bill, if an exchanger, finding a demand for a bill



upon Paris, for the value of 100 l. when Paris owes no more to



London, shall send 100 l. to his correspondent at Paris in coin,



at the expence, I suppose, of 1 l. and then, having become



creditor on Paris, he can give a bill for the value of 100 l.



upon his being repaid his expence, and paid for his risk and



trouble.



    Or it may be paid without a bill, if the London debtor shall



send the coin himself to his Paris creditor, without employing an



exchanger.



    This last example shews of what little use bills are in the



payment of balances. As far as the debts are equal, nothing can



be more useful than bills of exchange, but the more they are



useful in this easy way of business, the less profit there is to



any person to make a trade of exchange, when he is not himself



concerned, either as debtor or creditor.



    When merchants have occasion to draw and remit bills for the



liquidation of their own debts, active and passive, in distant



parts, they meet upon Change; where, to pursue the former



example, the creditors upon Paris, when they want money for



bills, look out for those who are debtors to it. The debtors to



Paris again, when they want bills for money, seek for those who



are creditors upon it. This is a representation of what we have



frequently called the money market, in which the demand is for



money, or for bills.



    This market is constantly attended by brokers, who relieve



the merchant of the trouble of searching for those he wants. To



the broker every one communicates his wants, as far as he finds



it prudent; and by going about among all the merchants, the



broker discovers the side upon which the greater demand lies, for



money, or for bills.



    We have often observed, that he who is the demander in any



bargain, has constantly the disadvantage in dealing with him of



whom he demands. This is no where so much the case as in



exchange, and renders secrecy very essential to individuals among



the merchants. If the London merchants want to pay their debts to



Paris, when there is a balance against London, it is their



interest to conceal their debts, and especially the necessity



they may be under to pay them; from the fear lest those who are



creditors upon Paris should demand too high a price for the



exchange over and above par.



    On the other hand, those who are creditors upon Paris, when



Paris owes a balance to London, are as careful in concealing what



is owing to them by Paris, from the fear lest those who are



debtors to Paris should avail themselves of the competition among



the Paris creditors, in order to obtain bills for their money,



below the value of them, when at par. A creditor upon Paris, who



is greatly pressed for money at London, will willingly abate



something of his debt, in order to get one who will give him



money for it.



    It is not my intention to dip into the intricacies of



exchange: all intricacies must here be banished; and instead of



technical terms, which are very well adapted for expressing them,



recourse must be had to plain language, for pointing out the



simple operations of this trade. It is by this method that



principles must be deduced, and from principles we shall draw the



consequences which may be derived from them.



    From the operation carried on among merchants upon Change,



which we have been describing, we may discover the consequence of



their separate and jarring interests. They are constantly



interested in the state of the balance. Those who are creditors



on Paris, fear a balance due to London; those who are debtors to



Paris, dread a balance due to Paris. The interest of the first is



to dissemble what they fear; that of the last, to exaggerate what



they wish. The brokers are those who determine the course of the



day: and the most intelligent merchants are those who dispatch



their business before the fact be known.



    Now I ask, how trade, in general, can be interested in the



question, who shall outwit, and who shall be outwitted, in this



complicated operation of exchange among merchants?



    The interest of trade and of the nation is principally



concerned in the proper method of paying and receiving the



balances. It is also concerned in preserving a just equality of



profit and loss among all the merchants, relatively to the real



state of the balance. Unequal competition among men engaged in



the same pursuit, constantly draws along with it bad consequences



to the general undertaking, as has been often observed; and



secrecy in trade will be found, upon examination, to be much more



useful to merchants in their private capacity, than to the trade



they are carrying on.



    Merchants, we have said, in speaking of the bank of England,



endeavour to simplify their business as much as possible; and



commit to brokers many operations which require no peculiar



talents to execute. This of exchange is of such a nature that it



is hardly possible for a merchant to carry on the business of his



bills, without their assistance, upon many occasions. When



merchants come upon Change, they are so full of fears and



jealousies, that they will not open themselves to one another,



lest they should discover what they want to conceal. The broker



is a confidential man, in some degree, between parties, and



brings them together.



    Besides the merchants, who circulate among themselves their



reciprocal debts and credits, arising from their importation and



exportation of goods, there is another set of merchants who deal



in exchange; which is the importation and exportation of money



and bills.



    Were there never any balance on the trade of nations,



exchangers and brokers would find little employment: reciprocal



and equal debts would easily be transacted openly between the



parties themselves. No man feigns or dissembles, except when he



thinks he has an interest in so doing.



    But when balances come to be paid, exchange becomes



intricate; and merchants are so much employed in particular



branches of business, that they are obliged to leave the



liquidation of their debts to a particular set of men, who make



it turn out to the best advantage for themselves.



    Whenever a balance comes to be paid, that payment costs, as



we have seen, an additional expence to those of the place who owe



it, over and above the value of the debt.



    If, therefore, this expence be a loss to the trading man, he



must either be repaid this loss by those whom he serves, that is,



by the nation; or the trade he carries on will become less



profitable to him.



    Every one will agree, I believe, that the expence of high



exchange upon paying a balance, is a loss to a people, no way to



be compensated by the advantages they reap from enriching the few



individuals among them, who gain by contriving methods to pay it



off: and if an argument be necessary to prove this proposition,



it may be drawn from this principle, to wit, whatever renders the



profit upon trade precarious or uncertain, is a loss to trade in



general: this loss is a consequence of high exchange; and



although a profit do result from it upon one branch of trade,



namely, the exchange business, yet this profit cannot compensate



the loss upon every other.



    We may, therefore, here repeat what we have said above, that



the more difficulty, there be found in paying a balance, the



greater will be the loss to the nation.



    This being admitted, I shall here enumerate all the



difficulties which occur in the paying of balances. Most of them



have been already mentioned from their relation to subjects



already discussed; and could it be supposed, that every reader



had retained the whole chain of reasoning already gone through, a



repetition in this place would be superfluous: but as this cannot



be expected, I shall, in as short and distinct a manner as



possible, recapitulate, under four articles, what I hope will be



sufficient to refresh the memory upon each of them.



    The first difficulty which occurs in paying a balance, is to



determine exactly the true and intrinsic value of the metals or



coin in which it is to be paid; that is to say, the real par.



    The second, How to remove the domestic inconveniences which



occur in paying with the metals or coin.



    The third, How to prevent the price of exchange from



operating upon the whole mass of reciprocal payments, instead of



affecting the balance only.



    The remedies and palliatives for these three inconveniences



once discovered, comes the last question, viz. How, when other



expedients prove ineffectual for the payment of a balance, the



same may be paid by the means of credit, without the intervention



of coin; and who are those who should conduct this operation.







Chap. II







How to determine exactly the true and intrinsic value of the



Metals, Coin, or Money, in which a Balance to foreign Nations is



to be paid







    This first question regards the whole mass of reciprocal



payments, as well as that of the balance.



    Every payment to be made of a determinate and fixed value,



that is to say, of a liquidated debt, must be paid in a value



equally determinate in its nature.



    This I suppose to be the case, whether payment be made in the



precious metals unmanufactured, that is bullion, or in a nation's



coin, or in denominations of money of account. All payments in



merchandize, except bullion, must suffer conversions of value



before the debts can be liquidated.



    Money of accompt, which is what we understand by



denominations, we have defined to be a scale of equal parts,



calculated to determine the value of things, relatively to one



another. It must, therefore, be by the money of accompt of



different nations, that the value of bullion and of coin can be



ascertained.



    When coin is introduced, the denominations of money are



realized in a determinate quantity of the precious metals, and



the fabrication of the bullion into coin, raises the value of



this commodity, bullion, like the manufacturing of every other



natural production.



    When coin, therefore, is employed in paying sums according to



the legal denomination which it carries, it is money, not



merchandize; but when it is given at any other rate than its



denomination, it is merchandize, not money.



    In the third book, we have shewn how utterly impossible it is



to realize with exactness, the denominations of money of accompt,



in the metals which are constantly varying in their value, and



exposed to waste in circulation.



    We have shewn, by many examples, how, in fact, the value of



the pound sterling has been subject to great vicissitudes of



late, from the great disorder of the coin.



    The coin of France, is, indeed, upon a better footing in



point of uniformity of weight, than ours; and the proportion of



the metals in it comes nearer their present value in the market:



but then as oft as the balance turns against France, the high



imposition upon her coinage, exposes the coin to great



fluctuations of value, when compared with bullion in the Paris



market. This is also to be ascribed to the imperfection of the



metals when used as money, while they are merchandize at the same



time.



    This being the case, the way to calculate the real par of



exchange between nations, who have in common no determinate and



invariable money, exclusive of coin, is to consider fine gold and



silver as the next best standard.



    This is a merchandize which never varies in its quality. Fine



gold is always the same in every mass; and weight for weight,



there is no difference in its value or quality any where.



    This standard being once adopted, the calculation of the real



par becomes an easy operation to those who know the course of the



bullion market in the two places exchanging.



    If, by the exportation of all the heavy coin of London, bills



must be paid in a worn out currency, the rise in the price of



gold in their market, above mint price, will mark pretty nearly



how far it is light.



    If, on the other hand, the wars of France, or an unfavourable



balance upon her trade, shall oblige her to export her coin, this



operation will sink the value of it, or raise the price of



bullion, which ever way you choose to express it.



    It is not here a proper place to resume the question, which



of the two expressions is the most proper: we are here



considering the value of the bullion to be the thing fixed,



because it answers the purpose. But whether we say that bullion



rises in the markets of Paris and London; or that the value of



their currencies sink, though from very different causes, the



calculation of the real par will proceed with equal accuracy. An



example will illustrate this.



    When fine gold is at the lowest price to which it can ever



fall at Paris, that is to say, at the mint price, it is worth 740



livres 9 sols, or 740.45 livres per mark, in decimals, for the



ease of calculation. The mark contains eight ounces Paris weight.



    Were the ounces of Paris equal to those of troy weight, 1/8



of this sum, or 92.5562 livres, would be the value of that ounce



by which gold is sold at London.



    But the Paris ounce is about 1 1/2 per cent lighter than the



troy ounce; and the exact proportion between them is unknown,



from the confusion of weights, and the want of a fixed standard



in England. By the best calculation I have been able to make, a



Paris ounce should contain 473 grains troy, which makes the



proportion between the two ounces to be as 473 is to 480, which



last is the number of grins in the troy ounce.



    Gold bullion at Paris is regulated by the mark fine, at



London by the ounce standard.



    When standard gold bullion is at the lowest price it can be



at London, it is worth the mint price, or 3 l. 17 s. 101/2 d. per



troy ounce, which, expressed in decimals, is 3.8937 l. sterling.



Standard is to fine, as 11 is to 12; consequently, the ounce fine



is 4.2476 l. sterling: and if the Paris ounce of fine bullion be



worth at the mint, as has been said, 92.5562 livres; the ounce



troy, according to the above proportion, will be worth 93.926



livres. Divide then the livres by the sterling money, and the



quotient will give you the real par of exchange of the pound



sterling, while bullion remains at the mint price in Paris and in



London, viz. 93/42 920/476 = 22.112 livres for the pound, or



32.56 d. sterling for the French crown of 3 livres.



    Gold bullion never can rise in the Paris market, at least all



the last war it never did rise, above the value of the coin; that



is, to 801.6 livres the mark fine, or 100.2 livres per ounce



Paris, and 101.7 livres the troy ounce.



    How high the price of gold bullion may rise at London no man



can say; but the highest it rose to, during the last war, was, I



believe, 4 l. 0 s. 8 d. per ounce standard, or to 4.3999 l.



sterling per ounce fine. By this divide the value of the ounce



troy fine in French livres, the real par at this rate of the



metals in both cities will be 101.7/4.3999 = 23.11 livres for the



pound sterling, or 31.155 pence sterling for the French crown of



3 livres. But suppose two cases which may happen, viz. 1. That



gold bullion at Paris should be at the price of coin, while at



London it may be at mint price: or, 2. That at Paris it may be at



mint price, when at London it is at 4 l. 0 s. 8 d. what will then



the real par of exchange be?



    I answer, that on the first supposition, it will be one pound



sterling, equal to 23.939 livres, and the crown of 3 livres equal



to 30.076 pence sterling. In the other, equal to 21.34 livres for



the pound sterling, and for the crown of 3 livres 33.728. A



difference of no less than 8.9 per cent.



    Is it not evident that these variations must occur in the



exchange between London and Paris? And is it not also plain, that



they proceed from the fluctuation of the price of bullion, not



from exchange?



    We have, I think, demonstrated, in the third book, that a



wrong balance upon the French trade may raise bullion in the



Paris market to the price of coin; and that a right balance may



bring it down to mint price. The price of coinage is above 8 per



cent. So that 8 per cent of fluctuation in the price of bullion



is easily accounted for in the Paris market, without taking into



the account the variations in the English market.



    In London, where no coinage is paid, were all the coin of



full weight, and exportation free, coin and standard bullion



would constantly stand at the same price: but when the heavy coin



is exported, and the currency becomes light by the old coin



remaining in circulation, the price of bullion rises in



proportion.



    Is it surprising that, at London, gold in bullion should be



worth as much as gold of the same standard in guineas, weight for



weight? Is it not worth as much at the mint? Why should it not be



worth as much at the market? I affirm that any man may offer to



pay for the ounce of all the guineas coined by Charles II, James



II, and William III, now in circulation, the highest market price



that ever was given for standard gold bullion in London, and gain



by the bargain.



    This, I hope, will be sufficient to satisfy any body that



there is a mistake in ascribing the high price paid for the



French crown in the London exchange to a wrong balance upon the



trade of England with France.



    From this new light in which I have placed the question, I



hope the arguments used in the 16th chapter of the first part of



the third book, will acquire an additional force; and that



thereby the eyes of this nation may be opened with regard to the



interests of the French trade; a point, I should think, of the



highest concern.



    To calculate, as every body does, the par of the French



crown, either by the gold or the silver in the English standard



coin, when no such standard coin exists; and to state all that is



given for the crown above 29 1/2 d. if you reckon by the silver,



or 30 3/4 d. if you reckon by the gold, for the price of a wrong



balance, is an error which may lead to the most fatal



consequences.



    If government should think fit to impose, in their own mint,



a coinage, equal to that of France, and make all their coin of



equal weight, and at the due proportion, it will take off all the



loss we suffer by paying coinage to France (which we at present



impute to the exchange) while she pays none to us. But then it



will occasion nearly the same fluctuations upon the real par of



exchange as at present; only from another cause on the side of



Great Britain. At present our exchange becomes favourable from



the weight of our own currency, and the balance against France



upon her trade; which, in Paris, raises the price of the bullion



with which we pay our French debts. On the other hand, our



exchange becomes unfavourable from the lightness of our own



currency, from the coinage we pay to France, and balance against



us; which last carries off all our new guineas; and in the Paris



market, sinks the value of that bullion in which we pay our



French debts.



    Were matters put upon a right footing, we should gain from



France the price of our coinage, when our balance is favourable,



and pay coinage to France when their balance is favourable;



instead of seeing our exchange turn more in our favour, from the



additional weight only of the coin in which we pay.



    If French coinage should appear too high a price for the



interest of other branches of British trade, a question I shall



not here determine, let us impose at least as much as to keep our



guineas out of the melting pot, and banish all the old coin which



throws us into such confusion.



    What has been said is undoubtedly too much upon this subject



for the generality of readers. The number of those who can go



through a chapter like this with pleasure is very small. But if



the idea I have been endeavouring to communicate, be found just



by one man of capacity, whose opinion shall have weight in the



deliberations of Great Britain, the consequences may be of great



advantage to this nation; and this consideration will, I hope,



plead my excuse.



    I shall now set this question in another point of view, from



which the stress of my arguments will be felt, and all intricate



reasonings will be laid aside.



    Does not the price of exchange, or what is given above the



par, proceed from the expence of sending the metals from the one



place to the other, the insurance of them, and the exchanger's



profit? If this be true, which I believe nobody will deny, must



not what is paid for the bill, over and above these three



articles, be considered as the real par, relatively to exchange?



Now does the price of the bullion which the exchanger pays in his



own market, or the price he gets for that bullion in the market



to which he sends it, at all enter into the account of the



transportation, risk, and profit, which the exchanger has on the



operation? Certainly not. May there not be a very great



difference between the buying and selling the very same bullion



in different markets at one time and another? Ought we not to



charge this to some other accompt than to the price of exchange,



which is confined to the expence of transporting the balance



only, and when two objects totally different are included under



the same term, does it not tend to perplex our notions concerning



them?



    The great variation in the price of bullion in France, for



example, and the expence of procuring it, proceeds from three



causes. The first is, the coinage imposed in France, while none



is imposed in England. What, therefore, is paid upon this



account, is profit to France, and loss to England.



    The second cause of variation, is the debasement of the value



of the pound sterling, when the heavy gold has been sent abroad.



This loss affects the nation, and every man in England, in the



quality of creditor for sums specified in pounds sterling, to the



profit of all debtors.



    The third cause of variation, is from the great expence



exchangers are put to, in procuring the metals from other



countries, when they cannot be got at home: the consequence of



this shall be explained in a succeeding chapter.



    As all these causes are combined in the exchange upon bills



when they come to market, I think it is proper to analize them,



before the doctrine we are upon can be distinctly understood.



    I shall therefore conclude my chapter with this proposition.



    That the best method of determining exactly the true and



intrinsic value of the metals, coin, or money, in which the



balance due to or from a foreign nation is to be paid, is to



compare the respective value of fine bullion with the respective



denominations of the coin in the one and the other; and to state



the difference as the price paid for the exchange.







Chap. III







How to remove the Inconveniences which occur in paying Balances



with the Metals or Coin of a Nation







    The inconveniences which occur when balances are to be paid



in bullion or coin are these:



    First, the want of secure and ready transportation, from the



obstructions government throws in the way to prevent it.



    Secondly, The difficulty of procuring the metals abroad when



they are not to be found at home.



    When we speak here of balances to be paid from one country to



another, we understand that the general amount of the whole



payments to be made to the world, exceeds the sum of all that is



reciprocally due from it. So far as a balance due to one country



is compensated with a balance due by another, they may be



mutually discharged by bills of exchange, according to the



principles already laid down. All compensations being made by



bills drawn for reciprocal debts, we must here suppose a balance



due by the country whose interest we are considering. This, like



debts between private people, must either be paid in intrinsic



value, or by security for it; that is, by contracting a permanent



debt bearing interest. The first is the question here before us;



the second will be examined in the succeeding chapter.



    The first difficulty mentioned, to wit, the want of secure



and ready transportation of the metals, proceeds in a great



measure from the obstruction government throws in the way, to



prevent the exportation of them. To remove which difficulty, it



is proper to shew how far it is the interest of government to



obstruct, how far to accelerate the transportation of the metals.



    We have said that it is the advantage of every state, in



point of trade, to have balances paid with the least expence. If



then we suppose that it is either necessary or expedient that



this balance should be paid in the metals, government, in this



case, should facilitate by every method the sending them off in



the cheapest and securest way.



    But since governments do not generally follow this rule, we



must examine the reasons which engage them to prefer a contrary



conduct.



    The principal, the most general, and most rational objection



against the exportation of the metals, is, that when it is



permitted without restriction, it engages the people, when they



go to foreign markets for articles of importation, to run to the



coin, instead of carrying thither the product and manufactures of



the country. From which a consequence is drawn, that as long as



coin and bullion are fairly allowed to be exported, the rich



inhabitants will employ them for the purchase of foreign



commodities, to the hurt of domestic industry.



    This is an objection of great weight, relatively to the



situation of many nations. The Spaniards and Portuguese feel it



severely. Many individuals there are very rich; the numerous



classes of the people are either lazy or not properly bred to



industry. In this situation the alternative to government is very



disagreeable. Either the rich must be deprived of many enjoyments



with which their industrious neighbours alone can supply them,



until, by very slow degrees, the lowest classes of their



countrymen can be engaged to change their way of living, and be



inspired with a spirit of industry; or they must be allowed to



gratify the desires which riches create, at the expence of the



nation's treasure, and the improvement of their country.



    From this alternative we discover the principle which must



direct the conduct of a statesman under such circumstances, viz.



    To forbid the importation of every foreign manufacture



whatsoever; to submit to the hardships necessarily implied in the



circumstances of the nation; and to pay freely what balance may



be owing upon natural produce imported for the uses of



subsistence or manufacture.



    This is a plan more rational and more easily executed, than a



general prohibition to export the metals; because by good



regulations, you may prevent the importation of manufactures; but



it is hardly possible to prevent the exportation of the metals



necessary to pay for what you have bought from strangers, by the



permission of government: and on the other hand, suppose you do



effectually prevent the exportation of the metals, the



consequence will be, to put an end to all foreign trade even in



natural produce, which on many occasions may be necessary for the



subsistence of the people. What nation will trade with another



who can pay only by barter? All credit will likewise be cut off;



for who will exchange by bills, with a place which cannot pay,



either in their own currency, or with the metals, the debts which



they reciprocally owe?



    The maxim therefore, here, is to prevent as much as possible



the contracting of debts with strangers; but when they must be



contracted, to facilitate the payment of them.



    This reasoning is calculated to direct a statesman who finds



himself at the head of a rich luxurious nobility, and an idle or



ill-instructed common people, surrounded by industrious



neighbours, whose assistance may be necessary upon many



occasions, to provide subsistence, or the materials of



manufacture, for his people; and this while he is forming a



scheme for introducing industry at home, as a basis for



establishing afterwards a proper foreign commerce.



    But in this subject combinations are finite, and the smallest



change of circumstances throws the decision of a question on a



different principle.



    I will not therefore say, that in every case which can be



supposed, certain restrictions upon the exportation of bullion or



coin are contrary to good policy. This proposition I confine to



the flourishing trading nations of our own time.



    To set this matter in a fair light, and as an exercise upon



principles, I shall borrow two examples, one from history, and



another from a recent experiment made in France, in which a clog



upon the exportation of the metals and coin was very politically



laid on.



    We learn from the history of Henry VII of England, a



sagacious Prince, that he established very severe laws against



the exportation of bullion; and obliged the merchants who



imported foreign commodities into his dominions, to invest their



returns in the natural produce of England, which at that time



consisted principally in wool and in grain.



    The circumstances of the times in which that Prince lived,



must therefore be examined, before we can justly find fault with



this step of his political oeconomy.



    In Henry the VIIth's time, the foreign trade of England was



entirely in the hands of foreigners, and every elegant



manufacture almost came from abroad.



    Under such circumstances, is it not plain, that the



prohibition to export bullion and coin, was a compulsion only



concomitant with other regulations, to oblige the foreign



merchants, residing in his kingdom, to buy up the superfluity of



the English natural produce of wool and grain? Had not the King



taken these measures, the whole money of the nation would have



been exported; the superfluous natural produce of England would



have lain upon hand; the redundancy of which would have brought



the price of them below the value of the subsistence of those who



produced them; agriculture would have been abandoned; and the



nation would have been undone.



    I allow that nothing is so absurd as to permit the



consumption of foreign productions, and to forbid the exportation



of the price of them. I also allow that every restraint laid upon



exporting silver and gold, affects the consumer of foreign goods,



and obliges him to pay the dearer for them; but this additional



expence to the consumer, does not augment the mass of foreign



debts. The debt due abroad will constantly be paid with the same



quantity of coin, whether the exportation of it be allowed or



not; because the loss of those who pay the balance arises from



the risk of confiscation of the money they want to export against



law; or from the high exchange they are obliged to pay to those



who take this risk upon themselves. In both cases, the additional



expence they are put to remains in the country, and is repaid



them by the consumers; consequently, can never occasion one



farthing more to be exported. Prohibitions, therefore, upon the



exportation of specie, are not in every case so absurd as they



appear at first sight. It is very certain that nobody ever gives



money for nothing; consequently, a state may rest assured that



the proprietors of the specie, their subjects, will take



sufficient care not to make a present of it to foreigners. The



intention, therefore, of such prohibitions is not so much to



prevent the payment of what people owe, as to prevent that



payment from being made in coin or bullion; and also to



discourage the buying of such foreign commodities as must be paid



in specie, preferably to others which may be paid for with the



returns of home produce.



    When a statesman, therefore, finds the balance of trade, upon



the main, favourable to the country he governs, he need give



himself no trouble about the exportation of the specie, from this



single principle, to wit, that he is sure that what is exported



is not given for nothing; and that the favourable balance cannot



fail to bring it back again, together with an additional supply



But when the balance turns against him in the regular course of



business, not from a temporary cause, then he may lay restraints



upon the exportation of specie, as a concomitant restriction,



together with others, in order to diminish the general mass of



importations, and thereby to set the balance even.



    In a trading nation, I allow that no restriction of this kind



ought to be made general; because it then affects the useful as



well as the hurtful branches of importation: but in Henry's days,



the sale of corn and wool was sufficient to procure for England



all it wanted from abroad; and the interests of trade were not



sufficiently understood, to enable the state to act by any other



than the most general rules. Forbidding the exportation of coin



was found to promote the exportation of English productions, and



this was a sufficient reason for making the prohibition



peremptory. In this view of the matter, did not Henry judge well,



when he obliged the merchants who imported foreign goods, to



invest the price they received for them in English commodities?



Once more I must say it, he was not so much afraid of the



consequences of the money going out, as of the corn and wool



remaining at home: had he been sure of the exportation of these



articles to as good purpose another way, the prohibition would



have been absurd; but I am persuaded this was not the case.



    The example taken from France is this.



    After the fatal bankruptcy in 1720, by the blowing up of the



Missisippi, the trade of France languished from the effects of



the instability of their coin, until the year 1726, when it was



set upon that footing on which it has remained ever since.



    Upon that last general coinage, the same principles of



enriching the King by the operation directed the conduct of the



minister.



    The old specie was cried down, and proscribed in circulation:



but it was thought, that as it was the King's coin, he had a



liberty to set a price upon it, at a different rate from any



other bullion of the same fineness: and that he had also a right



to command the proprietors of it to bring it to the mint at his



own price.



    The consequence was, that those who could were very desirous



to send it to Holland, in order to draw back the full value of



it, in bills upon Paris.



    Under such circumstances, were not prohibitions upon the



exportation of this coin most consistent with the plan laid down?



We shall, in the next chapter, examine the consequences of this



operation upon the exchange of France.



    What has been said, will, I hope, suffice to explain some of



the principal motives which statesmen may have, when they lay



restrictions on the exportation of the metals, with a view to



favour the trade of their nation, or the interest of the



exchequer.



    But besides the interest of trade, there are other reasons



for laying prohibitions on the exportation of the national coin,



although that of bullion be left free under certain restrictions.



    As often as it happens, that the value of a nation's coin



remains at par with bullion of the same weight and fineness, this



coin, if exported, may be melted down. This is a loss; because it



puts the nation to the expence of coining more for the use of



circulation.



    When nations give coinage gratis, or when they allow the coin



of other nations the privilege of passing current under



denominations exactly proportioned to its intrinsic value, then



coin never can be worth more than any other bullion of the same



standard; consequently, will be exported or smuggled out whenever



there is a demand for it abroad.



    If, therefore, a nation do really desire to avoid an expence



at the mint, they must make it the interest of merchants to



export every other thing preferably to their own coin. This is



done by imposing a duty upon the coinage; and this will either



prevent the coins going out unnecessarily, or if it be necessary



to export it, the coin will return in the payments made to the



nation; because of its advanced value above any other bullion



which can be sent.



    The forbidding of the exportation of coin, implies a



restriction upon the exportation of bullion; because, unless the



bullion be examined at the custom house, and the stamps upon it



looked at, it may happen to be nothing but the nation's coin



melted down, with an intention to avoid the law. For this reason,



whoever brings bullion to be stamped, whether it be for



exportation or not, must declare that it has not been made of the



nation's coin. How slender a check are all such declarations! The



only one effectual is private interest; and as no man will take



his wig to stuff his chair, when he can get cheaper materials



equally good, so no man will melt down coin which bears an



advanced value, when he can procure any other bullion.



    On the whole, we may determine, that a flourishing commercial



state, which has, on the average of its trade, a balance coming



in from other countries, should lay it down as a general rule, to



facilitate the exportation of its coin, as well as of bullion:



and if a very particular circumstance should occur, which may



continue for a short time, it may then put a temporary stop to



it, and facilitate the payment of the balance by the means of



credit.



    I have enlarged so much upon the methods of removing the



first difficulty of paying a balance, with the coin or bullion



found in a nation, that what remains to be said upon the second



difficulty, to wit, the procuring them from other nations, need



not be long.



    Were the mint weights of all countries sufficiently



determinate; were the regulations concerning the standard of



bullion exactly complied with; and were the current market prices



of this important commodity, considered as a valuable piece of



intelligence every where, the bullion trade would be much easier



than it is.



    We have said, that when the reciprocal debts of two nations



are equal, there is no occasion for bullion to discharge them.



But trading nations are many; and from this it may happen, that



one who, upon the whole, is creditor to the world, may be debtor



to a place which is also creditor to the world; and in this case



bullion is necessary to pay the debt.



    If a man owe money to a person who has many creditors, the



person owing, may buy up a claim against him, and pay what he



owes in that way: but if the person to whom he owes the money be



indebted to nobody, then the debt must be paid with ready money.



Just so of nations. For instance, when bullion is demanded to be



exported to Holland, the English merchants, who are creditors on



Spain and Portugal, take from thence their returns in bullion,



for the sake of paying the balance to Holland, which is, upon the



whole, creditor to the world.



    But as it seldom happens, that he who deals with Holland is



the person who has credit in Spain or Portugal, he is obliged to



apply to Portugal merchants in order to procure bullion. They



again who trade thither, having profit on the returns of the



commodities they bring from thence, will expect the same profits



upon the bills they give to the man who wants to take his return



in bullion. This plainly raises the price of bullion in the



English market; because it is brought home in consequence of a



demand from England. On the other hand, when the demands of



England for Portuguese commodities is less than the value of what



Portugal owes her, the Portugal merchants in London are obliged



to take the balance in the metals. These come to the London



market, and are offered to sale to those who want them: then the



price of bullion falls; because the demand comes from the other



side.



    To go through all the operations which merchants employ to



abbreviate the process I have been describing, would, indeed,



better explain the practical part of exchange, than what I have



said; but I write not to instruct merchants, but to extract from



their complicated operations, the principles upon which they are



founded.







Chap. IV







How the Price of Exchange, in a prosperous trading Nation, may be



prevented from operating upon the whole Mass of reciprocal



Payments, instead of affecting the Balance only







    We have taken for granted, that the price of exchange is a



hurt to trade in general.



    In this chapter, we shall inquire more particularly than we



have done, in what this hurt consists. The point of view of every



man, whether he be a merchant or not, is first honestly, and as



far as law and fair dealing do permit, to consult his own private



interest; and in the second place, to promote that interest with



which his own is most closely connected.



    According to this rule, every merchant will endeavour to



manage his exchange business to the best advantage to himself. If



the balance be against his country, he will sell his bills on the



country creditor as dear as he can; that is, he will endeavour to



raise the price of exchange as high as he can against his



country, whatever hurt may thereby result to the general trade of



it; and in so doing, he does only what duty to himself requires;



because it is by minding his business only, that he can trade



upon equal terms with his neighbours, every one of whom will



avail themselves of the like fluctuations, when they happen to be



in their favour.



    From this I conclude, that since the loss upon high exchange



against a country, affects principally the cumulative interest of



the whole, relatively to other trading nations; it is the



business of the statesman, not of the merchants, to provide a



remedy against it.



    The whole class of merchants, no doubt, exchangers excepted,



would be very glad to find the course of exchange constantly at



par. This is also greatly the interest of the state because it is



from the balance in its favour, not from the profit made in



drawing that balance from the debtor, that the state is a gainer.



This must be explained.



    I am to shew how it happens, that a nation is benefited or



hurt by the net balance only, which it receives from, or pays to



her neighbours: and that the whole expence of paying or receiving



this balance, is not national, but particular to individuals at



home. consequently, it would be the interest of all states, that



balances both favourable and unfavourable, were paid by the



nation-debtor, at the least expence possible.



    The great difficulty in communicating one's thoughts upon



this subject with distinctness, proceeds from the ambiguity of



the terms necessary to express them. This may be avoided by



adopting the technical terms of merchants; but these are still



more difficult to be comprehended by any one who is not



conversant in commerce. I shall acquit myself of this difficult



task the best way I can.



    When we speak of a balance between two nations, we shall call



the nation who owes the balance the nation-debtor; the other to



whom it is owing, the nation-creditor.



    Balances imply reciprocal debts; consequently, reciprocal



debtors and creditors. To avoid, therefore, confusion in this



particular, we shall use four expressions, viz. the debtors to



the nation-creditor; the debtors to the nation-debtor; the



creditors of the nation-creditor; the creditors of the



nation-debtor.



    Let me suppose that Paris owes a balance to London, no matter



for what sum. The reciprocal debts between Paris and London are



all affected by the consequence of this balance: that is to say,



some pay or receive more than the real par; some pay or receive



less. To discover where the profit centers, we are now to inquire



who are those who receive more, who are those who receive less.



And as profit and loss are here only relative, that is to say,



the profit of the one is compensated by the loss of the other; we



must see whether upon the whole, the price of the exchange in



this case be favourable to England, to which, by the supposition,



the balance is due, and unfavourable to France, which is the



debtor.



    The question thus stated, let us examine the operations of



exchange at London and Paris, and the state of demand in both,



for money or bills.



    In the London market the demand will be for money in London



for bills on Paris; and he who demands, must pay the exchange;



consequently, the London merchants, creditors of the



nation-debtor, will pay the exchange; that is to say they will



sell their bills on Paris below par; and the London merchants,



debtors to the nation-debtor, will buy them, and gain the



exchange; that is, they will buy bills upon Paris below par.



    Now as this negotiation is carried on at London, I must



suppose it to take place amongst Englishmen; one part of whom



will gain exactly what the other loses; consequently England, in



this respect, neither gains or loses by the exchange paid in



London.



    Let us next examine the interest of the merchants, and the



interest of the nation's trade.



    The creditors of the nation-debtor, who have lost by the



exchange, are those who have exported English commodities to



France. Upon this profitable branch of commerce the exchange



occasions a loss, the consequence of which is, to discourage



exportation.



    The debtors to the nation-debtor, who have gained by the



exchange, are those who have imported French commodities to



England. Upon this hurtful branch of commerce, the exchange



occasions a profit; the consequence of which is, to encourage



importation.



    This is not all. The English merchants exporters, who have



lost, cannot draw back their loss upon the return of their trade;



because the return of their trade is the money due by France, the



balance included. Whereas the English merchants importers may



draw back their loss upon the return of their trade; because that



return is merchandize, which they can sell so much the dearer to



their own countrymen.



    If the balance be in favour of London, importers gain, as we



have seen; when it is otherwise, and when they are obliged to pay



the exchange, they indemnify themselves, by the sale of their



goods so much the dearer. High exchange, therefore, may hurt



exporters, but never can hurt importers.



    Let us next examine the operation of exchange at Paris.



    In the Paris market, the demand will be for bills upon London



for money in Paris; and he who demands must pay the exchange. The



debtors, therefore, to the nation-creditor, must pay the



exchange, and the creditors of the nation-creditor will receive



it; and as both are Frenchmen, the profit and loss to Paris



exactly balance one another.



    But the debtors of the nation-creditor are here the importers



of English goods; consequently, this trade, hurtful to France,



would be hurtful to the importer, could he not indemnify himself



by selling them so much the dearer to his countrymen.



    The creditors, again, of the nation-creditor, who gain the



exchange, are the exporters of French goods to England; so that



here the exportation meets with an encouragement from a balance



against the country.



    From the advantage found upon exchange in favour of



exporters, and the loss upon it to the prejudice of importers, in



the case of a wrong balance, it has been believed, that a wrong



balance produced, upon importations and exportations, effects



equal and contrary, which destroy one another, and thereby bring



the balance even.



    In answer to this, I have two short arguments to offer.



    The first is, that were the argument conclusive, it would



hold good in reversing the proposition; to wit, that the



consequence of a favourable balance would be to destroy the



difference also, and bring the balance even. This I never heard



alleged.



    My second argument is the stronger: that the enhancing of the



prices of importations will not so effectually discourage the



sale of them at home, as the enhancing the prices of exportations



will discourage the sale of them abroad; for the reasons I shall



give presently. But in the mean time,



    If the compensation be considered in relation only to the



merchants importers and exporters, there, indeed, I agree, that



their profit and loss upon the exchange is most exactly balanced;



because what the one party gains the other loses; and the country



loses the balance only, as has been said.



    The reciprocal debts thus transacted by bills of exchange, we



see that no profit can be made, nor loss incurred, either to



London, or Paris, by this operation.



    The profit to Frenchmen is compensated by the loss to



Frenchmen; the same may be said of the English merchants: but the



balance due after these operations are over, and the more remote



consequences of high exchange, affect the relative interest of



the two nations.



    This balance is generally sent by the country-debtor, either



to the country-creditor, or to their order in a third country, to



which the country-creditor is indebted.



    The transportation and insurance of this balance is an



expence to those who owe it, and the profit, if any there be on



this operation, naturally belongs to the exchangers of the same



nation, who conduct it. So whether exchange be paid upon bills



drawn, or expence be incurred in the sending away the balances,



no profit can accrue upon this to the nation-creditor, to the



detriment of the debtor: it must, therefore, do hurt to both,



relatively to nations where, upon the average of trade, exchange



is lower.



    I come now to the method of transporting balances in the



metals.



    We have seen how the creditors of the nation-debtor pay



exchange upon the sale of their bills on Paris, which owes the



balance. If by the operations of exchangers, this exchange should



rise, to their detriment, higher than the expence, trouble, and



insurance, upon bringing this balance from Paris, then they will



appoint some factor at Paris, to whose order they will draw bills



upon their debtors in that city; and as what the Paris-debtors



owe to London is stated in pounds sterling, the London-creditors



will value the pound sterling, according to the rate of exchange,



in their favour; and in their bills upon their Paris-debtor, they



will convert the sum into livres, including the exchange.



    By this operation, we see how the transportation of the



balance may become the business of the creditors of the



nation-debtor: which is a circumstance we have not as yet



attended to: a few words will explain it.



    When the creditors of the nation-debtor sell their bills,



they must pay the exchange, as has been said. When they draw



bills to the order of a friend in the place where the balance is



owing, they superadd the exchange. This their debtors pay: but



then they themselves must be at the trouble and expence of



bringing home the money.



    It is from this alternative which both parties have of either



sending what they owe to their creditors in bullion, or of



allowing them to draw for it at the additional expence of paying



the exchange, that a check is put to the extravagant profit of



exchangers: and from this circumstance arise all the delicate



operations of drawing and remitting.



    Into these we shall not inquire: the principle on which they



depend appears sufficiently plain, and this is the principal



object of our attention.



    I proceed now to consider how far those reciprocal profits



and losses, between merchants in the same country, affect the



trade of it in general.



    When the balance is favourable, we have said that the



exporters lose the exchange, and the importers gain it; and both



being citizens, the country would not be concerned in their



relative interests, were it not that these interests are



connected with that of the country, which reaps great benefit



from the trade of those who deal in exportations, and loss from



the other.



    If, therefore, exchange be found to hurt exportation, when



the balance is favourable, in this respect the country has an



interest in bringing it as low as possible. But as it may be



said, that since the return of an unfavourable balance hurts in



its turn the interests of importation, and favours that of



exportation, exchange thereby operates a national compensation: I



must, in this place, add one reJection more, in order to destroy



the strength of this argument.



    Were this proposition admitted, as I am sure it cannot, from



what we have already said, it would afford no argument against



doing what can be done, to render exchange as little hurtful as



possible to exportation, during the favourable balance. But next



as to the question itself of national compensation, I cannot



allow that even exporters and importers are thereby brought on a



level in point of trade: for this reason, that since it is



allowed, that when the balance of trade is favourable, the price



of exchange is a loss to the merchants exporters; this exchange



in proportion as it augments, must discourage manufacturers, who



must have regular, and even growing profits, according to the



increase of demand. These the merchant exporter cannot afford;



because he cannot draw back from his foreign correspondents, any



advance upon manufactures at home, arising from domestic



circumstances. But when upon an unfavourable balance, the



merchant importer is affected by the exchange against him; this



additional expence he can draw back. because he sells to those



who are affected by all domestic circumstances.



    Let us therefore determine, that it is the interest of a



state to disregard this compensation which is said to be given to



exportation during a wrong balance, which does so much harm; and



to avoid the discouragement given to it by a right balance, which



does so much good. The only way to compass these ends, is to keep



exchange as near to par as possible.



    Could reciprocal debts be always exchanged at par, and could



the expence of bringing home, and sending a balance abroad, be



defrayed by the state, I think it would prove a great advantage



to the trade of a nation. I do not pretend to say that, as



matters stand, the thing is practicable; but as this is a



question which relates to my subject, and seems both curious and



interesting, I shall here examine it.



    At first sight, this idea will appear chimerical; and some



readers may despise it too much, to be at the trouble to read



what may be said for it. I shall therefore set out by informing



them that the scheme has been tried, in a great kingdom in



Europe, under a great minister: I say it was attempted in France,



in the year 1726, under the administration of Cardinal Fleuri,



and produced its effect; although it was soon given up, for a



circumstance which, I think, never can occur in Great Britain.



    After the last general coinage in France, 1726, exchange



became so unfavourable to that kingdom, as to occasion a general



outcry. The Cardinal, to put a stop to the clamour, and to set



exchange to rights, as he thought, ordered Samuel Bernard, at



that time a man of great credit, to give bills on Holland at par,



to all the merchants; and in order to enable him to place funds



in Amsterdam, for the payment of his bills, the Cardinal supplied



this exchanger with sufficient quantities of the old coin, then



cried down, and paid for the exportation of it to Holland.



    Upon this, exchange on Holland came to par; and the



exchangers at Paris looked on the operation with amazement. The



minister, however, in a short time discovered, that by this he



was undoing with one hand, what he wanted to establish with the



other. He therefore stopped in his career, after having paid,



perhaps, ten times the balance due to Holland.



    By unfolding the combination of this operation, I shall be



better able to cast light on the question before us, than in any



other way.



    When the general coinage was made in France, by the arret of



the month of January 1726, all the old coin was cried down, and



ordered to be recoined. The mint price of fine gold per marc was



fixed at 536 livres 14 sols 6 deniers; that of the silver at 37



livres 1 sol 9 deniers. These were the prices at which the mint



paid for bullion, when offered to be coined. But the King, as if



he had a right upon the metal in the old coin, commanded it to be



delivered at the mint at no higher rate than 492 livres for the



marc of fine gold, and at 34 livres for the marc of fine silver:



and to compel the possessors of it to bring it in, all



exportation and melting down was made highly penal; the avenues



from France were beset with guards to prevent the going out; and



the melting pots were strictly watched. Upon this, the possessors



of the old coin, rather than sell it to the mint at so great an



undervalue, had recourse to exchangers for bills upon Holland for



it: and these being obliged to send it thither at a great expence



and risk, exacted a very high exchange, which, consequently,



affected the whole trade of France.



    Politicians persuaded the Cardinal, that exchange had got up



so high, not from the discredit cast on the old coin, but because



of the wrong balance of trade, and of the alteration which had



been made at that time upon the denomination of the new coin: and



that as soon as the balance against France was paid, exchange



would return to par. Upon this the Cardinal set Bernard to work,



but he soon discovered his mistake; and by arret of the 15th of



June the same year, raised the mint price of the old coin, and



then exchange became favourable.



    These are all facts mentioned by Dutot, and yet he never will



ascribe the rise of exchange in France to any other cause than to



the tampering with the denominations of their coin: an operation



which may rob one set of people in favour of another; but which



has very little effect upon exchange, when other circumstances do



not concur, as in the case before us.



    Now had the high exchange against France been owing to a



wrong balance upon her trade, is it not evident that the



Cardinal's operation would have succeeded, that all demands for



bills at Samuel Bernard's office would have been confined to the



exact extent of this balance; that the reciprocal debts would



have been negociated between the merchants at par; and,



consequently, that all expence upon exchange would have been



saved to individuals, at the small charge to government of



transporting the balance paid by the merchants at Paris, for



Samuel Bernard's bills?



    Were prosperous trading states, therefore conducted by



statesmen, intelligent, capable, and uninfluenced by motives of



private interest, they would make it a rule to be at the expence



of sending off, and bringing home all balances, without any



charge for exchange to the traders; but the consequence of either



neglect, or incapacity in the person at the helm, would then make



it too dangerous to attempt, at once, so great a change in the



present method of paying balances: but I never make allowances



for such defects in ministers, while I am deducing the principles



which ought to direct the conduct of a statesman.



    I shall next slightly point out the bad consequences which,



upon an unfavourable state of commerce, might result from such a



plan: and without recommending any thing to practice, leave the



reader to judge of the expediency.



    We see, that by a statesman's giving bills at par, on all



occasions, and being himself at the expence of transportation and



insurance, in bringing home and sending off all balances,



exchange would of itself come to par.



    The first consequence of this would be, the total



annihilation of the exchange business; and if, after this, any



interruption should happen by neglect in the statesman, trade



might suffer considerably.



    Another consequence is, that the most destructive trade would



go forward without a check, as long as merchants could pay the



par of the bills they demanded upon foreign parts: and this they



would constantly be enabled to do, while there was neither coin



or paper in circulation, as has been explained in treating banks



of circulation upon mortgage.



    The consequence of this again would be, to oblige the state



to pledge the revenue of the country to strangers, in proportion



to the balance owing, over and above the extent of the metals to



discharge it.



    Now the question is, and this I shall leave to the sagacity



of my reader to determine, whether, as matters stand, there be



any check proceeding from high exchange which can prevent the bad



consequences here set forth. I suspect there is none. We see the



most enormous sums lent by nations to nations; raising the



exchange against the lenders; turning it in favour of the



borrowers, but never preventing the loan from going forward. Does



not Great Britain, as well as France, owe amazing sums to other



nations, at the expence of paying the interest out of their



revenue? And have not all these sums been transacted by



exchangers, who have made great fortunes by the operation? Are



not the most unfavourable balances paid in the ordinary method?



Are there not, already, instruments in the hands of all nations,



sufficient for their undoing? How then can their ruin be



accelerated by this alteration in the mode only of performing the



same thing?



    But let it be observed, that our business, in this chapter,



is to search for methods to advance the prosperity of flourishing



nations, who have a balance owing to them; and here we have been



setting forth the bad consequences which result from them, to



others who are in decay. Every argument, therefore, drawn against



this scheme, in favour of the idle or prodigal, is an argument in



favour of it, with respect to the industrious and frugal. As all



nations are liable to alternate vicissitudes of prosperity and



adversity, the principles here laid down, require to be carefully



combined with domestic circumstances, before they be applied to



practice.



    It was with a view to this distinction, that, in the title of



this chapter, I pointed out the question there proposed, as being



relative to the state of it in a prosperous trading nation; and I



am not quite clear how far it might not be advantageous in every



case: but this question I shall not here enlarge upon. What has



been said, will, I hope, be sufficient to point out the



principles upon which the decision depends; and if any statesman



incline to try the consequences of it now and then, by an



experiment, nothing is so easy as to do it, without any



detriment. This is proved from the operation performed by the



French cardinal, on the occasion of a very unfavourable and high



exchange.







Chap. V







How, when other Expedients prove ineffectual for the discharging



of Balances, the same may be paid by the Means of Credit, without



the Intervention of Coin or Bullion; and who are those who ought



to conduct that Operation







    We have now applied the principles formerly laid down,



towards discovering the most proper expedients for removing or



palliating the three inconveniences to be struggled with in



regulating exchange. First, How to estimate the value of a



balance due: Secondly, How to pay it with the coin or bullion of



the country: and lastly, How to prevent the price of exchange



from affecting any thing more than the balance to be paid, after



all reciprocal debts have been compensated.



    It remains to inquire, what are the most proper methods to



acquit what a nation may owe, after it has done all it can to pay



the value of their balance in the other way.



    At first sight, it must appear evident that the only method



here is to give security, and pay interest for what cannot be



paid in any other value. This in the end is constantly what is



done by every nation; but as the ordinary methods of bringing it



about, are very perplexed, and are attended with expences which



raise exchange to a great height, and thereby prove a prodigious



discouragement to trade in general: it would be no small



advantage, could all this loss on exchange be thrown equally upon



every class within the state, instead of being thrown entirely



upon its commerce.



    As this is the expedient to be proposed, it will not be amiss



to observe, that foreign balances arise chiefly upon four



articles. First, The great importation and consumption of foreign



productions. Secondly, The payment of debts and interest due to



foreigners. Thirdly, The lending money to other nations. And,



Fourthly, The great expence of the state, or of individuals,



abroad.



    Could all the bad consequences arising from these four



causes, and the high exchange occasioned by them, be cast upon



that interest alone which occasions them, I should not propose to



lay the whole body of the nation under contribution for repairing



the loss.



    But if from the nature of the thing, as matters stand, the



whole be found to fall upon trade, without a possibility of



preventing it; in this case, I think it would be better for the



nation, in cumulo, to lend its assistance, and to share the



burden, than to allow it to fall upon that part of the body



politic from which the whole draws its vigour and prosperity.



    It cannot be denied, that when a heavy balance is due by a



nation, it has the effect of raising exchange upon every draught



or remittance. When bills are demanded to pay a foreign claim, it



cannot be determined from which of the four articles, just now



mentioned, the claim has arisen. Whether for national purposes or



not, the exchange is the same, and equally affects the whole



interest of trade.



    If this be a fair state of the case, I think we may determine



that such balances ought to be paid by the assistance and



intervention of a statesman's administration.



    The object is not so great as at first sight, it may appear.



We do not propose that the value of this balance should be



advanced by the state: by no means. They who owe the balance must



then, as at present, find a value for the bills they demand.



Neither would I propose such a plan for any nation who had, upon



the average of their trade, a balance against them; but if, on



the whole, the balance be favourable, I would not, for the sake



of saving a little trouble and expence, suffer the alternate



vibrations of exchange to disturb the uniformity of profits,



which uniformity tends so much to encourage every branch of



commerce.



    We have abundantly explained the fatal effect of a wrong



balance to banks which circulate paper; and we have shewn how



necessary it is that they should perform what we here recommend,



to be done by the state itself. There is therefore nothing new in



this proposal: it is merely carrying the consequences of the same



principle one step farther, and making it a branch of policy, for



government to be assisting to trade in the payment of balances,



where credit abroad is required; and we have proposed that this



assistance should be given out of the public money.



    The greatest, and indeed, I think, the only objection to this



scheme, is, that by it the condition of our foreign creditors,



will be bettered, for no value received from them. This I allow



will be the case when the balance is against England: but it will



be compensated to the creditors by the loss they will sustain



when the balance is in her favour. But supposing there should be



a benefit to foreign creditors, will not this circumstance raise



the confidence of all the world in the English funds? If, upon a



proposal to government to lower the rate of money by refunding



the debts which bear a higher interest than what money can be



procured for, the continent should pour her wealth into our



subscription, might we not then more readily expect a supply from



that quarter? Besides, is not all the interest due to foreign



creditors paid in bank paper? Is not this demandable in coin, and



will not this coin be exported, if credit be not found? Were the



bank of England to keep a subscription open, at all times, in



Amsterdam, for money to be borrowed there, on the payment of the



interest in that city, who doubts but loans might be procured at



much less expence than at present, when we are beating about for



credit every where, until by the return of a favourable balance



upon the trade of England, she shall be enabled to fill up the



void.



    I feel my own insufficiency to unfold the many intricacies



which such an operation must imply. I therefore shall not attempt



what, at any rate, I must leave imperfect. What has been said,



together with what has been thrown out on the same subject, in



treating of other matters, is sufficient to give a hint,



concerning the expediency of the plan in general. And as to the



objection which arises from the payments to the public creditors



abroad, I shall reserve the more ample discussion of it till I



come to consider the doctrine of public credit.







Part IV







Of Public Credit







Chap. I







    The principles which influence the doctrine of public credit



ar so few, and so plain, that it is surprising to see how



circumstances should possibly involve them in the obscurity into



which we find them plunged on many occasions.



    For the better clearing the way towards the main object, I



shall shew from experience, and from the progress of public



credit in some nations, that the true principles have been



overlooked, and so confounded with extraneous objects, as to be



entirely lost.



    The true method of decyphering, as it were, the complicated



operations of statesmen with respect to this branch of politics,



is to bring back to their native simplicity such plans of



administration, as, from the infinite perplexity of them, make



people believe, that the principles which influence this district



of the science lie so involved, as to require a peculiar force of



genius even to comprehend them.



    By proceeding in this plain track, and by keeping principles



constantly in view, the most perplexed systems of borrowing,



funding, stock-jobbing, coining and re-coining of money, changing



the weight, fineness, and denominations of specie, circulating



paper in conjunction with it, imposing upon mankind with bubbles



and bankruptcies, and calling them operations of public credit,



may be rendered intelligible to the most slender capacity.



    Many of these topics have been already explained, and



dismissed. This will enable us to contract the plan of what



remains in proportion to the objects it is to comprehend.



    Public credit we have defined to be, the confidence reposed



in a state, or body politic, borrowing money, on condition that



the capital shall not be demandable, but that a certain



proportional part of the sum shall be annually paid, either in



lieu of interest, or in extinction of part of the capital; for



the security of which payment, a permanent annual fund is



appropriated, with a liberty, however, to the state to free



itself, by repaying the whole, when nothing to the contrary is



stipulated.



    In this definition I have put in an alternative, of paying a



perpetual interest for the money borrowed, or of paying annually



a sum exceeding the interest; which excess is intended to



extinguish the capital in a certain number of years. In both



cases, the annual payment is called an annuity. When it is



exactly equal to the interest agreed on, it is called perpetual;



and determinate, when it is granted either for life, or for a



certain number of years.



    The solidity of this security is essential to the borrowing



upon the cheapest terms: let me suppose it to be as solid as



land-property, and as permanent as government itself: what will



the consequence be?



    If we suppose government to go on increasing, every year, the



sum of their debts upon perpetual annuities, and appropriating,



in proportion, every branch of revenue for the payment of them;



the consequence will be, in the first place, to transfer, in



favour of the creditors, the whole income of the state, of which



government will retain the administration. The farther



consequences of this revolution will furnish matter for a chapter



by itself.



    If the borrowings of a state be in proportion only to the



extinction of the old capitals, or of what I have called



determinate annuities, then the debts will not increase.



    When a statesman, therefore, establishes a system of public



credit, the first object which should fix his attention is to



calculate how far the constitution of the state, and its internal



circumstances, render it expedient to throw the revenue of it



into the hands of a moneyed interest. I say, this is the most



important object of his deliberation; because the solidity of his



credit depends upon it.



    If, all the interests of the state duly considered, that of



trade be found to predominate; less inconvenience will be found



in allowing the moneyed interest to swell: but in monarchies,



where the landed interest is commonly, and ought to be the most



powerful, it would be dangerous to erect so formidable a rival to



it. In political bodies every separate interest will consult its



own; and in the contest between those who will be made to pay,



and those who are to receive the taxes, under the denomination of



creditors, the security of public credit will become precarious.



    From this we may conclude, First, That in governments where



the swelling of a moneyed interest is found to threaten the



tranquillity of the state, care should be taken either to



establish a sinking fund, for paying off, in times of peace, what



may have been borrowed in times of war, or the plan of borrowing



upon determinate annuities must be established.



    Secondly, If natural cares be left to work their own effects,



without a systematical plan of borrowing, the consequence will be



a bankruptcy and a total failure of public credit, at least for



some time.



    Thirdly, If a state should find the mass of their debts to



amount to so great a sum as to be insupportable, they might have



recourse to a total, or partial abolition of them by an act of



power.



    Fourthly, If they allow their debts to swell without



limitation, and adhere to the faith of their engagements, the



whole property of the state will be in constant circulation, from



one class of men to another.



    Fifthly, If the debts contracted be the property of



foreigners, these will either remove into the country, where



their funds arise, or the property, that is, the dominium utile



of the country, will be transferred from the natives.



    These and many other combinations will arise from the



extension of public credit; and an examination into the most



natural consequences upon every supposition, will be the best way



to acquire a distinct idea of the subject in general. To pretend



to foretell any one certain chain of consequences, which may, in



fact, result from any particular case, is, I apprehend,



impossible; because every one of them will depend upon



circumstances totally unknown. These consequences, in our way of



examining matters of this kind, are all to be founded UpOn



supposition. To supply therefore, in some measure, this defect, I



shall first have recourse to examples of what has happened in the



hitherto infant state of public credit; and as to cases which



have not as yet taken place, we must have recourse to ingenuity,



and endeavour to form the most rational combinations we can.







Chap. II







Of the rise and Progress of Public Credit







    While the policy of States directed them to form treasures,



there was no occasion for public credit. This policy prevailed



until the rise of the Roman empire. Then all the treasures of the



world were plundered, and the nations were inslaved. On this



revolution, the exigencies of that great empire were supplied



from the annual tributes paid by conquered nations. Under good



reigns, this annual supply swelled the public treasure, until a



prodigal Emperor squandered it away; and took to rapine and



extortion, to fill up the void.



    Upon the total dissolution of the Roman empire, Europe was



overrun by barbarous nations, who, with as little industry as



ever, supported their power by the military services of the whole



people.



    After the establishment of the feudal kingdoms under the



chiefs who first laid the foundation of them, arose the Barons,



or principal vassals, who, in imitation of their chief, erected



small principalities, which by degrees grew independent.



    This distribution of power into many hands had the effect of



destroying all systematic plans of government. Princes were



obliged to act according to the perpetual fluctuation of



circumstances. until, by a revolution in their favour, the power



of the vassals was swallowed up, and confined within the limits



of a more regular authority.



    In proportion as this revolution took place among the nations



of Europe, the system of their government resumed a more



permanent form. Justice was administered with more uniformity;



and from this insensibly arose a body of laws, which, in some



countries, were called customs: in others, as in England, common



law. Wars then became less frequent; and the military services



not being necessary on all occasions, insensibly became converted



into taxes, proportioned to the exigencies of the time.



    During this period, the coin and precious metals of Europe



were in a great measure, lodged, in private coffers. If wars



brought them forth for a short time, they soon found their way



back again. Princes were generally poor; because they were



generally extravagant, and spent money as fast as they got it. In



proportion as industry and alienation increased, the coin came



abroad; the inhabitants became easy in their circumstances; the



state flourished, and acquired reputation. The riches and power



of a state began then to be estimated, as they ought to be, not



by their treasures locked up, but by what was found in



circulation; that is, by their industry. Venice, Genoa, and the



Hanstowns, set the example. The Jews, banished from France, on



account of their extortions in the time of the holy wars, fled,



as it is said, into Lombardy, and there invented the use of bills



of exchange, for drawing their riches from those countries to



which they durst not resort in order to bring them off. Interest



for money began to be considered as lawful in many cases:



merchants were protected by Princes, for the sake of the



consequences of trade and industry: and from such small



beginnings has this mighty engine of public credit sprung.



    While Princes mortgaged their lands and principalities, in



order to obtain a sum of money, they acted upon the principles of



private credit. This was the case in the more early times, before



government acquired that solidity which is necessary to establish



a firm confidence. In proportion as it drew toward a regular



system, the dawn of credit put on appearances analogous to the



solidity of the fund upon which it was established.



    The second step was to raise money upon a branch of taxes



assigned to the lender, for the reimbursement of his capital and



interest. We shall shew the consequences of this plan of credit



from some examples, which will fully point out all its



inconveniences.



    This plan of administration was attended with so much abuse,



and so much oppression, that statesmen began to despair of



carrying on public affairs by such expedients; and therefore



concluded that the only way to obtain money at the least expence,



was to raise it on the subject within the year, or upon what they



called short funds.



    At length public credit assumed its present form. Money was



borrowed upon determinate or perpetual annuities: a fund was



provided for this purpose: and the refunding of the capital was,



in many cases, left in the option of government, but never in the



option of the creditor.



    This is a short view of the progress of public credit. The



principles upon which it is built are so few, that were I to



confine myself to a bare deduction of them, little new or



interesting could be said. I shall therefore steer another



course: I shall collect the sentiments of some eminent



politicians, who have either written upon, or acted in the



administration of this branch of government; and by applying



principles as we go along, I shall be enabled to point out the



extraneous circumstances which are so apt to involve this subject



in obscurity. Had we not before our eyes the numberless examples



of this kind, it would hardly be possible to conceive how so



great confusion, and so many calamities, could have followed upon



the operations of public credit.







Chap. III







Of Anticipations, or borrowing Money upon Assignments to Taxes



for the Discharge of Principal and Interest; and of the



Sentiments of Dr Davenant on this Subject







    I have already observed, that by the cessation of the



constant wars, in which all Europe was engaged during the feudal



government of the barons, nations began to enjoy some sort of



tranquillity. Upon this the military services became insensibly



converted into taxes: and as Princes extended their jurisdictions



over the cities, which had been formerly more immediately under



the protection of the bishops who resided in them, taxes were



augmented. These impositions were very inconsiderable, with



respect to what they brought into the King's coffers. The policy



in raising them was bad; the frauds in collecting them were



great.



    These considerations engaged Princes to begin by contracting



debts, with a view, afterwards to pay them by temporary



assignments to the taxes imposed.



    From this again ensued the most terrible extortions on the



side of the tax-gatherers, so often complained of by those who



have written concerning the affairs of France, as we shall see in



the following chapter.



    Philip le bel, King of France, was the first who, in 1301,



admitted, with great policy, the inhabitants of cities to have a



seat in the states of the kingdom. He formed them into a distinct



body, and called them tiers etat, or the third state, after the



clergy and the nobility. His view was to facilitate thereby the



jurisdiction he wanted to establish over those cities, and to



engage them to consent to the imposition of taxes for carrying on



his wars in Flanders, and for opposing the ambitious views of



Boniface VIII. Accordingly, the people began to pay willingly,



when once they found that they had a vote in what concerned them.



    I take it for granted, that every tax, about that time, was



imposed for a particular purpose, and assigned either to



creditors, or to people who advanced money upon it: because we



are told that the first imposition granted by the states to a



King of France as a permanent branch of revenue, was an excise



upon spirituous liquors granted to Philip de Valois, in the year



1345; at which time, however, according to Mr d'Eon's Memoires



pour servir a l'Histoire generale des Finances, there were not



less than twenty two different taxes known in France, which he



enumerates as follows:



    Tailles, complaintes, charges, redevances, coutumes, peages,



travers, passages, centiemes, cinquantiemes, ôtes, chevauchées,



subventions, exactions, chevaleries, aides, mariages, toultes,



impositions, prisons, servitudes, and nouvellettes.



    That all these impositions must have been mere trifles, I



gather from a circumstance in the Political History of France,



mentioned by the author just cited, which being itself



exceedingly curious and tending greatly to confirm many things



which I have advanced concerning the small circulation in former



times, I shall here briefly relate it.



    In 1356, John, King of France, applied to the States for



50,000 livres, about 9165 l. sterling, to pay his army. The



States, besides several other taxes imposed to pay this sum,



granted him 8 deniers on the livre, or 3 1/3 per cent upon all



meat, drink, and merchandise, sold in France within the year;



that is to say, upon the whole alienations of France. The tax,



was levied, but fell far short of the sum required, and the



deficiency was made up by a poll-tax.



    Can any example be better calculated for forming a notion of



the circulation of France at that time?



    It may be here alleged that the prices of every thing were



then so very low, that no judgment can be formed concerning the



quantity of alienation from the smallness of the sum. This



objection is of no force, as I shall presently shew.



    We know from the records of the selling price of grain in



France, which was then remarkably cheap in proportion to the



years which followed and which had preceded, that in 1356, the



septier of wheat, or nearly 4 Winchester bushels, sold for 17



sols 8 deniers of the then currency, which was 12 livres to the



marc fine silver, and a French soldier's allowance for bread to



this day, is 3 septiers, or nearly 12 Winchester bushels a year.



Now let me suppose, that the whole 50,000 livres had been raised



by this imposition of 3 1/3 per cent or 1/30 of the total value



of the single article of corn sold at market, which was far from



being the case, and then compare this with the number of men who



could have been subsisted with all the corn sold in France at



that time.



    If 1/30 of the price were the tax, then by multiplying 50,000



livres by 30, we have the value of the corn sold; to wit,



1,500,000 livres: divide this sum by the value of what a man



consumes in a year, to wit, 3 septiers at 17 sols 8 deniers,



which make 2 livres 13 sols, and the quotient will be the number



of portions for a man, to wit, 566,037. Since, therefore, the



50,000 livres could not be raised in consequence of the tax, it



follows, that the whole alienation of France, at that time, fell



far below the value of as much wheat as would have fed 566,037



men.



    What a poor idea does this communicate of the state of Europe



so lately as 400 years ago! It would be in vain to seek for



examples to illustrate any principle of our complicated modern



oeconomy in the histories of those times: their taxes, their



credit, and their debts, resembled ours in nothing but the name.



    I shall now come nearer home, and give an account of the



ideas of public credit formed by Davenant, who flourished about



the time of the revolution in 1688, which I may take to be the



aera of public credit in England.



    No person at that time, whose writings I have seen, appears



to have so thoroughly understood these matters as Davenant. He



was a man of theory, as well as knowledge of facts: he had an



opportunity which, and he few people have, to be well instructed



in the one and the other; turned his talents to the best



advantage for promoting the interest of his country. He has



written many tracts on political subjects, which, when carefully



read and compared with what experience has since taught us, cast



great light upon many questions relative to the subject of this



inquiry.



    Davenant, like other great men of his time, was of opinion



that borrowing money upon what he calls short funds, was much



preferable to that upon perpetual interest; and he thought the



most adviseable plan of all, could it be accomplished, was to



raise the money wanted within the year.



    Men, at that time, had a terror upon them in contracting



debts for the public: they considered the nation as they would a



private man, whose interest is one, uncompounded, and relative to



himself alone: in this light, creditors appeared as formidable as



enemies; they were looked upon by ministers as such; and this



general opinion on one side, contributed, no doubt, to make the



monied people less interested in the distress of government, and



more ready to lay hold of every opportunity of improving such



occasions, for their own advantage.



    Government was in constant war with creditors: when ready



money failed in England, it had nothing to pay with but exchequer



tallies, upon the taxes imposed. these were much more easily



issued than acquitted. When the first year's amount of a tax was



engaged, people considered the security for what was to follow as



very precarious; consequently, the value of it diminished.



    This method, however, succeeded far better in paying off



debts already contracted, than in contracting new ones; and the



hardships put upon those who had already advanced money to



government, and who were paid by assignments upon taxes



previously engaged, made people very diffident afterwards, except



upon proper security. The limited form of the English government,



prevented the violent proceedings of ministers, with respect to



the public creditors, which were common in France; and this



circumstance contributed, no doubt, to establish the credit of



the former upon the better footing. But still the long



expectation of payment for the capital and interest, upon a



distant fund, made Davenant acknowledge that 700,000 l. in ready



money would at any time go farther than a million in tallies; and



yet he thought it was better for the state to borrow the million



upon a plan of discharging the debt in three or four years, than



to obtain the 700,000 l. at the expence of a perpetual interest



of 8 per cent.



    There were many more considerations which moved Davenant to



prefer what he calls short funds to perpetual interest.



    It was the general opinion in his time (not his own indeed,



for he endeavoured to shew the fallacy of it) that money borrowed



upon the anticipation of a fund, raised and appropriated for the



discharge of it, was not a debt upon the state; because it did



not diminish the former revenue. We have a remarkable instance of



the prevalence of this opinion, in the famous memorial presented



by M. Desmaretz to Philip Duke of Orleans, after the death of the



late King of France; wherein he advanced, that during seven



campaigns, from 1708 to the peace of Rastad, while he had been at



the head of the King's finances, he had not increased the public



debts by more than nine millions of livres capital: and yet when



he came into the administration, in 1708, the King's debts did



not amount to 700 millions; and we have seen, that at the time of



his death, they were upwards of 2000 millions. But Desmaretz did



not reckon the difference, which was no less than 1300 millions



as any debt at all; because he had settled it upon funds of his



own creation. This was so much the language of the times, that no



criticism was made upon it.



    It is remarkable, that Davenant, in giving an account of the



debts of England, during the period of which he writes, that is,



from the revolution down to the peace of Ryswick, hardly ever



takes notice of the sums paid for interest upon them. The minds



of men at that time were totally taken up with the payment of



capitals; and provided these could be discharged in a few years,



it was no matter, they thought, what they cost in the mean time.



    As long as nations at war observe the same policy in their



methods of raising money, the ways in which they proceed are of



the less importance: but when any one state makes an alteration,



by which more money is thrown into their hands than they could



formerly obtain; this circumstance obliges every other state to



adopt the same method. Thus while Princes made war with the



amount of their treasures and annual income, the balance of their



power depended on the balance of such resources: when they



anticipated their income on both sides, for a few years, the



balance was in proportion still: when, afterwards, they adopted



long funds and perpetual interest, the supplies increased; but



still the balance was determined as formerly.



    The usefulness, therefore, of an inquiry into the principles



of public credit, has not so much for its object to discover the



interest of states in adopting one mode of credit preferably to



another, as to discover the consequences of every one in



particular; and to point out the methods for making them



severally turn out to the best account not only for the state,



considered as a body politic by itself, but also for the



individuals which compose it.



    When so many different relations are taken in, the subject



becomes much more complex, and therefore the consequences which



can be guessed only at must be less determinate: but on the other



hand, it opens the mind, and suggests many hints which with time



may be improved for the good of society.



    People who barely relate political facts, afford only an



excercise to the memory: those who deduce principles, and trace a



chain of reasoning from them, give exercise to the understanding;



and as a small spark may raise a mighty flame, so a hint thrown



out by a slender genius may set all the great men of a nation on



a plan of general reformation and improvement.



    Let us now take a view of the state of public credit in



England, at the peace of Ryswick; in order to shew how Davenant



came to be so great an enemy to long funds, and more especially



to perpetual interest. We shall at the same time point out from



what causes proceeds the great change of sentiments at present.



    At the peace of Ryswick, the debts of England, according to



Davenant, in his fifth discourse upon the public revenues and



trade of England, stood at 17,552,544 l. sterling; call it 17



millions and a half, as we have no occasion to calculate with



exactness.



    Of this debt the capital of 3 1/2 millions was sunk, as he



calls it; because 1,300,000 l. was on lives at 14 per cent and



what was over to make up the 3 1/2 millions, was intended to



remain a perpetual burthen on the nation.



    For paying the interest of this sum, no less than 400,000 l.



a year was necessary, which makes on the whole above 11 per cent.



    But then it must be observed, that more than one third of the



sum was upon lives at 14 per cent: the debt due to the bank, of



which we have spoken in another place, was 1,200,000 l. for which



was paid 100,000 l. a year, including 4000 l. allowed for the



charge of management: the remaining million was upon lottery



tickets, bearing about 8 per cent the price at which the bank had



lent.



    The second branch of debts was near 11 millions, which, he



says, were in course of payment; because they were secured upon



branches of revenue engaged for discharging them. A part of this



class of debts was to be extinguished in the year 1700: and



whenever this was done, then a proportion of the appropriated



taxes, amounting yearly to above a million sterling, was



immediately to be taken off.



    The third class of debts were those not provided for at all;



which in the place referred to, he makes to amount to no more



than 3,200,000 l. but he afterwards finds his mistake, and that



they in fact amounted to above 5 millions and a half, which makes



the debts of England at the peace of Ryswick, to have been near



20 millions.



    Was it then any wonder, that a man who wished well to his



country, should prefer borrowing upon short funds at any expence



whatever in the mean time, rather than at perpetual interest,



when he found that parliaments could not be prevailed upon to



allow any tax to subsist one instant after the discharge of the



debts for the payment of which it had been appropriated?



    Besides, there was very little to be gained by borrowing upon



long funds and perpetual interest, as long as the lenders



considered their advantage to consist principally in getting



their capitals refunded.



    The plain matter of fact was, that trade at that time was



only beginning to take root in England, and demanded funds to



carry it on. The use of banks for turning property into money,



had not then been discovered. Circulation, consequently, was



confined to the coin; and profits on trade were very great. All



these circumstances rendered capitals of essential use; and the



consequence was, to raise interest to an excessive height.



    Compare this situation with the present. Were the capital of



140 millions sterling thrown by Great Britain, in a few years,



into the hands of the present creditors; were France, on the



other hand, to throw in as much, what trade could absorb it?



Capitals now are of value, in proportion only to the interest



they bring; and so long as the interest paid on public debts is



sufficient to keep circulation full, and no more, interest will



stand as it is: when this ceases to be the case, as in time of



war, we see interest begins to rise; and when, on the other hand,



the interest paid, proves more than sufficient for the uses of



circulation, as upon a return of peace, then, from the same



principles, interest must diminish.



    Davenant, like an able politician, who had the state of facts



before him, reasoned according to actual circumstances. Whatever



was borrowed on long funds, was charged on the standing revenue



of the state, which parliament was very unwilling to increase in



proportion to the charges laid upon it. This, of itself, was



argument sufficient with him to cast his view upon short



appropriations, or upon his favourite object, of raising money



within the year, to supply the exigencies of the state.



    But in this operation he found great difficulties. In his



treatise of ways and means, article excises, where he is



searching for expedients to provide money for the war, he plainly



shews a thorough knowledge of this imposition. It had taken place



in England as far back as the great civil war, and formed at the



revolution about 1/3 of all the revenue: but what is very



extraordinary, and which at present will hardly be credited, the



excise had at that time the effect of sinking the price of the



subject excised, instead of raising the price of what was



produced from it. Thus the excise upon malt, after the



revolution, had the effect of lowering the price of barley,



instead of raising the price of beer.



    This effect of excises Davenant saw; from which he, and since



him, many more have concluded, that all excises fall ultimately



upon the land.



    This circumstance, together with a feeling for the interest



of the great number of idle poor at that time, who must



constantly suffer by excises, engaged Davenant to propose having



recourse to the land-property and poll-taxes, for raising, within



the year, the sums required for carrying on the war.



    According to his proposal, there was to be no less than 3



millions raised by a land tax, besides half a million by a



quarterly poll, which made together, above 100,000 l. more than



all the permanent taxes of England put together.



    A proposal of this kind coming from Davenant, shews the



difference of situation between those times and the present. On



this subject more is to be learned by comparing facts, than by



all the reasoning in the world.



    We have seen how credit stood in England during the reign of



William III. It was then in its infancy, and was set upon the



principles of a free and limited authority, exercised by



ministers of state, at all times responsible to parliament at the



risk of their heads, in case of any open violation of the public



faith. This is the best of all securities against the bad



exercise of power.



    Whoever reads the admirable writings of Davenant, and



compares his ideas with what experience has since taught us,



concerning the nature of taxes and public credit, will plainly



discover that the great distress of England at that time,



proceeded from the following causes.



    The war they were engaged in, was far beyond their power to



SUppOrt, although they had the greatest part of Europe to assist



them.



    The bravery of the British nation was ill supported with



money, the sinews of war.



    The coin soon after the revolution fell into the greatest



disorder, which sent it away; no expedient was found to supply



its place for the uses of domestic circulation; and,



consequently, the fixed revenue could not be paid, nor industry



carried on.



    The people were unaccustomed to taxes, tunnage and poundage,



the branch with which they were best acquainted, and which they



bore with the least murmuring, because it was little felt by



individuals, together with the excise upon beer and ale, the



hearth money, the posthouse, and wine-licences, composed the



whole of the permanent revenue of the state, and amounted to



about one million and a half sterling: besides which, the



parliament had granted new customs (all to cease before 1690) to



the amount of about half a million more, upon wines, tobacco,



sugar, and French linnen. This was the state of the revenue at



the revolution.



    One would imagine that England, under so small a burthen,



might have been able to make the greatest efforts.



    Were we now to grapple with France, under such circumstances,



what sanguine hopes should we not form of success! The case



turned out widely different: the first benefit the nation



expected in consequence of their liberty restored, was an



abolition of the hearth money; a tax which raised over the whole



kingdom, 245,000 l. This was considered as an insupportable



burthen.



    Such sentiments and dispositions in the English nation, might



have been a sufficient indication of what was to be expected from



the war; the consequences of which had, before 1695, produced the



following changes in the revenue.



    The tunnage and poundage, which at the revolution produced



600,000 l. was by this time reduced to 286,687 l.



    The excise upon beer and ale, from 666,383 l. was reduced to



391,275 l.



    The hearth money was abolished.



    The post-house, from 65,000 l. was reduced to 63,517 l.



    The wine-licences, from 10,000 l. to 5000 l.



    The temporary customs which subsisted at the revolution, were



now expired, and had been either continued by new grants, or by



others of the same nature introduced in their stead. The former



had produced 415,472 l. the new produced 373,839 l.



    The last and most important grant of all, was an additional



excise upon beer and ale, which produced 450,000 l.



    The revenue at the revolution produced, clear of all charges,



2,001,855 l. sterling. A revenue established at pretty much the



same rate, and nearly on the same objects, with an addition of a



new excise, which produced 450,000 l. produced net in 1694, no



more than 1,570,318 l. so that, deducting the new excise, the old



revenue was diminished in its produce, no less than 1,081,527 l.



or above one half, in five years time.



    In a country like England, at that time, taxes were of little



use to the state, and were an excessive burthen on the people.



    What could they be paid out of? Not out of the value in the



hands of the people; because there was no way provided for



turning this value into money. The whole of the money coined



before the end of the war in 1697, did not amount to 8 1/2



millions. It was not to be expected that during the war, foreign



coin was to come in, except in consequence of borrowing; and we



may be very certain, that all that was borrowed, and a great part



of what had been coined at home, had gone out from the year 1695



to 1697. under these circumstances, the exchequer issued tallies



of wood, a notably expedient for facilitating circulation! And



the bank of England lent not one farthing upon mortgage. all that



was possible to be raised on the land and on the people, by



pound-rate, assessment, and poll-tax, was imposed.



    Now let us recall our principles concerning circulation,



alienation, and banking upon mortgage, and combine these with



what we have so frequently repeated, and I think demonstrated,



viz. that in proportion to the extent of alienation, and the



demands for money, a circulating equivalent should be provided,



so as to be ready at the hand of every person who has property to



pledge for it; and then decide whether it was any wonder that



credit in England should have been at so low an ebb at the peace



of Ryswick; that taxes should have diminished in their produce;



that interest should have risen to such an extravagant height;



that the people should have groaned under a load from which they



could not relieve themselves.



    Under such circumstances, England appears to me in the light



of a dumb man put to the torture in order to extort a confession.



    Were eight or nine millions sterling in coin, and a few



wooden sticks, the tallies, constantly sold at a great discount,



a circulating value sufficient to supply the exigencies of a



state which was spending annually at the rate of five or six



millions?



    The consequence of this total drain of money, was, that



people could neither consume exciseable commodities, or pay the



taxes laid upon their persons and solid property.



    The excises failed, because the body of the people, who paid



them, were interrupted in their industry, for want of money to



carry on alienation. Those who were liable to the arbitrary



impositions, such as the landlords, could not pay; because what



they had, their land, could not be given in payment.



    From what I have here laid together, we may determine, that



as alienations among individuals cannot exceed the proportion of



the circulating equivalent of a country, so a statesman when he



intends suddenly to augment the taxes of his people, without



interrupting their industry, which then becomes still more



necessary than ever, should augment the circulating equivalent in



proportion to the additional demand for it.



    This, according to my notions, cannot be so well compassed



as, 1. by establishing banks of circulation upon mortgage: 2. by



relieving those companies of the load of paying foreign balances



by giving bills at par, or at a small exchange: and 3. by



providing funds abroad for the payment of them, according to the



principles above deduced.



    Such expedients will work their effect, in a nation where the



public faith stands upon the solid security of an honest



parliament, and upon that responsibility which is fixed upon



those who are trusted with the exertions of the royal authority.



    I think I may illustrate this operation by a simile.



    A gentleman chooses to form a cascade of the water which



serves to turn his corn-mill; consequently, the mill stops; but



in its stead, he immediately erects another which turns with the



wind. Coin is the water, bank paper is the wind, and both are



equally well calculated for the use they are put to.







Chap. V







Of the Present State of Public Credit in Great Britain







    We have, in a preceeding chapter,given a general view of the



state of public credit in England, at the end of the last



century. In this, I shall briefly run through the most remarkable



revolutions, both in sentiments and events, which have succeeded



since that time.



    At the revolution the revenue of England was about two



million sterling, affected by two debts. The first was called the



bankers debt, contracted by Charles II and, by letters patent,



charged upon his hereditary excise, to the amount of upwards of



1,300,000 l. This debt was arbitrarily reduced to one half, in



the last years of King William, and put at 6 per cent perpetual



annuity, to commence no sooner than 1706. The other was a debt of



60,000 l. due to that Prince's servants, neglected to be paid by



his successor, and discharged after the revolution.



    At the peace of Ryswick, the national debt amounted to about



20 millions. The branches of taxes subsisting at the revolution,



and continued till then, produced no more than about 800,000 l.;



but by additional taxes laid on in the reign of King William, the



whole revenue extended to 3,355,499 l. of which above one million



was to cease before 1700, as has been said. This reduced the



revenue, at the beginning of Queen Anne's reign, to nearly what



it had been at the revolution: out of which if we deduct the



interest of the national debt then subsisting, and the expence of



the civil list, we shall discover the extent of the funds



prepared for engaging in the war with France; and then by



comparing the state of the nation at her accession, with what it



was at her death, we shall form a general notion of the progress



of credit at that period.



    The revenue of England at the accession of Queen Anne may be



stated at about - - - - - - - - - - -                 2,272,000







    The debts subsisting on the 31st of



December 1701, were - - - - 6,748,780







Upon which the annual interest



        was - - - - - - - - - 566,165







Queen Anne's civil list - - - 600,000







    Which two sums amounting to - - - - - -           1,166,165







    Being deducted from the revenue, there will



remain for the current service of the state - - - - - 1,105,835











    What the exact amount of the revenue of England was at the



death of the Queen, I cannot justly say. But as it may be



comprehended under the three general branches of customs,



excises, and other inland duties, we may form a guess at it,



though imperfectly, I allow, from the number of articles in each.



    At her accession, the customs comprehended fifteen articles;



at her death, they amounted to thirty-seven: at her accession,



the excises comprehended ten articles; at her death, they



amounted to twenty-seven: at her accession, the other inland



duties comprehended eight articles; at her death, they amounted



to sixteen, including the land tax, then become in a manner



perpetual, although laid on from year to year.



    At her accession, the public debts amounted (as above) to



near seven millions, at her death they exceeded fifty millions.



    In fourteen years, from the revolution to her accession, the



money granted by parliament, partly raised on the subject, and



partly borrowed, or taken credit for, according to the custom of



the times, amounted to above fifty-five millions. During the 13



years of Queen Anne, the money granted by parliament raised on



the subject, or borrowed as above, amounted to upwards of 80



millions.



    By this general sketch I do not mean to enter into exact



details: facts must be sought for in books which treat of facts:



our chief object is to examine the principles upon which the



public credit was supported, let the exact sum of money raised be



what it will.



    The expences of the French war first engaged the nation to



revive those taxes which had been suppressed; and to impose many



others for a considerable number of years, in proportion to the



money borrowed upon them, according to the principles of the



former reign.



    In 1702, interest was so low, that government got money at 5



per cent. It continued so till 1704, when some loans began to be



made at 6 per cent and at this rate it stood during the war.



    But in 1706, the exigencies of government were far greater



than what all the money to be borrowed, or raised on the subject,



could supply. This opened a door to the abuse of paying the



growing deficiencies upon the taxes with exchequer bills,



chargeable on distant funds. These fell constantly to great



discount; and the unhappy servants of the state, who received



them in payment, were obliged to dispose of them to people who



could wait for an usurious reimbursement by parliament.



    When these exchequer bills had once got into the hands of the



monied people, they had interest with government to engage the



bank to circulate them at 6 per cent interest: but as the funds



upon which they were secured happened at that time, 1706, to be



engaged for discharging debts previously contracted, the bank,



during that interval, could receive no payment of this interest



of 6 per cent so the expedient fallen upon, was to pay the bank



compound interest for all the tallies and bills they were to



discount, until the funds appropriated should be relieved.



    This expedient, bad as it was, and burdensome to the state in



the highest degree, proved of infinite service, both in



establishing the credit of exchequer bills, and relieving those



who received payment in them.



    This operation was quite similar to those of banks of



circulation upon mortgage. The bank of England was here employed



in converting into money exchequer bills, secured upon the faith



of government. Banks upon mortgage convert into money the



property of individuals upon private security. Had, therefore,



banks upon mortgage been established in England at this time, all



those who had property would have got credits from them, and



would have been enabled thereby to pay their taxes, and carry on



their industry, without diminishing their consumption. The



exchequer would then have had no occasion to issue discredited



bills and tallies for making up deficiencies; because taxes would



have been productive, and the state would have been relieved of



this excessive burden of interest at 6 per cent accumulated



quarterly in favour of the bank.



    What extraordinary profit must have accrued to the bank by



this operation, every one must perceive. They were not here



procuring funds to lend at a great expence; all they did was to



augment the quantity of their paper upon government security;



which they knew well would remain current in the common circle of



payments within the country; and the public borrowings were



sufficient to furnish credit for the sums sent out of the



country. In this view we may conclude, that almost the whole



accumulated interest paid, became a pure profit to the bank, as



well as a great augmentation of the national debt.



    This operation of the bank in 1706, did not prevent



subsequent deficiencies, in the payment of the navy, army,



ordnance, and of many other articles. In 1710, they amounted to



above nine millions sterling. This was too great a sum to be



borrowed; and the bank durst not venture to discount more than



what domestic circulation could support: so that after this great



debt had circulated upon the discredited obligations which had



been issued for it, and in this way had fallen again into the



hands of monied people, at 30 and 40 per cent below par, the new



proprietors of it were all incorporated into one great company,



with a governor and directors, who got 6 per cent for the whole



capital, with an allowance of 8000 l. a year for charges of



management.



    Thus all the original creditors for these deficiencies lost



the discount; the monied people gained it, and the public paid



for all.



    When credit is in this languid state, every expence of



government must rise in proportion to the discredit of the paper



with which they pay, till at last the whole sum, with interest,



accumulation, and expence, falls upon the state, as if every



farthing of it had been frugally expended in ready money.



    This is a general view of the state of credit in Queen Anne's



reign.



    Government had not, as in the former war, the inconveniences



flowing from the disorder in the coin to combat with. These



contributed more than any other circumstance, to raise the



capital of the debts at the peace of Ryswick. Circulation, too,



was considerably augmented, in consequence of the increase of



taxes, public debts, and the operation of the bank in circulating



exchequer bills and tallies. Yet money was still scarce, in



comparison of what it night have been, had proper methods been



contrived to preserve it upon a level with the occasions for it.



    The incorporation, also, of nine millions capital in the



hands of a corporation, which afterwards was called the South Sea



Company, was an assistance to public credit, by increasing a



monied interest, the principal view of which was to fill the



government loans, on the lucrative conditions offered for them.



And last of all, the strictly adhering to the public faith of



engagements, without seeking, by acts of power, to indemnify the



state for the losses it had been obliged to incur, from the



circumstances of the times, laid the solid basis of national



credit for the future.



    Although the many taxes added to the former revenue, did not



increase it in any proportion to the load laid upon the subject



during this war, they served, however, as a good foundation for



improvement, as soon as the effects of peace restored them to



their full production. But the securities affecting these taxes



having become every year greater, government was obliged to



engage certain funds for thirty-two years to come, and sometimes



longer; and many branches of taxes, which formerly had been



granted for short terms, were then made perpetual. After the



peace of Utrecht, the expences of the state were greatly



diminished, and money began to regorge: so that in the year 1716,



the first foundation of the sinking fund was laid, by opening a



subscription for paying off about ten or eleven millions



sterling, at that time, charged upon several branches of taxes,



the produce of which amounted annually to 724,849 l. sterling.



    The proprietors of these debts were allowed to subscribe into



this new fund, at an interest of 5 per cent redeemable by



parliament: and in case the whole subscription should not fill at



that rate, the bank and South Sea company became bound to make it



up, upon receiving a like annuity in proportion to their



subscriptions.



    The bankers' debt, of which we have spoken, the only public



debt owing at the revolution, made part of those which were to be



subscribed for.



    The taxes which had been appropriated for the discharge of



those capitals, from temporary, were made perpetual; with a



clause added, that when the surplus of the fund, after payment of



the interest, had discharged the capitals of all the national



debt due the 25th of December in that year, the whole produce of



the fund itself should remain at the disposal of parliament.



    After this first operation in reducing the interest, the bank



complied with a reduction to 5 per cent of what was due to them;



and they began to circulate exchequer bills at a more moderate



interest than formerly.



    Public credit was now daily gaining ground. In 1719, the



South Sea company, the capital of which was then swelled to



eleven millions at 5 per cent with a sum of 9397 l. sterling for



the expence of management, enlarged their views; and finding



large profits to arise from so great a fund under one



administration, formed a project of acquiring a farther sum of



the public debts, which remained outstanding upon the original



funds appropriated for them.



    For this purpose they proposed to government to acquire,



first, The property of above 16 millions of redeemable debts,



bearing then 4 and 5 per cent interest; and to reduce the whole



to 4 per cent at midsummer 1727. Secondly, To acquire the



property of 794,000 l. of annuities upon lives, and for long



terms, as they should agree with the proprietors, at 5 per cent



upon the purchase-money, until 1727. and at 4 per cent



afterwards. Annuities were then valued at fourteen and twenty



years purchase, according to their length: they rose, however,



during the operations of the South Sea, to 25 and 30 years



purchase. Thirdly, They were to have a sum added to their former



allowance for the charge of management, in proportion to this



augmentation of their stock. Fourthly, That for the advantage



which might follow upon this agreement with government, the



company was to pay into the exchequer above seven millions



sterling, toward discharging other national debts outstanding.



And in the last place, they engaged to circulate a considerable



sum of exchequer bills, and to pay the interest of 2 pence per



cent per diem, which should grow upon them during seven



years.(1*)



    From the operations we have been describing, we perceive,



that the point of view in England, from the peace of Utrecht, has



always been, to reduce the interest of the national debt; but



never to leave in the hands of the creditors, any part of the



savings made, in order to diminish the capital. These savings



have constantly been thrown into a sinking fund supposed to be



intended for extinguishing the capital: and were it employed for



this purpose for a few years only, and not diverted to other



uses, I am persuaded the consequence would be, to reduce the



interest of money in England lower than ever perhaps it has been



seen in any nation. That interest may be reduced, by making money



regorge in the hands of the lenders, is, I think, an



uncontroverted principle: that by regorging in France, anno 1720,



it reduced interest to 2 per cent is a fact indisputable. I shall



not pretend to say positively, that the total appropriation of



the sinking fund, and an augmentation upon annual grants, to make



up the void, would in Great Britain work this effect in a few



years; but I think it is very probable that it would: and if the



domestic creditors, in any state, where debts, due to strangers,



are swelled to such a height as to exceed the whole profits made



upon trade, shall by their influence, and from a motive of



present advantage, obstruct a scheme of this nature; the



consequence will prove, in the first place, to discourage, and



then totally to extinguish commerce, and in a little time to



occasion an unavoidable bankruptcy; as shall be farther explained



in a succeeding chapter. I return to the South Sea company.



    The proposal of the South Sea company, mentioned above, was



accepted of, and ratified by act of parliament, 6 Geo. I. chap.



4th. But the disaster which befel credit, in consequence of the



ambitious views of those who were in the administration of that



company, prevented the nation from reaping all the advantages



which might have proceeded from it.



    The reign of K. George I though little disturbed by foreign



wars, produced not the smallest diminution upon the capital of



the public debts; and those which subsisted at the peace of



Utrecht, stood, at his death, at 50,354,953 l. The same taxes



subsisted; and every one almost was by this time made perpetual,



except indeed the land tax and malt duty, which to this day



continue to be annual grants.



    But alas! this apparent revenue, arising from a multitude of



taxes, was of no use towards defraying the smallest extraordinary



expence of government. Every article of it was engaged for debts;



and the operations for reducing the interest were calculated only



to produce a fund for discharging the capital. The civil list,



indeed, that is to say, the expence of civil government,



exclusive of army, navy, ordnance, and incidental articles, was



paid from the permanent taxes, and considered as a charge upon



them. But were not armies and navies then become as regular an



expence upon every state in Europe as judges and ambassadors?



Undoubtedly they were. Yet after the peace of Utrecht, in laying



down the plan which has constantly been followed ever since, for



defraying the regular expence of British government, these two



great and unavoidable expences were considered as contingent



only, and provided for by annual grants: and because armies, in



time of peace, in former reigns, had proved dangerous to liberty



from the abuse of power, they were still considered in the same



light, at a time when liberty and trade were continually



threatened from their armed enemies and rivals abroad.



    When the continuance of peace, in the reign of George the



First, had produced the effect of reducing interest, on many



occasions, to 3 per cent the sinking fund began to gather



strength. The land tax, from the year 1722, had not exceeded two



shillings in the pound; and the extraordinary expence of



government, according to the annual grants of the 13 years of his



reign, did not exceed 34,800,000 l. or 2,670,000 l. a year.



Public tranquillity was very little disturbed during the first



twelve years of the succeeding reign; and all the extraordinary



expence did not much exceed three millions per annum: yet this



expence, small as it was, compared with what it has been since,



was almost every year made out, by taking one million at least



from the sinking fund: and in the years of the least expence,



such as 1731 and 1732, the land tax was reduced to one shilling



in the pound, at the expence of taking two millions and a half



from the sinking fund.



    These steps of administration I neither censure, or approve



of. I must suppose every statesman to have good reasons for doing



what he does, unless I can discover that his motives are bad. May



not the landed interest, who composed the parliament, have



insisted upon such a diminution of their load? May not the



proprietors of the public debts have insisted on their side, that



no money out of the sinking fund should be thrown into their



hands, while the bank was making loans upon the land and malt



duties at 3 per cent? Might not the people have been averse to an



augmentation of taxes? When three such considerable interests



concur in a scheme, which in its ultimate, though distant



consequences, must end in the notable prejudice of perpetuating



the debts, although opportunities offer to diminish them, what



can government do? They must submit; and, which is worse, they



cannot well avow their reasons.



    Such combinations must occur, and frequently too, in every



state loaded with debts, where the body of the people, the



landlords and the creditors, find an advantage in the non-payment



of them. It is for this reason that I imagine, the best way to



obviate the bad consequences of so strong an influence in



parliament, would be, to appropriate the amount of all sinking



funds in such a manner, as to put it out of a nation's power to



misapply them, and by this to force them either to retrench their



extraordinary expences, or to impose taxes for defraying them.



    The second period of George IId's reign, was from the



breaking out of the Spanish war in 1739, to the peace of



Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748. During these ten years, (1748 being



included,) the extraordinary expence was, upon an average, very



near seven millions; and at the end of the year 1738, the public



debts amounted to 46,661,767 l. bearing 1,962,053 l. interest.



    The first expedient for borrowing money during this war, was



to continue the duty on salt for seven years; and to mortgage it



at once for 1,200,000 l. according to the old plan. To this was



added, the expedient of lotteries, and loans upon indeterminate



annuities, according to the current value of money.



    An additional excise upon spirituous liquors, brought in



wherewithal to compensate these additional sums of interest; and



the East India company, for lending one million at 3 per cent



upon this occasion, had their charter continued from 1766 to



1780. This operation I also consider as an anticipation; and as



it was to commence at the distance of 23 years from the time of



the grant, could not fail of being very burdensome to the nation,



however convenient it might be at that particular time.



    Were the India company now, 1766, to purchase the renewal of



their charter for 14 years, what a sum might be expected from it!



Yet the value given for the grant they then obtained did not



exceed 30,000 l. because the other annuities of 3 per cent. were



sold at that time for 97 l. or, in the language of the funds, at



3 l. premium for every 100 l. subscribed; and this so early in



the war as 1743.



    The practice of borrowing upon premiums had taken place in



Queen Anne's reign, and has of late years been very common. The



credit of Great Britain is so firmly established, that in



whatever way government inclines to borrow, the moneyed men are



willing to lend, provided the loan be made according to the rate



of interest at the time.



    To avoid therefore the establishment of funds at different



rates of interest, in proportion to the fluctuations of money,



the bargain is made at one determinate rate. Suppose, for an



example, 3 per cent. Then, according as money is found to rise



above this rate in the market, a premium is paid out of the money



subscribed; as in this case 3 l. was paid out of the 100 l.



subscribed; that is, the subscriber retained it, and obtained his



3 l. annuity, for the payment of 97 l. so this remained a 3 per



cent loan, instead of being, as it really was, at 3 9/97 per



cent. and was sold and transferred as every other 3 per cent



without occasioning any perplexity.



    As the war continued, interest rose, from the demand for



money, when the supplies became deficient.



    The year following, viz. 1744, this manifested itself, by the



conditions offered by government, which were. That, of two



millions to be borrowed at 3 per cent as before, upon the whole



sum, 1,500,000 l. should be formed into perpetual annuities, and



the remaining 500,000 l. into a lottery, consisting of 50,000



tickets, to be sold at 10 l. each. The original subscribers to



this loan subscribed therefore 10 l. for the ticket, and 30 l.



for the annuity, in all 40 l.; for which they were to receive 3



per cent. But the premium consisted in this; that every



subscriber for 10 tickets, that is, 400 l. of the total fund, had



an annuity for life given to him of 4 l. 10s.



    This made five thousand annuities on lives, of 4 l. 10s.



each, or 22,500 l. a year to be added to the interest of 3 per



cent. on the two millions, that is, to 60,000 l. a year of



perpetual annuities. So that the whole loan of two millions this



year cost government 82,500 l. of interest, of 4 1/8 per cent;



22,500 l. of which was to extinguish with the lives of the



subscribers.



    Now, if we suppose these life-annuities worth 20 years



purchase,(2*) this was the same thing as if government had given



a deduction of 90 l. out of the 400 l. subscribed; consequently



the remainder, which was 310 l. produced 12 l. This makes the



rate of interest upon the loan to have been 3.87 per cent. And as



government inclined that the loan should be made in this way, the



lenders were willing that it should be so; and the difference



between 3.87 per cent (the then rate of money) and 4 1/8



interest, which was paid by government, was a sinking fund, as it



were, for the gradual extinction of the capital of the lottery



for 300,000 l. during the lives of the annuitants.



    In 1746, perpetual or indeterminate annuities were



constituted at 4 per cent and the premium upon the ten lottery



tickets was raised to 9 l. life-annuity.



    It would be unnecessary to trace the various methods of



contriving the premiums given in the succeeding years of this



war. The principle upon which they were regulated was always to



proportion them to the rate of interest at the time; and the



motive was, I suppose, that by this method of borrowing, a part



at least of the debt would become extinguished with the lives of



the subscribers. There might perhaps be another, to wit, that by



swelling the capital, for value not received, there was an



appearance of borrowing at a lower rate of interest than what in



reality was the case. Thus in 1747, when 6,300,000 l. were



borrowed; instead of giving not quite 4 1/2 per cent. for this



sum, they gave 4 per cent. upon 6,930,000 l. which capital,



although money should return to 3 per cent was still to stand at



its full value; whereas, had 6,300,000 l. been borrowed at 4 1/2



per cent. there would have been a saving of 600,000 l. upon the



capital; and at the peace, the interest of 4 1/2 per cent would



equally have come down to 3 per cent with the other funds.



    During this first war of George the Second, the land tax was



constantly at 4s. in the pound; and new branches of customs,



excise, or other inland duties, were created in proportion to the



swelling of the national debts, which, on the 31st of December



1748, amounted to 78,293,313 l. sterling, bearing 3,003,325 l.



interest; and the sinking fund, or surplus of all permanent taxes



then imposed, after paying the civil list, and the interest upon



this capital, amounted to 1,060,948 l. sterling. During this war,



the debts were increased above what they were at the end of 1738,



by 31,631,346 l. sterling capital, and by 1,043,272 l. of



interest or annuities.



    The war was no sooner over, and the national expence



diminished, than money began to regorge in the hands of the



monied interest: an infallible consequence of such a violent



revolution, when extraneous circumstances, such as occurred after



the peace of 1763, do not prevent it.



    To profit of this conjuncture, government, early in 1749,



proposed that all the public creditors upon capitals bearing 4



per cent interest, redeemable by parliament, and amounting to



upwards of 57 millions, who should accept of 3 per cent from



December 1757, should have their debts made irredeemable until



that time; and in the interval should continue to have 4 per cent



till December 1750; and 3 1/2 per cent from thence, until the



total reduction to 3 per cent in December 1757.



    This bold undertaking had the desired effect. Many obstacles



were thrown in the way; but the regorging capitals in the hands



of many, made every one fear the reimbursement for himself; and



the credit of France was then so low, that very few chose its



funds as an outlet for their superfluous money.



    But an outlet, unfortunately, was not wanting at the end of



the last war in 1763, as we shall shew in its proper place.



    Here then is a notable instance of the effects of regorging



money. A small sum, when compared with a nation's debt, operates



upon the whole capital; as a small balance upon trade affects the



whole mass of reciprocal payments.



    The reimbursement of 57 millions offered by government, in



1749, was, to the conviction of all the world, an impracticable



scheme; but the stockholders seeing a large sum ready to be



subscribed, at the interest offered, and feeling the effects



which that regorging money must, in all events, have produced;



willingly, and wisely perhaps, consented to the offer made them.



Had they refused, and had the scheme proposed become abortive



thereby, perhaps the nation, from the disappointment, might have



been so far animated against the creditors, as to have consented



to be at the expence of defraying the service of the following



years, without encroaching upon the sinking fund. What effect



this would have produced upon the rate of interest, in that



conjuncture, no man can tell, nor will the real consequence of



such a measure be ever known, until the happy trial be made. That



it would have brought interest below 3 per cent in December 1757,



is, I think, evident: for as matters stood, had the creditors of



57 millions been able to hold out, I must do them the justice to



believe, they would not have accepted the proposal made to them;



and an addition of all the sinking fund thrown among them



annually, at a time they could not dispose of what they had, upon



better terms than those offered to them, would undoubtedly then,



as at all times, operate a very great national relief, in



bringing down the interest of money.



    During the tranquillity which continued from the peace of



Aix-la-Chapelle, in 1748, to the commencement of hostilities in



1755, the money expended for extraordinary services amounted on



an average to above four millions per annum. The expence of



government was then increased, by supporting the colonies, and by



several great and uncommon outgoings at home, for purposes



mentioned in the supplies of those years.



    A little before the breaking out of the last war, that is to



say, on the 5th of January 1755, the national funded debt was



reduced to 72,289,674 l. upon which was paid an annuity of



2,654,500 l. and the sinking fund amounted to 1,308,814 l. At the



end of 1763, the year of the peace, the funded debt amounted to



130,586,789 l. 10 s. besides above 9 millions not provided for.



So that at the end of last war the national debt exceeded 140



millions; besides the value of the annuities granted in 1757,



1761, and 1762. Hence it appears, that the war occasioned an



augmentation of upwards of 58,297,116 l. upon the funded national



debt;(3*) besides the difference between the unfunded debts at



the beginning and end of the war; and also the value of those



annuities.



    I shall, before I conclude this chapter, present a short



scheme of the state of the nation at that time: but first let us



take a view of the methods used to borrow so large a sum in the



short period of eight years.



    Until 1757, money was borrowed by government, at very little



more than 3 per cent but then a loan of 5 millions being



necessary, government consented to create annuities of 4 1/2 per



cent irredeemable for 24 years. By this expedient the monied



people eluded the operation of reducing the interest of this



fund, upon the return of peace. How far this expedient was to be



preferred to the former, of increasing the capital beyond the



money paid; or whether it would not have been still better to



have paid for the money wanted, according to the current rate of



interest in the market at the time, waiting until a peace might



afford a favourable opportunity of reducing it, I shall not take



upon me to determine.(4*)



    I have observed how rash it is for any one to censure acts of



administration, when the motives of a statesman's conduct are



unknown. This, however, I have sometimes ventured to do, in



speaking of things which happened many years ago; but we ought to



be more cautious as we come nearer to our own times, because not



having, as in the case before us, a course of experience to point



out the errors, we must entirely rely upon our own sagacity, and



reason from analogy only.



    During the last war, as in that preceding it, taxes were



increased in proportion to the interest of the money borrowed;



and new impositions were now laid on the articles of great



consumption, which produced abundantly. The new malt-duty of 3d.



per bushel, and the new beer-duty of 3s. per barrel, bring in net



into the exchequer near 820,000 l. per annum, and discharge the



interest of above 27 millions sterling, at 3 per cent. Such a sum



raised at the end of a war so very expensive, and at the very



time when the credit of France was totally fallen, must have



operated in the strongest manner, and did in fact operate more,



perhaps, than any other consideration, to put an end to that war,



the most glorious that Europe has beheld since the beginning of



this century, or perhaps in any age whatever: advantageous to



Great Britain, notwithstanding all the expence, provided that the



consequences happen to correspond to what may be reasonably



expected.



    I shall now set before my reader a short state of the taxes,



debts, and public funds of Great Britain, at this bright period



of her history.



    From the best authority I have been able to procure, the



revenue of the state, considered under the three general branches



of customs, excise, and other inland duties, which comprehend the



whole permanent income of this kingdom, was then as follows:







    Customs net into the exchequer, about             *2,000,000



    Excise in all its permanent branches net, about    4,600,000



    Other in land duties net                           1,000,000



    Land tax at 4s. in the pound                       2,000,000



    Annual malt tax net                                  613,000







    In all                                            10,213,000







    Let us next state the annual charges and appropriations



settled upon this fund.







    First then the civil list, to the



amount of                               800,000



    Secondly, The interest of about



131 millions of funded debts at different



rates of interest, about              4,500,000



    Thirdly, The interest of nine



millions not then provided for,



supposed to be at 4 per cent.           360,000







 In all of regular and permanent annual charge          5,660,000







    So there remains free, about                        4,553,000



    From which if we deduct the annual grants of land



and malt-taxes, which extend together, as above, to     2,613,000



    There will remain as the produce of the sinking



     fund(5*)                                           1,940,000







    In this state, nearly, stood the affairs of Great Britain



after the conclusion of the peace in 1763.



    It now only remains to offer some conjectures why, after the



conclusion of this peace, as after the peace of Aix-la-chapelle,



money was not found to regorge, so as to furnish an opportunity



of reducing the rate of interest upon all redeemable debts, and



by that to raise the amount of the sinking fund, and more firmly



to establish the national credit.



    After the fall of the credit of France toward the end of



1759, Great Britain had the command of all the money to be lent



in Europe; and accordingly amazing sums were borrowed in 1760,



1761, and 1762. Of the sums borrowed, a great part, no doubt, was



the property of strangers; but they, not being so well acquainted



with the affairs of this nation as the English themselves,



instead of subscribing to the loans, lent the money to our own



country people, who, in hopes of a great rise upon the return of



peace, filled the subscriptions with this borrowed money.



    The consequence was, that no sooner did the funds begin to



rise after the peace, than many creditors demanded their money of



those who had invested it in the public funds. This obliged the



latter to bring their stock to market, and this again had



naturally the effect of keeping the funds very low. Some, more



prudent than the rest, had borrowed upon a long term of



repayment: which had the effect of putting off still longer the



settlement of the funds in the hands of the real proprietors, and



of taking them out of those who only held them nominally.



    Besides this accidental cause of the low price of the funds,



other circumstances, no doubt, greatly contributed to produce the



same effect.



    How great soever the balance of trade, that is, of



exportations above importations, may have been of late in favour



of England, still the mighty sums drawn out by the foreign



creditors have certainly, upon the whole, prevented much money



from coming home on the general or grand balance of payments.



While this continues to be the case, it is impossible that much



money should regorge at home in the hands of the natives, and



until this shall happen, there can be no hope of seeing the 3 per



cents rise above par. But then the rise, small as it is, since



the peace, may encourage us to hope that this favourable change



is not far off: for had the profits of our trade been quite



unable to balance the loss upon our foreign debts, the funds



would undoubtedly still continue to fall, which is demonstrably



not the case from the circumstances of the loan in April 1766,



obtained by government, with the assistance of a lottery indeed,



at 3 per cent.(6*)



    Here then was an outlet provided for more money than all that



could regorge at home, viz. the payment of those foreign



creditors, to whom the stockholders were indebted. besides this,



the sale by government, of such tracts of land in the new



acquired islands in the West Indies, provided another; money was



even placed in the funds of France soon after the peace, until



the adventurers were checked by the operations of the King's



council, in reducing both capitals and interest upon them,



contrary to the original stipulations with the creditors. A lucky



circumstance for Great Britain, as it forces, in a manner, all



the money of the continent into the English funds, which equally



remain a debt upon the nation, whether high or low in the market.







Chap. VIII







Contingent Consequences of the Extension of Credit, and Increase



of Debts











    I now proceed to inquire what be the consequences of this



might change produced upon the policy of industrious and trading



states from the establishment of credit, debts, and taxes.



    I have, from the very beginning of this inquiry, occasionally



taken notice of the influence which such a change must make upon



the spirit and manners of a people. The lower classes, who are



slow in forming combinations, do not soon comprehend the



necessary consequences of such revolutions. Even ministers have



been often at a loss to judge of the consequences which might



follow upon some steps of their own conduct relative thereto,



although taken upon mature deliberation.



    When public credit is employed for raising money upon a plan



of refunding the capital, either by uniform annual payments



exceeding the interest, or by funds established for sinking the



capital, no contingent consequences can happen, provided the plan



be executed: the debts contracted will be paid, and matters will



return to their former state.



    When public credit is employed for raising money upon payment



of a perpetual interest; or if, whatever be the plan laid down,



capitals should not happen to be discharged, but the debts should



swell continually; in this case, the contingent consequences are



many and various, far exceeding any man's sagacity to



investigate.



    If we judge of them from what past experience has taught us,



we may conclude, that, in one way or other, all debts contracted



will in time disappear, either by being paid, or by being



abolished: because it is not to be expected that posterity will



groan under such a load any longer than it is convenient; and



because in fact we see no very old public debts as yet



outstanding, where interest has been regularly paid out of a fund



which has remained in the possession of the state.



    This is a very rational conclusion from past experience; but



it is relative only to the circumstances of past times. While the



debtors are the masters, there is no difficulty of getting clear



of debts: but if the consequence of this new system should be to



make the creditors the masters, I suppose the case may be



different. Farther,



    In former times public debts were contracted between the



state and its own subjects; but at present we see that in such



loans, foreigners, even enemies, are invited to concur: and the



better to engage them to it, a total immunity is promised from



all taxes upon the interest to be paid by the borrowers.



    This circumstance has already drawn the attention of Princes,



in the discussion of their reciprocal concerns. We saw how, in



the treaty of Dresden, which took place after the King of



Prussia's invasion of Saxony in 1745, it was provided by the 6th



article, that all debts due by the bank of the Steuer to that



Prince's subjects, were to be paid, on presentation of their



contracts.



    We have not indeed as yet seen wars carried on for the



payment of debts; but the case may happen, and kingdom may be



carried off upon such pretensions, as well as private property.



What a chain of contingent consequences arises from this single



combination, were this a proper place to introduce them!



    But without going to the supposition of Princes or nations



becoming reciprocally engaged in debts, and thereby involving



such mighty interests in the support of public faith, we may



easily conceive, that a monied interest, of a long standing, may



have influence enough to produce a change upon the spirit and



manners of a people.



    Let me here take the example of Great Britain. Do we not see



how the spirit of that nation is totally bent upon the support of



public credit? And do we not see how absolutely their commercial



interest depends upon it? Can it be supposed, that every one has



combined all the consequences which may flow from the constant



swelling of their debts? Or, indeed is it possible to determine



what will be the consequences of them? This however we may



suppose at least, because we see the progress of it already, that



the interest of the creditors will daily gather strength, both in



parliament and without doors: and if from small beginnings it



have arrived at the pitch we now see, it is very natural to



conclude, that, in time, it may become stronger, and that at



last, the creditors of the nation may become the masters of it.



    When any one interest becomes too predominant, the prosperity



of the state stands upon a precarious footing. Every interest



should be encouraged, protected, and kept within due bounds. The



following speculations are intended for the application of



principles to new and unexperienced combinations; where natural



causes may work their direct and immediate effects, and thereby



prove prejudicial to the general welfare, unless they be foreseen



in some degree, and proper remedies be prepared against them.



    Europe was possessed by our ancestors free from taxes; our



fathers saw them imposed, and we now see how fast they become



mortgaged for our debts. We can as little judge of the extent of



our credit, as they could of the possibility of contributing so



large a fund for the support of it.



    As the plan of imposing taxes has been extended, we see the



public coffers every day receiving a vast flux of money, and like



the heart in the human body, throwing it out again into



circulation. Happy state, could it be lasting, and were this flux



and reflux preserved in a due proportion to all the uses for



which it is intended! But states have their vices, as well as



private people. Public opulence should be proportioned to public



exigences: but how often do we see ambition putting on the face



of public spirit, and animating the resentment of a nation, under



colour of providing for her security? Hence wars, from wars



expence: recourse is had to credit, money is borrowed, debts are



contracted, taxes are augmented; all this increases circulation,



which demands a supply of currency: this is procured by melting



down the solid property. These operations performed, the public



money is either sent abroad, or remains at home. If sent abroad,



more property must be melted down, in order to fill up the void.



If it remain at home, it will animate every branch of



circulation; and when the exigence, which required this



additional quantity of money, is over, what circulation finds



superfluous, will stagnate in the hands of the monied interest,



and will either form a fund for the filling of new loans to



government, or it will be laid out in the purchase of the



property formerly melted down, which produced it; and thereby



will be consolidated a-new.



    Every interest in a state must influence the government of



it, in proportion to its consequence and weight; and every



government must influence the spirit of the people who live under



it.



    Now, as we have seen how industry creates wealth; how wealth



and confidence create credit; how credit creates debts and taxes;



how these again occasion an augmentation of money, by the melting



down of property; and how this property becomes transferred to a



new set of men, once the monied interest, who afterwards acquire



the lands, and consolidate this quantity of money which is become



superfluous to circulation; does not this chain of consequences



represent a kind of circle, returning into itself? And is it not



plain, that without the intervention of this engine, namely the



money created in proportion to the demand for it, the chain would



be cut off, before it could reach the link from which it first



set out? Will not this conversion of the former monied interest



into a new landed interest, insensibly inspire the bulk of the



landlords with sentiments analogous to a monied interest? Is not



this evidently more and more the case every day in England? And



from this may we not prognosticate the solidity of public credit



in that nation?



    If on the other hand we find, as in France, industry in times



of peace drawing wealth from other nations, and thereby



increasing the coin, upon which alone credit is circulated



through the kingdom; and then foreign expence sending it away in



times of war; must not circulation keep pace with the coin, that



is to say, be circumscribed within the proportion of it?



    If the solidity and extent of the King's free revenue should



afford credit to borrow this coin; and if, without providing a



proportional supply of currency to fill up the void, the coin



borrowed be sent out of France; how can the ordinary circulation



be carried on?



    Let us here recal to mind what was said in the 22d chapter,



upon banks, where we distinguished voluntary circulation, which



is buying, from involuntary circulation, which is paying: we



there observed how paying must always take place of buying;



consequently, we may here determine that taxes must be paid



before buying, that is consumption, can go on. The deficiency



therefore of coin for circulation, will, first, proportionally



affect the trade, manufactures, and consumption of France, and



afterwards the revenue which arises from them. Is not this the



constant complaint in France, when war carries off their coin?



The remonstrances of all their parliaments are filled with it.



    In times of peace, the amount of what comes from the people



is greater than in time of war: but then there is coin sufficient



for all the payments; and when they are made to the royal



treasury, they immediately return into circulation, and no hurt



is felt.



    I insist the more upon this principle, and I introduce it in



so many different ways, and under such a variety of views,



because I take it to be one of the most important considerations



in the whole doctrine of credit, and one which I have never seen



suggested by any French or English writer upon this subject. Many



are the complaints for want of money; but no method have I ever



seen proposed for obtaining it from solid property; the easiest



and safest of all operations, when conducted with honesty, and



according to principles.



    As money therefore is the means of closing the chain of



consequences already mentioned, and forming it into a circle, as



has been said, we plainly see how, when it is wanting, the same



effects cannot be produced; and consequently the country of



France, where money is confined to the coin, will be very long of



adopting the sentiments of a monied interest; whether for its



profit or its loss, in the end, is not here the question.



    We have now traced the contingent consequences of public



credit as far as to shew how it may tend to influence the spirit



of a people, and make them adopt the sentiments of a monied



interest.



    The allurement of acquiring land-property is very great, no



doubt, especially to monied men. The ease and affluence of those,



on the other hand, who have their capitals in their pocket-books,



is very attracting to the eyes of many landlords, especially at a



time when they are paying the heavy taxes laid upon their



possessions.



    The firm establishment of public credit tends greatly to



introduce these reciprocal sentiments of good-will among the two



great classes of a people, and thereby to preserve a balance



between them. The monied interest wish to promote the prosperity



of the landlords; the landlords, the solidity of credit; and the



well-being of both depends upon the success of trade and



industry.



    Let us now suppose what is actually the case in Great



Britain, that from the swelling of public debts an enormous fund



of personal property is created. This is formed out of the income



of the whole nation; and as it has been purchased by those who



have lent money to the state, in common language it is included



in what we call the monied interest: it is however very distinct



from it, as will be understood from what is to follow.



    The capital of the public debts is the price which has been



paid for the annuities due to the creditors, and is now no more



money to them than land is money to the landlord. It may be



turned into money, no doubt; but so may land.



    The monied interest, comprehends, those only who have money,



not realized upon any fund, and who either employ it in the way



of trade, in the way of industry, in jobbing in land, in stock,



or in any way they please, so as to draw from it an annual



income. While it is fixed, that is, given for any permanent



value, it ceases to be money; when it is called in, it becomes



money again. Let stock, therefore, suffer ever so many



alienations from hand to hand, it still continues stock: it never



can become land, it never can become money, until it be paid off



by government. I hope this idea is so clear, as to be well



understood. Stock, therefore, I here consider as one great branch



of solid personal property; as far as the security of government



is solid and good; and as such, may be melted down into money by



banks, as well as any other thing.



    Now I have said that this fund is formed out of the income of



the whole nation; consequently by fund, here, I do not understand



the capital, which exists no more, but the interest which is



drawn for it: it is this interest, I say, which is paid from the



land, the money, the trade, the industry, &c. which forms one



great branch of the monied interest of England. From the land,



out of the amount of the taxes charged upon it; from the money,



trade, industry, &c. out of the amount of proportional taxes,



such as excises, customs, salt-tax, stamp-duties, and the like.



    The more the national debts increase, by the monied interest



realizing into this branch of solid property the funds, the more



the taxes must augment; and consequently, the more the



proprietors of the funds themselves must be affected by such



taxes, as well as the landlords.



    From this exposition of the matter, it may be concluded, that



as proportional taxes affect every man's income, according to his



consumption; the landlord, caeteris paribus, who pays a land tax,



as well as his proportion upon his consumption, is more hardly



dealt with than the proprietor of the other branch of solid



property, the funds, who pays his proportion only of the last.



    But the condition of the stockholder is not equally



favourable to that of the landlord, for two very plain reasons.



The first is, that the income of his stock cannot increase; that



of the land may. The second is, that the swelling of this great



capital of stock has the effect of sinking the interest upon it,



and consequently of diminishing the income of the stockholder:



and in proportion to this diminution, the value of land must



augment. Now I readily allow that the augmentation upon the value



of lands is no inducement to a landlord to turn them into money;



because he would then lose upon his money, what he gains upon the



additional price received. But it is a great advantage in another



respect, namely, that he thereby diminishes the interest he pays



upon his debts, if he have any; and if he have none, it enables



him to borrow at a lower rate for the future; and by improving



his lands with the money borrowed, he may augment his income much



beyond the proportion of the interest paid.



    It is therefore necessary, in imposing land taxes, rightly to



combine every circumstance; that the load of all impositions may



be equally distributed upon every class of a people who enjoys



superfluity, and upon no other. If, after a fair deduction of



principles, this shall appear a thing possible to be done, we may



expect to see statesmen engaged to depart from the old maxim of



grasping at what is readiest and nearest at hand, to wit, the



landed property, with a view to spare a class of people, which,



in a well regulated state, never can be made to feel the burden



of any proportional tax whatsoever; I mean the industrious poor.



    I now proceed in my inquiry into the nature and consequences



of the swelling of this great branch of property, the public



funds.



    As to the nature of it, we have said already, that it is



formed by realizing money into stock. When government borrows,



the lenders must be people who have money. If the loan be made at



home, the money is no sooner paid in, than it is spent; and as we



may suppose that it would not have been lent, had either the



lenders found it necessary for their current expence, or had they



found a more profitable way of realizing it than by lending it to



government, we consider it as having been in a state of



stagnation; but being lent to government, it is thrown into a new



channel of circulation.



    Farther, this money stagnating in the hands of the lender,



either proceeded from his income, which exceeded his expence, or



from the profits of his industry. In either case, the country is



neither poorer or richer, when considered in a cumulative view,



than if the same sum had been lent to private people at home.



    Let us next suppose the money to have been borrowed for the



exigence of a foreign war. In this case, if it be borrowed at



home and sent abroad, it must first be converted into the money



of the world, gold and silver, and then sent off, to the



diminution of this kind of property; or it must go abroad in the



money of the country, credit, to the diminution of the annual



income upon which the credit is established. As this last



operation may not be so clear, an example will explain it.



    Government borrows one million; it is paid in paper, and must



be sent to Holland. If at that time a balance be due by Holland



of one million, bills will readily be found for it. In this case,



the balance of trade is borrowed as it were by government, and



becomes converted into a capital of a million in the public



funds, the interest of which will remain at home, and continue to



be the property of the nation. But as the value of this balance



is sent to Holland and spent abroad, it is, upon the whole, to



the nation, as if no balance had been due to them. This I call a



lucrum cessans to the country.



    But suppose no balance to be due by Holland at the time the



million comes to be sent off, I say the consequence will be, to



alienate in favour of foreigners a part of the annual income,



proportional to the whole interest paid for the loan, whether it



has been subscribed for by foreigners, or by natives.



    If the subscription be filled by foreigners, the consequence



is evident: it is equally so in the other case, upon a little



reflection.



    Suppose then the million subscribed for, and paid in London.



Bills are sought for; none are found, I mean in the way of



reciprocal compensation, does not this sum immediately become a



balance against London? And as a country loses all such balances,



and the country to which they are due gains them, this million is



lost to England, and forms what I call a damnum emergens; that is



to say, her former property or income is so far diminished, or



comes to be transferred to strangers.



    From this we may conclude, that in all matters of public



borrowing, it is of no consequence whether the subscription be



filed by natives, or by foreigners, when the value of it is to be



sent abroad.



    Let us next examine the state of the question when the loan



is made in order to be spent at home, as is the case after a war,



when the unfunded debts come to be paid off.



    We have said that loans are filled by money stagnating, which



the owner desires to realize: if he cannot do better, he lends it



to government; if he can do better, he will not lend it.



    While the uses of domestic circulation absorb all the money



in the country, that is to say, when there are private persons



ready to borrow all the money to be lent, at this time government



cannot borrow at home; and if they did, by offering a high



interest for it, the borrowing would do harm to circulation;



because it would raise interest at home, or disappoint those who



would gladly borrow it, for little more than the interest offered



by government.



    Let us next suppose that after a war, when the unfunded debts



are either bearing a high interest, or selling at discount,



government shall find an advantage in opening a subscription,



which may be filled from abroad, at a lower rate than the then



actual value of money. Suppose, I say, the Dutch should be



willing to lend at 3 per cent while money in England stood at 4



per cent. I ask if, in this case, government ought to borrow from



Holland, at the expence of sending the interest out of the



country, rather than suffer such debts to sell at discount; or



continue paying a higher interest at home for what they owe?



    It is my opinion that still they ought to borrow abroad, for



the following reasons. That if the high interest at home proceed



from want of money, that is to say, from circulation not being



full enough, it is their interest to borrow, were it for nothing



else than to supply circulation; because unless this be full, all



industry must languish. But suppose it should be said that



circulation is full enough, that industry suffers no check from



that quarter, but that there being no superfluity of money,



interest stands 1 per cent higher than it would do were there



considerable stagnations. In this case also, I think it is their



interest to borrow, were it for no other reason than to produce



such stagnations.



    It is a general rule every where, that there is no having



enough without having a superfluity; at least there is no



certainty of one's having enough without finding a superfluity.



Borrowing abroad, therefore, in small sums, at such a time, will



produce stagnations at home, from which succeeding loans may be



filled, after circulation is sufficiently provided: and even in



case more should be borrowed from strangers than may be found



necessary; and that in consequence of this, too much money should



come to stagnate at home, after the demand of government is over;



the monied interest would then lend, in their turn, to other



states, where interest is higher; and the annual returns from



that quarter would more than compensate what must be sent away,



in consequence of the former borrowing.



    From these combinations, let us draw some conclusions.



    First, That the effect of public borrowing, or national debt,



is to augment the permanent income of the country, out of



stagnating money, and balances of trade.



    Secondly, That this income so created, may be either the



property of natives, or of strangers.



    Thirdly, That when money is found to regorge, in a country



where circulation is not diminishing, it may be supposed to



proceed from the coming in of a right balance of trade.



    Fourthly, If stagnations in one part be found to interrupt



circulation in another, public borrowing, for domestic purposes,



has the good effect of giving vent to the stagnation, and



throwing the money into a new channel of circulation.



    Fifthly, That the sum of interest paid by any nation to



strangers, shews the general balance due by the nation, after



deducting all the profits of their past trade from all the



expence of their foreign wars.



    But here it must be observed, that as on one hand we are



comprehending all that is paid to foreign creditors, on account



of the funds they have in England, for example, so on the other



hand, must be deducted from this, all the payments made to



Englishmen by other nations.



    Sixthly, From this last circumstance we discover that the



lending to other nations by private hands, produces the same



effect to a nation as if the state were actually paying off the



debts due to strangers. Consequently, when Moses permitted the



Jews to lend to strangers at interest, and forbade such loans



among themselves, his view was to establish a foreign tribute, as



it were, in favour of his own nation, instead of promoting luxury



at home.



    Seventhly, As the balance due to a nation upon her trade, is



found to compensate, pro tanto, the money she spends abroad, we



may from the same principle, conclude that so soon as she ceases



to expend money abroad, the balance of trade in her favour, if



not realized at home in some new improvement, will diminish, pro



tanto, the interest, or capitals due to strangers. This is



evident from the nature of balances, of which we have treated



already.



    Eighthly, The consequence, for example, of England's owing



large sums to strangers, will, from the same principle,



constantly prevent exchange from rising very high in her favour,



when the balance of her trade comes to be paid to her: because on



every such occasion, her foreign creditors will be glad to



disappoint exchangers, by furnishing bills for their interest, or



capitals, to those who owe the balance; the consequence of which



is plainly to diminish the foreign debts.(7*)



    This circumstance implies no loss to the nation which is



creditor in the balance of trade, and debtor upon the capitals;



because we have proved that the price of exchange never affects a



nation, but certain individuals only, who pay it to others of the



same nation.



    This is sufficient, I think, to point out in some degree the



nature of a national debt. I come next to examine the



consequences of its constant augmentation; when proper measures



are not taken, either to pay it off, or to circumscribe it within



certain bounds.



    In what is to follow, I shall throw all consideration of



capitals totally out of the question; and as to the amount of



taxes, it is quite indifferent whether the money proceeding from



them be in consequence of an improvement made upon those already



established, or from new impositions: such combinations will come



in more properly afterwards.



    If the interest paid upon the national debt of England, for



example, be found constantly to increase upon every new war, the



consequence will be, that more money must be raised on the



subject for the payment of it. The question then comes to be.



First, How far may debts extend? Secondly, How far may taxes be



carried? And Thirdly, What will be the consequence, supposing the



one and the other carried to the greatest height possible?



    I answer to the first, that abstracting from circumstances



which may disturb the gradual progress of this operation, before



it can arrive at the ne plus ultra, debts may be increased to the



full proportion of all that can be raised for the payment of the



interest. As to the second, How far taxes may be carried, I shall



not here anticipate the subject of the following book, any



farther than is necessary to resolve the question before us.



    Taxes, we have said, either affect income, or consumption.



The land-tax of England is now at 4 shillings in the pound, upon



a supposed value of the property affected by it, which is all



real and personal estates, the stock upon lands, and some few



other particulars excepted.



    This tax may be carried to the full value of all the real



estates in England. As for personal estates it never can affect



them proportionally; and this part of the statute of land-tax



which passes every year, and imposes 4 shillings in the pound on



personal estates, carries in it a mark of our former ignorance in



matters of taxation.



    The notion of actually imposing 20 shillings in the pound



upon the real value of all the land-rents of England, appears to



us perfectly ridiculous. I admit it to be so; and could I have



discovered any argument by which I could have limited the rising



of the land-tax to any precise number of shillings under twenty,



I should have stated this as the maximum rather than the other.



    The second branch of taxes comprehends those upon



consumptions, excises, and the like. The maximum as to this



branch must depend upon the interests of foreign trade; because



this is affected in a certain degree by the prices of domestic



industry. Other taxes have not this effect, as we shall shew in



its proper place.



    But as foreign trade on the other hand is not essential to



the support of the domestic industry, consumption, circulation,



&c. of any nation, as has been proved in the second book, but



merely to its increasing in wealth proportionally to other



nations; were foreign communications cut off entirely, I perceive



no limit to which I can confine the extent of proportional taxes.



Let me therefore suppose a term beyond which impositions of all



kinds must come to a stop, and then ask, in the third place, what



the consequence will be? I answer, that the state will then be in



possession of all that can be raised on the land, on the



consumption, industry and trade of the country; in short, of all



that can be called income, which it will administer for the



public creditors.



    When this comes to be the case, debts become extinguished of



course; because they come to be consolidated with the property: a



case which commonly happens when a creditor takes possession of



an estate for the payment of debts equal to its value.



    Government then may continue to administer for the creditors,



and either retain in its hand what is necessary for the public



expence of the year; or if it inclines to shew the same



indulgence for this new class of proprietors as for the former,



it may limit the retention to a sum equal only to the interest of



the money wanted; and in this way set out upon a new system of



borrowing, until the amount of taxes once more extending to the



amount of the public revenue be transferred to a new set of



creditors. This is the endless path referred to in the ninth



chapter of the second book, which, after a multitude of windings,



returns into itself.



    A state, I imagine, which would preserve its public faith



inviolable, until a period such as I have been supposing, would



run little risk of not finding credit for a new borrowing. The



prospect of a second revolution of the same kind with the first



would be very distant; and in matters of credit, which are



constantly exposed to risk, such events being out of the reach of



calculation, are never taken into any man's account who has money



to lend.



    The whole of this hypothesis is, I readily agree, destitute



of all probability; because of the infinite variety of



circumstances which may frustrate such a scheme. I introduced it



merely to shew where the constant mortgaging of a public revenue



may end; and to disprove the vulgar notion, that by contracting



debts beyond a certain sum, a trading nation which has a great



balance in its favour, must be involved in an unavoidable



bankruptcy. To say that a nation must become bankrupt to itself,



is a proposition which I think implies a contradiction.







Chap. IX







Of Bankruptcies







    In the last chapter we have been running through a chain of



consequences relative to the increase of public debts, which



appear as extravagant to us at present, as it would have appeared



to Davenant, to have supposed the debts of this nation to grow up



to their present height, without the risk of involving the nation



in a general bankruptcy.



    But these consequences are merely contingent. The present



debts may either be paid off, or the nation may be involved in a



general bankruptcy. In either case, the vast property in the



funds, this great article of permanent income, belonging to



natives and to foreigners, must wither and decay, and at last



disappear altogether.



    We may therefore conclude, that one of three events must



happen, viz. either First, Debts will swell to such a pitch as at



last to pay themselves: or, Secondly, The nation will be involved



in a bankruptcy.. or, Thirdly, They will be fairly paid off, or



at least circumscribed within reasonable bounds.



    The first supposition we have examined; the second we are now



to consider; the last will be the subject of the following



chapter, with which I shall conclude this book.



    I shall advance no argument to prove that the scheme of a



public bankruptcy is either lawful, honourable, or expedient, if



voluntarily gone into by a state; because I think it is



diametrically opposite to every principle of good government. It



is a maxim uncontroverted, that a contract ought to be binding



between the parties contracting, and that it ought to be



fulfilled in every article. If the public good be alleged as an



overruling principle, to which every other must give way, I



readily admit the justness of the exception. There is another of



equal force, the impossibility of performance. When such



arguments are used to engage a nation to commit a deliberate act



of bankruptcy, two things must be examined: the first, is the



interest which the public has in adopting the scheme: the second,



the consequences of it. What reasons a state may have for



breaking faith with her creditors, I shall consider afterwards;



but let us first enquire what might be the consequences of a



general and total bankruptcy in England; from which we may gather



what difference it would make, were it partial only; and by this



inquiry, we may be led to discover the proper method of breaking



faith, in case it should become unavoidable. This is what in



another place I called bringing credit decently to her grave;



when, after being overstretched, it can no longer be supported.



    A bankruptcy may take place in two ways: either as a



consequence of circumstances which cannot be prevented; or by a



deliberate act of government.



    Were the trade and industry of England to decay, the amount



of all the permanent taxes might so far diminish, as to prove



insufficient to pay the interest of the national debt, and defray



the expence of civil government. Were the people to be blown up



into a spirit of revolt against taxes, the same event would



probably happen. In either case, the natural and immediate



consequences of the bankruptcy would probably follow one another



in this manner:



    First, Every creditor of the state would become poorer in



proportion to the diminution of his income.



    Secondly, Consumption and the demand for work would diminish



in proportion to the part of that income withheld, which the



creditors annually expend for these purposes.



    Thirdly, Trade would directly suffer, in proportion to that



part of the said revenue yearly thrown into it by the public



creditors at present; and it would consequently suffer, in



proportion to the hurt resulting to private credit, from the



consequences of the bankruptcy.



    The creditors would then lose all, the trade of England would



be undone, and the multitudes who live in consequence of the



demand for their industry from the one and the other, would be



reduced to misery. These immediate effects would first manifest



themselves in the capital. The consequences would soon be felt



all over England: a diminution upon the consumption of the fruits



of the earth; a stagnation of that commerce which is carried on



between London and the country (which we have seen to be equal to



the amount of all the taxes, and to all the land-rents spent in



London) would soon throw every thing into confusion. But taxes



would be abolished: of that there is no doubt. Let a deliberate



bankruptcy take place without any abolition of them by law, they



would soon sink to nothing, from the utter impossibility there



would be found to pay them.



    A total bankruptcy, therefore, coming upon England, either



from a decay of her trade, or a disturbance in collecting the



public revenue would have the effect of plunging the nation into



utter ruin at home: what might be the consequences from abroad, I



leave to the reader's sagacity to determine.



    Let me now suppose a bankruptcy to take place from a



deliberate act of power, with a view of expediency.



    The difference between the two consists in this; that in the



first, all the consequences we have mentioned would follow one



upon another, without a possibility of preventing them: in the



other, a plan to prevent them might be concerted.



    Let me then suppose, that government shall find it expedient,



at any time, to use a spunge for the public debts; that they



shall fear to external bad consequences, either from the



resentment of those states who may be hurt by it, or from the



ambition of others who may profit by it; that they shall cooly



resolve to sacrifice the interest of all the creditors in favour



of the whole body; and that they shall deliberate upon the plan



to be followed, in order to bring about so great a revolution,



without essentially hurting any interest in the state, that of



the creditors alone excepted.



    In this case, I imagine, they would begin by ordering the



amount of all that is paid to the creditors, to be set apart as a



fund for the execution of the plan.



    They would purchase all over England, every article of



produce and manufacture which might remain upon hand for want of



a market: they would feed all those who would be forced to be



idle for want of employment: they would instantly put proper



employments into their hands; one week's delay in the execution



of this part of the plan would throw the manufacturing interest



into such confusion, as to be past all remedy: they would furnish



credit to all the merchants subsisting, in proportion to what



they had lost by the extinction of the funds: they would



establish offices every where, to supply the wants of those who



would be totally ruined, until by degrees they could re-establish



confidence, the parent of trade, the mother of industry. By such



precautions, properly taken, and properly executed, none would



suffer but the unhappy creditors and their families, who, from



great opulence, would be reduced to poverty.



    As far as human prudence is insufficient for going through so



great a detail all at once; so far would the effects of a general



bankruptcy add hurtful consequences to those which in every case



are unavoidable.



    Were a statesman endowed with the supernatural gift of



turning the minds of a nation at his will, and of foreseeing



every consequence before it happened, such a plan might be



executed. Another who, with the greatest capacity ever man was



endowed with, would, for expediency, not from necessity,



deliberately undertake a general bankruptcy, I should consider as



a madman.



    I should rather prefer to submit to the natural consequences



which might result from an accidental bankruptcy, than endeavour



to avoid them by a plan too complicated for human wisdom to



execute.



    Let us next suppose the scheme to be fairly executed from a



view of expediency, no matter how, and all inconveniences



prevented during the execution, what would be gained by it?



    If by the supposition all taxes be kept alive, for at least a



certain time, in order to prevent a total confusion, certainly no



body could gain during this period; even the state itself would



lose, because every branch of consumption would infallibly



diminish. But that time elapsed, and taxes reduced to the lowest,



who would be the gainers? We shall see when we come to the



doctrine of taxation, that a sudden abolition of taxes, in



consequence of a bankruptcy, would be advantageous to no body,



but to creditors upon mortgage, and to the idle: not to



landlords; because their incomes would diminish more than in the



proportion of the present land-tax, at least their improvements



would be interrupted, and their rents ill paid: not to the



manufacturing classes; because at present they pay no taxes, but



in proportion to their idleness or extravagance, as shall be



proved: the monied interest, not secured on land, would I suppose



be extinguished; trade and credit at an end. The gains then would



be confined to those who have money secured upon land, where the



capital is demandable. In such a situation, the interest of money



would rise beyond all bounds; and a debt which might have been



considered as a trifle before, might then carry off an estate.



The idle also who live peaceably upon a very moderate income



would find a great advantage from the fall of prices for want of



consumption, and from the distress of the industrious; but the



indigent poor, who are supported from voluntary charity, would



suffer: all the great establishments for labour and industry, in



public workhouses and hospitals, would fall to the ground: the



numbers of poor who are there maintained at present would come



upon a society, which is beginning to lose those tender feelings



of compassion, which in countries of idleness, are more or less



prevalent in proportion as misery is more or less familiarly



before them.



    To say all in one word, a total bankruptcy, and abolition of



taxes, would bring this nation back to the situation it was in



before taxes and debts were known.



    Does any body imagine that our present situation is not



analogous to our present policy, and that it is possible that



independently of the same circumstances we should long continue



to enjoy the advantages we feel? No: were we in the same



situation as formerly, we should feel as our fathers felt. They



had as good understandings to improve their circumstances as we



have; but they had to do with an idle. we with an industrious



common people. Trade and credit have been long at work to effect



this great revolution: the operation is not as yet compleated,



and a total bankruptcy now, would destroy every good effect of it



for a long time.



    Were taxes made to cease, the large sums which proceed from



them would disappear entirely. Money would not, as some imagine,



become equally distributed among those who now pay the taxes, and



so proportionally increase every man's income. The reason is



plain: the money paid for taxes, circulates; because it is



demanded by the public, and is spent by it. Were taxes



suppressed, people having less occasion for money than formerly,



would circulate less in proportion. It is the necessity of paying



taxes, which creates this money for the payment of them; and when



this method of creating is not contrived, the taxes cannot be



paid, as has been often said. Now it is this great flux of money



from taxes which animates the trade of England: take them out of



the circle, what becomes of the whole?



    To suppose, therefore, so great a revolution in the



circulation of a country, as that produced by the cessation of



taxes; and to suppose no interruption from it upon the state of



industry, and the employment of the people of this nation, is a



proposition I must reject, as being contrary to all principles;



and to this among the rest, that it would be a most sudden, and a



most violent revolution; which throughout the whole course of



this inquiry, we have found to involve inconveniences beyond the



power of any theory to point out or to remedy.



    Upon the whole we may conclude, that the fatal consequences



of a bankruptcy would be many; and that the good resulting from a



total abolition of taxes would be confined to two objects. First,



A relief to those who pay them upon their possessions, or



persons. Secondly, A diminution of prices in favour of the idle



at home, and of trade abroad: great objects, no doubt, could they



be obtained at less expence than the consequences of a total



failure of public credit and domestic industry. Perhaps when we



come to examine the Principles of taxation, we shall find that



taxes do not raise prices so much as is generally believed; and



those principles which influence the application of public money,



will point out better expedients than a bankruptcy for compassing



the great national objects which we have just now mentioned.



    But let us suppose a case, which may possibly happen, as



matters seem to go on. Suppose, I say, that by continuing to



carry on long and expensive wars, the sum of interest paid to



strangers should exceed all that the nation can gain by her



trade. In this case, there must be a general balance of payments



against her every year, which very soon would manifest itself by



the most fatal consequences.



    The bank of England would be the first to feel them, by the



departure of all the coin and precious metals. Trade would feel



them next, and then indeed they would become universal.



    In such a situation, I fairly acknowledge, that I cannot



discover any expedient to avoid a bankruptcy. Engaging the



foreign creditors to become citizens, by the allurements of the



greatest privileges, and bills of naturalization, are vain



speculations. Unless some resource, hidden from me, should, upon



such an occasion, open itself, in the deep recesses of future



events, I believe the nation would soon be driven upon the fatal



rock of bankruptcy. The idea of a nation's becoming bankrupt to



itself, I have always looked upon as a contradiction; but that it



may become bankrupt to the rest of the world, is quite consistent



with reason and common sense.



    I shall not take upon me to suggest what mode of bankruptcy



would in such a case be the best; a total, or a partial one. The



partial, I am afraid, would, in England, work effects almost as



hurtful as the other. But if ever the case should happen, the



only way will be, to watch over every symptom of the approaching



catastrophe, and to improve circumstances to the best advantage.



    I cannot omit inserting in this place the opinion of a most



sagacious and most intelligent foreign merchant, most consolatory



to Great Britain, with respect to the debts she owes to



foreigners.



    The late Mr Megens, who lived many years in England, composed



a treatise in German, which Mr Horsley translated in 1752, under



the title of the Universal Merchant. In the 31st Section of this



work is the following passage:



    'And although it cannot be denied, that for as much as



foreigners are become great creditors in the public debts of



England, a great sum of interest must be annually made good to



them. Yet if it appear that the private people abroad, are more



indebted to the private people here, than such interest amounts



to; the nation has no prejudicial draught upon it, on account of



such debt; and that the general balance of trade is highly in



favor of England.'



    Few people, I am persuaded, have any such idea as this laid



down by Mr Megens. Happy, for Great Britain, could it be



verified!



    Of what infinite consequence is it then for a British



statesman to inquire into the amount of debts owing to strangers,



and into the state of the balance of trade? In speaking of



exchange, I threw out many things concerning the idea of putting



that branch of business into the hands of the bank, in



conjunction with the exchequer. Were the state brought into the



dilemma of either submitting to this gradual decline of trade,



from a cause which could not be removed; or of being pushed to



the necessity of leaping into the terrible gulph of a deliberate



bankruptcy; in such a dilemma, I say, what infinite advantages



might not be drawn from the management of exchange?



    I have heard it said, that the debt owing to strangers was a



great advantage to England; because it drew people to that market



where their funds are settled. I allow all the force any one can



give to this proposition: But alas! what would it avail, whenever



England becomes incapable to furnish goods equivalent to all her



imports from abroad, added to all she owes to her foreign



creditors?



    I am very far from supposing the present situation of England



to forebode the approach of any such disaster; but it is good to



represent to one's self some determinate object, by which we may



judge of our situation in times to come.



    Debts have increased far beyond the imagination of every



mortal. Great men have uttered prophecies, which have proved



false, concerning the consequences of a debt of one hundred



millions. From this most people conclude, that they will go on



until some unforeseen accident shall dash the fabric to pieces. I



have been pretending to shew how they may go on in a perpetual



chain. But alas! one fatal circumstance was there omitted; and



now that it has been taken in, I think it serves as a datum, to



resolve the most important problem of this science, viz. How to



determine the exact extent of public credit. The solution of



which is, That it is not necessary that public credit should ever



fail, from any augmentation of debts whatever, due to natives;



and that it must fail, so soon as the nation becomes totally



unable either to export commodities equal to all their imports



and foreign debts, or to pay off a proportional part of their



capital, sufficient to turn the balance to the right side.



    From this proposition two corollaries may be drawn.



    First, That the most important object in paying off debts, is



to get quit of those due to strangers.



    Secondly, That whatever circumstance has a tendency towards



diminishing the burden of foreign debts, should be encouraged.



    If it be said, that whenever our foreign debts exceed the



balance of our trade, the best way would be to break faith with



strangers, and keep it with the subjects of the state: I answer,



that were the thing possible, which I apprehend it is not, the



consequence might prove equally hurtful.



    The greatest of all the inconveniences proceeding from a



bankruptcy, is the ruin of industry, and the stop put to



circulation. Can it then be supposed, that a country might



execute so glaring a scheme of treachery to all her neighbours,



and still continue her correspondence with them in the open way



of trade? Certainly not. Were all foreign trade to be stopt at



once, what a revolution would it occasion! The circulation of



foreign trade, in the city of London only, exceeds perhaps the



amount of all the taxes. A stop put to this would occasion such a



stagnation, as would ruin the nation as much as if the bankruptcy



were to become universal. I do not here pretend minutely to trace



consequences, which are finite: all that can be done, is to



suggest hints, which every one may pursue, in proportion to the



extent of his combinations.



    The intention of touching upon this subject at all, is to



shew, that the expedient of a spunge, which is frequently talked



of as a remedy against the consequence of debts, is, perhaps,



more dangerous than any thing which can be apprehended from them.



The reason is, that the spunge implies a more sudden bankruptcy



than any one brought on in a gradual way, by natural causes.



    Were natural and irresistible causes totally to cut off all



profit upon the trade of Britain, one cannot say how far the



other nations of Europe might not find it their interest to



assist us, provided we did our utmost to preserve our good faith



to them. And as I think I have made it sufficiently evident that



nothing can be gained by openly violating public faith, the best



resolution a nation can take, is to adhere to it to the last



extremity, and to banish from their thoughts every idea which may



be repugnant to it.







Chap. X







Methods of contracting and paying off public Debts







    We are now to collect together, in one view, the several



methods of contracting and paying off the debts of a nation. Such



methods may be deduced, either from principles, or from what



practice has pointed out.



    The foundation upon which public credit is built, is the



existence of a sure and sufficient fund for performing the



engagements contracted.



    When, in the early times of public credit, the repayment of



the capital was an express condition of the loan, a much more



extensive public fund was necessary than at present, when no more



is required than the payment of the interest. As such funds never



can be formed but from taxes, or general contributions from the



people, the greater they are, the larger must the contribution



be. Whenever therefore there is occasion to contact debt, the



chief object of a statesman's care should be, to model the spirit



of his people so as to dispose them to concur in the proper



resolutions to render the plan proposed as easy as possible in



the execution.



    In the first place, the body of the people must be made



sensible that the consequence of contacting debts must imply a



diminution upon the income of some individuals; but that the



fewer the obstacles thrown in the way of the loan are, the less



will this diminution be.



    In the second place, he must gain the confidence of his



people, so far as to impress them with a firm belief that he will



consult their good, and nothing else, in what he undertakes.



    And in the last place, he must gain the confidence of those



from whom he is to borrow; and convince them that all covenants



between the public and them will be religiously performed.



    In a limited and free government, these three requisites are



essential to the firm establishment of public credit.



    Where the power of the statesman is unlimited, he may



substitute his authority over the people who are to pay, instead



of confidence; but with respect to those who are to lend, he will



find no room for any such substitution: confidence here is the



only expedient.



    All therefore that is required of the statesman with respect



to the people, is to enable them to do what he requires of them.



    For this purpose he must establish credit with them, for



finding the contributions he is to exact of them; because they



will have as much occasion for credit, in paying what is demanded



of them by authority, as he himself has in paying what he is



obliged to pay, in consequence of his engagements.



    If this general plan be not followed, the consequence will



be, that the produce of taxes will fail on one hand, and public



credit on the other.



    If all this operation cannot be previously concerted, the



plan of borrowing must be circumscribed to funds previously



established.



    When money is borrowed before the fund be prepared, every



obstacle which occurs in establishing it, becomes a drawback upon



the confidence of those who lend, and renders the conditions less



favourable to the state which borrows.



    In the contract of loan, the first article to be agreed upon



is the rate of interest. We have, in the beginning of this book,



examined the causes of its rise and fall; and have in general



determined, that when the demand is for borrowing, interest



rises; when for lending, interest falls.



    As the object of the borrower is to have interest low, the



statesman who intends to borrow, must use all possible means to



increase the quantity of money in circulation.



    But if coin alone be used as money, and if this coin be sent



out of the country, when borrowed, and if what is sent away



cannot be replaced at will, the scheme of augmenting money



becomes impracticable: it will daily become more scarce, more



difficult to procure, and interest must rise higher every day.



Symbolical or paper money, that is credit, must then be



established at home, upon the firmest basis: this will enable



every one to pay what he owes; consequently, the taxes will be



paid, the creditors will receive what is due to them regularly,



money will every year augment in proportion as debts are



contracted; and if borrowing do not augment beyond this



proportion, interest will not rise; and if borrowing should fall



below this proportion, interest will sink.



    Is not this whole doctrine verified in the strongest manner



by the operation of the Missisippi? At the death of the late King



of France, money had disappeared. Some years before, he had, for



seven millions in coin, engaged his kingdom for thirty-two



millions; upon a distant fund indeed, but still it became a debt



to be paid. Paper money had not been introduced three years, when



interest fell to 2 per cent. The paper indeed was actually a



bubble; but we have shewn that it became so from bad management



only.



    By the augmentation of money, capitals cease to be so



valuable. By the melting down of property, the very capital,



though in the hands of the state, may be turned into money by the



creditor, whenever he has occasion for it; in the same way as the



coin which is buried in the vaults of the town-house of



Amsterdam, is constantly performing all the uses of circulation.



    The method, therefore, of borrowing money to the best



advantage, is previously to establish a fund of credit, arising



from annual taxes; to provide the people who are to pay them,



with credit or money in proportion to their property or industry;



and to prevent the latter from ever failing for want of the



medium, money, for caring it on.



    If in time of peace interest shall stand high, relatively to



other states with which you are at war, throw as much money as



possible into the hands of your creditors, in payment of the



debts already contracted; because the more you throw in there,



the more you will draw out, if you have occasion to borrow more;



and if you have no occasion to borrow more, the lower you will



reduce the rate of interest, by augmenting the fund of money to



be lent.



    From these principles I conclude, that every nation which



sets out by contracting debts with its own citizens, must begin



by borrowing upon condition of repaying the capital in a short



term of years. This is also the best method to engage the people



to contribute largely without murmuring. The reason is, that when



taxes begin to be imposed, the mass of circulation becomes



proportionally augmented; and the paying back of considerable



sums to the creditors, prevents, on the one hand, the debts from



increasing so fast, and supplies circulation and facilitates new



borrowings on the other. While this plan of augmenting



circulation is carrying on, the statesman must prevent his



expence abroad from diminishing circulation proportionally at



home. This is to be accomplished by opening loans for foreign



expence in foreign countries, and by paying the interest only of



such loans, with the greatest punctuality.



    The difficulty of performing this, is no argument against it.



It must either be done, or credit will be hurt; because without



obtaining credit abroad, it is impossible to defray any expence



incurred abroad, beyond what the metals of your country and the



exports from it can pay: that is, in other words, beyond the



quantity of metals exported, and general balance in your favour



upon all reciprocal payments with the world.



    If it be said, that nations never pay the interest of their



debts any where but at home, I answer, that it is so much the



worse for them; because wherever the debts or interest is to be



paid, the lender always states his account as if the payment were



made in his own house. All the expence to him of sending his



money to the place of subscription, and of drawing back his



returns, are compared with the interest offered by the borrower;



and if upon the whole the lender find his account in the bargain,



he subscribes; otherwise not. Since therefore the money borrowed



must in this case be sent abroad, it is an advantage for the



borrower to be under an obligation to provide a method of sending



it; and by this means he will borrow cheaper than he can do, when



he refunds to every lender all his expence and trouble in getting



his interest remitted to him.



    I am now deducing principles, and therefore shall not enter



into a discussion of the many objections which occur against this



plan, from foreign considerations; such as the facility it might



procure to a statesman in defrauding his foreign creditors, and



several others which might be formed: all I say is, that this is



a cheaper and more systematical way of borrowing, and it has this



good effect, that it constantly points out the state of the



external debt, from which alone a bankruptcy is to be feared.



    Were a favourable balance to return after an expensive war,



the payment of this foreign debt would be the consequence then,



as much as now when the payment is made at home, and rather more



so; because who ever owed a balance (to England, I suppose) would



then pay his debts at London, with money due by England, payable



at Antwerp, for example; consequently, he would remit at



discount; and when he remitted in favour of an Englishman, the



debts might be considered as discharged upon the foreign fund,



and stated a-new upon the funds payable in London. Could the



payment of the interest of the public debts be rendered



susceptible of such transfers upon all occasions, it would, I



imagine, have a remarkable effect in favour of public credit.



    This thought suggested itself, while I was considering the



situation of a country where borrowing is in its infancy; and it



occurred as an expedient for preventing foreign expence from



draining the country of the money necessary for circulation at



home. This, in every combination of circumstances, is the most



important object of a statesman's care, while he is engaged in



wars abroad.



    Now whether the money of a country be paper or coin, it is



equally taken out of circulation, by every foreign payment. When



it is coin, it goes out of the country, as well as out of



circulation: when it is paper, it does not go out of the country,



certainly, but by coming upon the debtor in it for payment, it is



equally taken out of circulation; and what the debtor gives for



it (viz. a bill of exchange upon another country) goes out of the



country. And unless this bill of exchange can be paid with value



exported in merchandize, it will remain a debt upon the country,



contracted in favour of some other nation.



    This I hope will be sufficient to recall to mind what has



been so fully explained in the 13th chapter upon banks; where the



same question was stated with regard to the payments Scotland was



obliged to make to England, towards the end of the last war. The



same principles operate in the case before us, and may be applied



to every circumstance of it; with this difference only, that here



the statesman's interest is supposed to be more closely connected



with that of his banks than was the case during the distress in



Scotland: because if he do not support them by a systematical



chain of conduct, he will drain the fund of circulation by his



remittances; his credit will fail; his taxes will no more be



paid; and his people will be oppressed. But if he pursue his plan



systematically, circulation will be kept full; his credit will be



supported; his taxes will be paid; his people will be easy:



because no check will be put either to their industry or



consumption for want of money; a great part of the solid property



will be melted down into money; whatever part of this money is



lent to the state will be, by that operation, consolidated into a



new species of property, the public funds; and if, after the



borrowing scheme is over (that is, when peace is restored)



circulation should be contracted, a part of the money will then



stagnate in the hands of individuals, and will, in their favour,



be realized in that part of the solid property which was formerly



melted down in order to produce it. That is, lands will be sold



by the former proprietors, and will be acquired by those who have



money not realized in stock; and for which money, circulation has



no farther demand. This is the reason why, at the end of every



war which has run the nation in debt, lands have constantly risen



in their value, even when considerable quantities of them have



been offered to sale.



    If it be said that the stock-holders are those whom we



commonly see buying the lands, and not those who have sums not



realized:



    I shall, in answer, observe, that the stock-holders cannot



buy lands unless they sell their stock, to those who have money



not realized; so it is still the money not realized which is



employed in buying every article of solid property: and even



after this operation, the same money will still remain in



circulation as before; because it is impossible to realize even



paper money itself, except when the creditor in it becomes



proprietor of the property upon which it is secured; and if the



money be coin, it is plain that this cannot be realized any



farther than it is by nature. When therefore we say, that a man



realizes his money, we do not mean any thing farther, than that



he gives his money to another in exchange for solid property.



Thus when an estate is bought in a country where banks upon



mortgage are established, a part of the price is commonly taken



out of circulation altogether; because in consequence of the



price paid, the bank is refunded what it had melted down of the



land sold; consequently, this paper becomes consolidated a-new,



as it were, with the lands which are relieved of the mortgage.



    But when lands are sold in a country where there is no paper,



the price remains in circulation as before; and if the quantity



of coin in circulation should exceed the uses for it, a case



which seldom happens in these days, it would be exported, and



realized abroad.



    When this complicated and systematical scheme of credit is



not established, the fallible consequence is, that money



disappears: consequently, interest rises. The taxes formerly



imposed cannot be paid: consequently, it is in vain to seek to



augment them; because in proportion as they are augmented, they



become less productive. If money be borrowed upon remote funds,



engaged for other debts previously contracted, and if public



faith be at all events to be preserved, the consequence must then



be, that the public will be eat up by usurers.



    This was the case in England during the wars of Queen Anne.



    So early as 1706, government, as has been said, began to



borrow at 6 per cent upon funds already engaged. What was the



consequence? The exchequer having no money to pay the interest as



it fell due, paid with tallies; these fell to great discount, and



had they remained long in that discredited situation, lending



would have stopt, or interest would have risen, as in France, so



high as to lose the name of interest altogether. This was the



case, in the example above cited, when seven millions ready



money, borrowed by the late king of France, became a debt of



thirty-two millions on the state.



    Upon the occasion above mentioned, government availed



themselves of the bank of England, as I say every private citizen



should have a power to do, on every occasion, when his credit is



good, though money should fail him. They engaged the bank to



discount all tallies issued for the interest of debts; that is,



in other words, to turn those sticks into money: but as public



credit was so low that money could not be found to discharge even



the interest of the advance made by the bank, the government



consented, that all advances of that kind should bear compound



interest quarterly, at 6 per cent. What a monstrous profit to the



bank! what a charge upon the state! Had a bank of circulation



upon mortgages been established at that time, money would have



come in at a moderate simple interest to individuals, who would



have availed themselves of them, for the payment of all public



burdens. Instead of which, industry was made to, suffer the



public money did not come in; taxation stopt; expences went on,



and deficiencies were paid by the public at this monstrous



charge.



    On the other hand, had it not been for the assistance the



bank then gave the state, in circulating those exchequer tallies,



bills, &c. it is very certain that credit would have failed as



totally in England as it had done in France in 1708, when



Desmaretz undertook the finances. This minister had no bank to



avail himself of, and accordingly he run France in debt at the



rate of two hundred millions of livres per annum, during seven



campaigns; of which, I am persuaded, he did not receive one half,



or near it, in effective value.



    What I have said will, I hope, be sufficient to shew that the



only way for any state to borrow, is previously to provide a fund



for making good what is agreed upon with the lenders; and that



all expedients to supply the want of it will in the end bring



great expence upon the people, either by involving them in an



excessive burden of debts, in case public engagements should be



held sacred, as has constantly been the case in Great Britain; or



by driving the state to a bankruptcy, as was the case in France



upon the death of the late King. I call it a bankruptcy, because



all that was owing was not paid. A man who pays no more than 19s.



11 3/4d. in the pound, is a bankrupt, as well as he who cannot



pay one farthing.



    I come next to the methods of paying off debts when already



contracted.



    Public debts may be divided into two classes, redeemable and



irredeemable. Redeemable debts may be paid off in several ways,



which we shall briefly enumerate before we compare their several



advantages.



    First then, such debts may be paid off at once, by refunding



to the creditors the whole capital, with all arrears of interest.



    Secondly, They may be paid off yearly, according to a certain



rule to determine the preference, and order of payment: for this



purpose, a determinate sum must be set apart as a sinking fund



for discharging the capital and interest.



    Thirdly, They may be paid off cumulatively and proportionally



every year, by incorporating the sinking fund into the money



appropriated for discharging the interest, and by placing all



that is paid beyond the interest, as payment in part of the



capital.



    Fourthly, They may be paid in one sense, as shall be farther



explained by reducing the interest upon the capitals, without



diminishing them.



    Fifthly, They may be paid off by converting them into



annuities for lives.



    Sixthly, And lastly, they may be paid off below the value of



the capitals, by the means of lotteries; where the state may gain



what the creditors choose to lose from a desire of gaming.



    To one or other of these methods, may be reduced all the fair



and honest expedients which a state may employ to get rid of its



debts, without any breach of public faith, or without proceeding



to the extremity of prescribing conditions of payment, which the



creditors are forced to accept against their will.



    As for the irredeemable debts, I apprehend, that, without



consent of the creditors, no change upon the condition of loan



can justly be made.



    I shall next point out the advantages and disadvantages of



the several methods of discharging debts, as they may affect the



separate, or cumulative interest of a state.



    Were large debts which have subsisted for a long time to be



paid off all at once, it would occasion a sudden and a violent



revolution, which is always attended with inconveniences.



    Were, for example, the proprietors of lands to consent to



sell off a part of their estates for the payment of the public



debts, the quantity of land brought to market, would sink the



price of it very considerably; from which would arise a great



detriment to landlords. I shall not here inquire from whence such



a sum of money could come; that it may be produced is very



possible, from what happened in France in the year 1720.



    Could a treasure be brought from India (let me suppose)



sufficient at once to discharge the debts of Great Britain,



circulation would become so glutted with money, that interest



would fall to nothing. This would be a temporary loss to all the



former creditors, until they had time to lend to the other states



of Europe; who would, in consequence of this circumstance, sink



the rate of interest upon their own debts. Something like this



was the consequence of paying off all the debts of France with



bank notes in 1720, upon which interest fell, as we have observed



above, to 2 per cent.



    When, in the second place, debts are paid off partially every



year, according to a certain rule, it is expedient to have the



capitals reduced into shares of a determinate value, as is the



practice in France, that they may be drawn out as in a lottery.



The lots drawn may then be paid, and no detriment will follow to



any particular creditor, more than to another. because if by



being paid there be either profit or loss to the creditor, it



will affect the value of the whole stock in proportion. If, upon



the establishment of such a plan, the stock be found to rise, it



will be a proof that either the interest formerly paid was below



the common rate, or that the credit of the state was looked upon



as precarious: if it should sink, contrary conclusions may safely



be drawn.



    This is a common method of paying off debts in France, where



funds are more commonly divided into shares than in Great



Britain.



    In 1759, the King opened a subscription for seventy-two



millions of livres upon the general farms: this sum was divided



into seventy-two thousand actions, bearing 5 per cent and it was



stipulated, that upon the renewal of the farms in 1762, twelve



thousand actions should be drawn by lot, and paid off monthly; so



that in six months the whole debt was to be discharged. The third



method of applying what is annually paid above the interest, in



extinction of the capital, is the measure proposed by Cardinal de



Richlieu for discharging the debts of Frances. only the Cardinal



went to work in a very arbitrary way, both in determining the



interest, and in fixing a value upon the capital, equally



detrimental to the creditors.



    To apply this to an example. Had England at the time



government first established a sinking fund, arising out of the



savings which were made upon reducing the rate of interest, from



time to time, continued to pay to the creditors the same annual



sums as formerly; and thereby applied what was paid beyond the



interest, to the payment of the capital, there could not have



been any misapplication of the sinking fund; and the debts by



this time would have been greatly diminished. Whereas by applying



the sinking fund to the service of the year, for the ease of the



people and advantage to the creditors, the consequences may prove



exceedingly inconvenient.



    The fourth method of reducing debts is that adopted by Great



Britain, viz. by reducing the interest paid upon them. From this



we discover the reason why taxes, even in time of war, are seldom



augmented in this kingdom much above the proportion of the



interest of the money borrowed.



    We have, in the second chapter of the first book, boldly



declared this to be against principles, and the authors of such a



scheme were there stigmatized as men of no foresight: we now see



how much people may be mistaken in their conclusions in political



matters, when they are formed upon too narrow combinations.



    Were capitals intended ever to be paid, no doubt the



conclusion would be just; but if it be resolved, that capitals



shall never be considered as the object of attention, and that



the interest alone shall be looked upon as the real burden, then



all payment of capitals is unnecessary, except so far as by



paying a part of them, it may serve to reduce the interest upon



the rest, by making money regorge in the market beyond the uses



found for it.



    This plan cannot be carried on while a nation is engaged in



an expensive war, which absorbs all the money to be lent: but it



becomes the object of a statesman's care, after peace is



restored, and when trade begins to bring in a balance upon



exportations.



    We have seen how this balance tends every year to diminish



the capitals due to strangers, and to keep money at home. Then is



the time to extend taxation beyond the uses found for money to



pay the interest. Two or three millions extraordinary, raised at



the close of a war, and thrown into the hands of the creditors of



Great Britain, in extinction of their capitals, would soon engage



them to cry for mercy. They would find no outlet but France for



such sums; and it is precisely after a war, that France is busy



in playing off the arbitrary operations on her debts, which



reduces her credit too low for any one to trust her with money.



Let peace continue for a tract of years, confidence will there



advance apace, and then it will become more difficult to make



money regorge in England.



    To say that taxes are already beyond all bounds, is, in other



words, to say the nation is no more in a state of defence:



because, should Britain be again involved in an unavoidable war,



the consequence will be, either to render more taxes



indispensable, or to oblige the nation to submit to any terms



demanded by her enemies.



    If it be therefore true, that taxes may still be augmented,



the most proper time for augmenting them, is, at the very close



of a war; because then every circumstance favours the scheme, as



we shall now explain.



    We have said above, and experience proves the truth of it,



that at the end of a war circulation becomes too full for



domestic uses; and that the superfluity of money is realized upon



property. This is the consequence of a sudden stop in national



expence. Were taxes at such a time augmented, part of this



regorging money would find a vent by the augmentation upon



domestic circulation which taxes would occasion; which



augmentation would circulate into the exchequer, instead of



becoming consolidated with property, as has been said, and coming



into the hands of government, would be poured into those of the



creditors, in payment of part of their capitals. There it would



regorge anew; because it is observed, in general, that those who



have property in the funds are not apt to squander money when



unexpectedly thrown into their hands; on the contrary, they are



commonly found to live very much within their income.(8*)



    But suppose it should not immediately regorge, it would then



increase expence and consumption; consequently, would advance



industry, and render every branch of excise more productive. In



every supposition we can make, public opulence would be



augmented: money would regorge at last; and then the creditors



would come with their application to government to suspend the



reimbursement of capitals, and to accept, in lieu of that, a



diminution upon the interest.



    This is the golden opportunity for diminishing the public



burden occasioned by debts; and this method of compassing so



desirable an end, is far preferable to that of compelling



creditors to submit to a diminution, by offering a sudden



reimbursement, which was put in practice in Britain in the year



1749, as has been observed. Had the public waited with patience



one year longer, and then thrown in a few millions more than they



did into the hands of the creditors, the proposal of reducing the



interest would have come from the other quarter; which in all



bargains with creditors is of the greatest consequence to the



debtor.



    The sum of interest thus diminished, upon an obligation to



suspend the reimbursements of capitals for a limited time, three



questions will naturally occur: 1. Whether the taxes should be



diminished in proportion: or 2. If they should be allowed to



subsist with a view to apply the overplus of them to national



purposes: or 3. Whether it may not be most adviseable to turn



such a part of the debts into annuities for lives, as may absorb



the saving upon the former interest paid. The first two questions



I reserve for the following book, where they will be fully



examined; the last is the fifth expedient already proposed for



acquitting the public debts. As the nature of it is abundantly



evident, I shall repeat only what I formerly observed, namely,



that this method of establishing a sinking fund, has the



advantage of being less exposed to misapplications than any



other.



    The last expedient of paying off capitals, below the original



value, by the means of lotteries, should take place only after



the interest of money is brought so low as to cut off any near



prospect of reducing it still farther.



    I shall not pretend to guess at the lowest point to which the



rate of interest may be brought, by the expedients of increasing



money at will, by the means of banks upon mortgage. I have in the



seventh chapter of the first part of this book, thrown out a hint



of a land-bank, which opens a very wide field of speculation; but



in this place, it would be unnecessary to enlarge upon that



subject.



    Let me suppose the rate of interest brought lower in Britain



than any where else, it will nevertheless be subject to



periodical risings, on many occasions.



    Upon every such emergency, capitals will sink in the market



below par.



    It is then only that a state can have recourse to this last



expedient of opening lotteries, and taking in subscriptions at



the market price of the funds subscribed into them. And although



the annuities to be paid upon the lottery fund be regulated by



the rate of interest at the time, and consequently above the



standard of the other debts; yet the same methods of reducing it



afterwards will constantly produce their effects, and thereby



diminish the capital by degrees.



    In like manner, in time of war, when the public funds fall



greatly in their price, government may open new subscriptions,



and receive payment for them in their own paper at the market



price, allowing a small premium in the rate of interest. If the



creditors willingly subscribe upon these conditions, no violation



of public faith can be alleged. By this operation, the capitals



will be diminished, and the advanced rate of interest paid during



the war, will return upon the peace to where it was: then the new



subscriptions may be paid off, or subscribed for again at a lower



rate than before.



    Suppose it then resolved, that in time of war, the nation's



creditors should be allowed, at certain times, to subscribe their



capitals in books opened at the bank for that purpose, one



quarter per cent. above the selling price. Would not this have



the good effect of supporting the price of stocks on one hand,



and of reducing the capital of the national debt upon the other?



Example:



    Let me suppose that in time of war, the 3 per cents. sell at



74 3/4, might not government receive them at 75, and constitute



the new subscription at 4 per cent? What interest could any one



have not to subscribe, who at such a time intends to sell his



stock? His 3 per cent sold to government at 75, and turned into a



4 per cent. would afterwards, when sold in the market, produce



1/4 per cent more than if it had not been subscribed into the new



fund.



    Perhaps in Change Alley, where calculation is carried to the



utmost pitch of refinement, even this eventual advantage to



government might sink the value of the new 4 per cents. Let this



be allowed. The answer is, that when people compute with such



nicety, and comprehend in their calculations every circumstance



the most minute, it is, I think, the interest of a state (whose



views should extend far beyond the period of human life) to grant



a premium upon such subscriptions more than sufficient to



indenmify the subscribers, according to the most rigid



calculation concerning their present advantage.



    The smallest profit to be discovered by the nicest pen will



engage the monied man to subscribe; consequently, the capitals of



debts may be diminished, at a loss to the public almost



imperceptible. And for this imperceptible loss in the mean time,



the greatest national advantage may be obtained at a distant



period.



    It is now full time to close this book, which has swelled far



beyond its due proportion. The subject of credit and debts is so



connected with many questions relating to taxes, and to the



application of their amount, that the unity of the subject would



have suffered little in blending them together. But as I find it



to be a great relief to the memory to interpose, now and then, a



pause; and as taxes were intended to be treated of by themselves,



according to the plan I at first proposed, I shall make no



alteration in it.



    At the end of the first and second books, I subjoined a



chapter of recapitulation; in the third book, this was supplied



by a very full table of contents; here, because of the intimate



connection of the subject of this and the following book, I shall



refer the reader to the end of the volume, for a full



recapitulation of both.







NOTES:







1. After the long and particular account I have given of the



Missisippi, I shall not enter into a like detail concerning a



scheme which proceeded upon the very same principles; to wit, the



artifically raising the value of a stock, by promising dividends,



out of funds which were nowise proportioned to them.



    I shall therefore, in a very few words, first compare some of



the operations of the South Sea scheme with those of the



Missisippi; and in doing it, point out the principal differences



between them. 



    The great profits upon the Missisippi were expected from the



interest paid by government for the great loan, from the farms of



the revenue, and from the profits upon their trade. 



    Those of the South Sea were, at setting out, first, The



profits upon their trade: secondly, The allowance made them by



government for the expence of management: thirdly, The difference



of receiving 5 per cent for the money they laid out in purchasing



the public debts, when money was at 4 per cent as it was when the



scheme was set on foot: and fourthly, The surplus money



subscribed into the stock above par, in consequence of the



artifices used to enhance the value of it.



    The seven millions they were to pay to the state, seemingly



for no value received were a sort of compensation for receiving



the 5 per cent for 7 years, at a time when money was worth no



more than 4 per cent. 



    These advantages raised, at first, the value of the original



stock of eleven millions. The consequence was, that the



proprietors of the 16 millions of the redeemable debts, which



were to be bought in, when they came to subscribe their capitals



into the new stock, transacted them at a proportional discount;



which discount, being good against the government in favour of



the company, served to discharge proportionally the seven



millions the company was to pay. This gave an additional value to



the stock; and so it rose, greatly indeed above this proportion.



Then the company promised a dividend of 10 per cent for one half



year, upon their capital, at midsummer 1720; this dividend was to



be paid in stock, which was constantly rising in its value; but



no information was ever given to the public concerning the funds



which were to produce this dividend; so every one concluded that



there were hidden treasures in the hands of the company which



enabled it to promise such large dividends. Accordingly, stock



rose from 300 per cent to 375; then to 400, and at last to 1000



per cent; and in proportion as it rose, the wealth of the former



subscribers augmented from the surplus above par, paid by the



latter, and those who subscribed last, bore all the loss upon the



blowing up of the scheme. 



    But one great difference between the South Sea and



Missisippi, was this: That in France there was abundance of money



in the hands of the public, for purchasing the actions, at the



exorbitant price to which they rose; but in England there was



not: consequently, in France, the rate of interest fell to 2 per



cent and in England, the great demand for money to borrow, raised



it beyond all bounds. 



    Those who subscribed in money, paid down no more than 10 per



cent at subscribing; but became bound to pay up the remainder.



But when the stock tumbled, people were better pleased to lose



the 10 per cent they had paid, than to pay up the remaining 90



per cent according to the terms at subscribing. Those indeed who



subscribed their former capitals at a vast discount, did not



labour under the same inconvenience for want of money; but this



discount became as real a loss to them, as the cash subscribed



became a loss to the money subscribers, the moment that those who



were in the secret, and who, by the most infamous chain of



artifices, had blown up the public frenzy, began to realize and



sell out, and that the whole was discovered to be a cheat. So



that upon the whole, the English scheme had intrinsically a much



worse foundation than the French. The first blew up from an



absolute necessity, and for want of any bottom at all; the last



from misconduct, and rather from folly than knavery. I return to



an account of the scheme. 



    The original capital of the South Sea company, was 11,750,000



l. The redeemable debts which the proprietors of this capital



afterwards proposed to purchase, amounted to 16,750,000 l.; and



the value of the irredeemable, or what were called the absolute



terms, was computed at 15,058,000 l. together 31,808,000 l.



sterling. 



    The proprietors of this original capital of 11,750,000 l.



consulted their own advantage only, in purchasing in this large



sum of debts, which were to be converted into additional stock;



and therefore sounded very high the great advantages of such a



transformation of them; first, From the profits of the trade,



which they were to enjoy exclusively. And, secondly, From the



great addition to their wealth, from the constant rising in the



price of their stock. They carried their views to nothing less



than obtaining a majority in the house of commons, by the weight



of their wealth, and of becoming the absolute rulers of the



nation. 



    The public being from the beginning intoxicated with such



ideas, subscriptions for stock were opened at 200 per cent above



par; and some of the proprietors of the 31,808,000 l. subscribed



at first their capitals at a proportional discount; that is, they



made over a debt of 100 l. for 33 1/3 in South Sea stock; and



successively the subscription rose to 1000 per cent. These



immense profits being incorporated into the gains of the general



stock, were proportionally shared by the subscribers themselves,



who became proprietors; and the higher the stock rose, the more



these gains augmented. This influenced the infatuation; and the



dividends augmenting in proportion to the price of subscription,



there appeared no end of the rising of the stock. 



    The first dividend offered, as has been said, was 10 per cent



half-yearly in stock; this was afterwards converted into no less



than 30 per cent in money, for that half-year: and when stock



rose to 1000, a dividend of no less than 50 per cent per annum,



in money, was promised for twelve years to come. 



    Had stock risen to 2000 per cent the dividend could have as



easily been carried to 100 per cent per annum, as it had been to



50 per cent when at 1000.



    But whence was this dividend to be paid? The company and the



directors took good care never to give to the public any light as



to this particular.



    To prevent, therefore, such abuses in the rising of the South



Sea, it ought to have been provided by parliament, that in taking



in subscriptions, and offering dividends, the directors should,



on the one hand, have informed the public, first, Of the money



owing to them by government, secondly, Of the money gained by the



subscriptions above par. And thirdly, Of the profits upon their



trade. And, on the other hand, of the debts due by them; and of



the nett balance upon their books, in their favour. 



    This would have been fair dealing. But to pretend the



necessity of secrecy, in a point where a nation is interested,



was in itself a mere pretext; and had it been otherwise, it might



have been answered, that a company which is obliged to have



recourse to such secrets, ought to be prevented from dealing with



those who were to remain ignorant of them, however deeply



interested. 







2. This may seem a high valuation, and is, in fact, far beyond



what any of those annuities sold for: but as the interest of



money cannot be estimated, for a constancy, at more than 3 per



cent and that probably the best lives were chosen, the value to



government of such annuities may well be estimated at 20 years



purchase. By De Moivre's tables, annuities for the most



favourable ages, interest being at 3 per cent are valued at 19.87



years purchase; and his valuations are generally allowed not to



be too high. 







3. The annuities of 1757, are estimated, by the author of the



Consideration on Trade and Finances, at 472,500 l. or at 14



years' purchase; and the annuities of 1761, 1762, at 6,826,875 l.



or at 27 1/2 years' purchase. But this valuation seems too low.







4. This question has been determined in the affirmative, in a



pamphlet ascribed to Mr G. Grenville, entitled, The Present State



of the Nation, an. 1768: page 12 in the note.







5. I find that the sinking fund is now estimated at 2,100,000 l.



by the author of the Considerations on Trade, etc. above cited. I



am also informed that the net produce of the customs exceeds



2,200,000 l. considerably: but 4,600,000 l. is rather the gross



than the net produce of the permanent duties of excise; that is,



of all the excise duties, excepting the annual malt-duty. It must



also be observed, that the annuities payable to the national



creditors amounted, the 5th January 1764, to more than 4,720,000



l. But on the other hand, the interest of the unfunded 9 millions



is rated too high, as appears from the author above quoted. I



cannot pretend to give exact details. The general sketch here



stated is sufficient for my purpose. 



6. The loan of 1766, was 1,500,000 l. at 3 per cent. Every



subscriber for 100 l. had an annuity of 3 per cent on 60 l. and 4



lottery tickets, valued to them by government at 10 l. each, in



all 100 l. The prizes and blanks in the lottery amount to 600,000



l. and bear 3 per cent paid by government. The annuities amount



to 900,000 l. and bear also 3 per cent. The number of tickets are



60,000. Hence at 10 l. each, they amount to 600,000 l.



    The advantage government reaps by this way of borrowing, is,



that the desire of gaming, raises the lottery tickets above their



value, when thrown into the hands of the public; and this



advanced value being a profit to those who receive them in part



of their subscription, this profit they share with government.



Example. In April 1766, when government borrowed 1,500,000 l. at



3 per cent, the 3 per cents were at 89: consequently, the



difference between 89 and 100, which is 11 l. must have been



supposed to be the sum which the subscribers, from the propensity



of people to game, had a reasonable, or rather a certain



expectation of gaining upon the sale of 4 lottery tickets, that



is, 2 l. 15s. upon every one. 



    To know therefore the real par of a lottery ticket, you must



proceed thus: it costs the subscribers 10 l. for which they



receive from government 3 per cent. This 10 l. as 3 per cents



stood at 89, is worth at that rate no more than 8 l. 18s. Add to



this sum what the public must pay for the liberty to play, which



we have stated above at 2 l. 15s. and you have the exact par of a



lottery ticket at 11 l. 13s. 



    Whatever they sell at above 11 l. 13s. is profit to the



subscribers, whatever they sell below 11 l. 13s. is a loss to



them. 



    This profit though small in appearance, is greatly increased



from another circumstance, viz. 



    That the subscribers may sell their subscriptions at a time



when they have really advanced but a small part of it. The first



payment is commonly of 15 per cent on their subscription: when



they sell, they make this profit upon the whole capital. Suppose



then 15 per cent paid in: if the profit upon selling be no more



than 1 per cent upon the capital, that 1 per cent turns out no



less than 6 2/3 per cent upon the money they have advanced. Thus



a person who is possessed of 1500 l. only, may subscribe for



10,000 l. in this loan: he pays in his 1500 l. and receives his



subscription; when he sells, he sells 10,000 l. subscription,



upon which he gains 1 per cent, 1 per cent. of 10,000 l. is 100



l. so (in one month suppose) he gains by this means 100 l. for



the use of 1500 l. But as a counterbalance for this profit, he



runs the risk of the falling of the subscription, which involves



him in a proportional loss if he sells out; or in the



inconvenience of advancing more money than he had to employ in



that way, in case he should prefer keeping his subscription for a



longer time, in hopes of a rise in the public funds. By this mode



of borrowing, government profits by the disposition of the people



to game. But this propensity has its bounds, and at present it is



found by experience not to exceed 60,000 lottery tickets, or



60,000 l. Were, therefore, a subscription of 3 millions taken in



upon the same plan with the present of 1,500,000 l. the regorging



number of tickets would so glut the market, that the whole would



fall below the par of their supposed value.







7. We must always carefully avoid confounding the grand balance



of payments with the balance between importation and exportation,



which I consider as the balance of trade.







8. Experience shews, that when the debts of a nation have come to



a height, the public creditors become people of great



consequence, upon account of the ease and affluence of their



circumstances. They are not exposed to the many hidden expences



incident to land proprietors. They are a class in the state but



lately known; the capital of their wealth is hidden; and opinions



concerning their rank, and the figure they ought to make, are as



yet unformed. Whereas the family of a land proprietor is known;



his expence may surpass that of his predecessors without much



observation; but if it should fall below it, he commonly sinks in



the estimation of his neighbours, who seldom put circumstances



together which can only be guessed at. An heir to a landed



estate, is bred up from his infancy with the notion of living



like his father: the son of a monied man has commonly very



different sentiments; and even when any of this class takes a



turn to expence, the lustre of it is all displayed round his own



body; that is, in his own house, and in his own family: no



country seats, hounds, horses, servants in every quarter, family



interest to keep up, little economy in spending. In a word, every



one feels better than I can describe that landed men commonly



exceed, and monied men commonly live within their income. 






