




Third Book

The Systems


Chapter 28

The National Economists of Italy

    Italy has been the forerunner of all modern nations, in the
theory as well as in the practice of Political Economy. Count
Pechio has given us a laboriously written sketch of that branch of
Italian literature; only his book is open to the observation, that
he has clung too slavishly to the popular theory, and has not duly
set forth the fundamental causes of the decline of Italy's national
industry -- the absence of national unity, surrounded as she was by
great nationalities united under hereditary monarchies; further,
priestly rule and the downfall of municipal freedom in the Italian
republics and cities. If he had more deeply investigated these
causes, he could not have failed to apprehend the special tendency
of the 'Prince' of Macchiavelli, and he would not have passed that
author by with merely an incidental reference to him.(1*)
    Through a remark of Pechio, that Macchiavelli in a letter to
his friend Guicciardini (in 1525) had proposed a union of all the
Powers of Italy against the foreigner, and that as that letter was
communicated to Pope Clement VII he had thus exercised considerable
influence in the formation of the 'Holy League' (in 1526), we were
led to imagine that the same tendency must underlie the 'Prince.'
As soon as we referred to that work, we found our anticipation
confirmed at first sight. The object of the 'Prince' (written in
1513) was clearly to impress the Medici with the idea, that they
were called upon to unite the whole of Italy under one sovereignty;
and to indicate to them the means whereby that end might be
attained. The title and form of that book, as though its general
intention was to treat of the nature of absolute government, were
undoubtedly selected from motives of prudence. It only alludes
incidentally to the various hereditary Princes and their
governments. Everywhere the author has in view only one Italian
usurper. Principalities must be overthrown, dynasties destroyed,
the feudal aristocracy brought under subjection, liberty in the
republics rooted out. The virtues of heaven and the artifices of
hell, wisdom and audacity, valour and treachery, good fortune and
chance, must all be called forth, made use of, and tried by the
usurper, in order to found an Italian empire. And to this end a
secret is confided to him, the power of which has been thoroughly
made manifest three hundred years later -- a national army must be
created, to whom victory must be assured by new discipline and by
newly invented arms and manoeuvres.(2*)
    If the general character of his arguments leaves room for doubt
as to the special bias of this author, such doubt will be removed
by his last chapter. There he plainly declares that foreign
invasions and internal divisions are the fundamental causes of all
the evils prevailing in Italy; that the House of the Medici, under
whose dominion were (fortunately) Tuscany and the States of the
Church, were called by Providence itself to accomplish that great
work; that the present was the best time and opportunity for
introducing a new régime, that now a new Moses must arise to
deliver his people from the bondage of Egypt, that nothing
conferred on a Prince more distinction and fame than great
enterprises.(3*)
    That anyone may read between the lines the tendency of that
book in the other chapters also, may be best seen by the manner in
which the author in his ninth chapter speaks of the States of the
Church. It is merely an irony when he says, 'The priests possessed
lands but did not govern them, they held lordships but did not
defend them; these happiest of all territories were directly
protected by God's Providence, it would be presumption to utter a
criticism upon them.' He clearly by this language meant it to be
understood without saying so in plain words: This country presents
no special impediment to a bold conqueror, especially to a Medici
whose relative occupies the Papal chair.
    But how can we explain the advice which Macchiavelli gives to
his proposed usurper respecting the republics, considering his own
republican sentiments? And must it be solely attributed to a design
on his part to ingratiate himself with the Prince to whom his book
is dedicated, and thus to gain private advantages, when he, the
zealous republican, the great thinker and literary genius, the
patriotic martyr, advised the future usurper utterly to destroy the
freedom of the Italian republics? It cannot be denied that
Macchiavelli, at the time when he wrote the 'Prince,' was
languishing in poverty, that he regarded the future with anxiety,
that he earnestly longed and hoped for employment and support from
the Medici. A letter which he wrote on October 10, 1513, from his
poor dwelling in the country to his friend Bettori, at Florence,
places that beyond doubt.(4*)
    Nevertheless, there are strong reasons for believing that he by
this book did not merely design to flatter the Medici, and to gain
private advantage, but to promote the realisation of a plan of
usurpation; a plan which was not opposed to his
republican-patriotic ideas, though according to the moral ideas of
our day it must be condemned as reprehensible and wicked. His
writings and his deeds in the service of the State prove that
Macchiavelli was thoroughly acquainted with the history of all
periods, and with the political condition of all States. But an eye
which could see so far backwards, and so clearly what was around
it, must also have been able to see far into the future. A spirit
which even at the beginning of the sixteenth century recognised the
advantage of the national arming of Italy, must also have seen that
the time for small republics was past, that the period for great
monarchies had arrived, that nationality could, under the
circumstances then existing, be won only by means of usurpation,
and maintained only by despotism, that the oligarchies as they then
existed in the Italian republics constituted the greatest obstacle
to national unity, that consequently they must be destroyed, and
that national freedom would one day grow out of national unity.
Macchiavelli evidently desired to cast away the worn-out liberty of
a few cities as a prey to despotism, hoping by its aid to acquire
national union, and thus to insure to future generations freedom on
a greater and a nobler scale.
    The earliest work written specially on Political Economy in
Italy, is that of Antonio Serra of Naples (in 1613), on the means
of providing 'the Kingdoms' with an abundance of gold and silver.
    J. B. Say and M'Culloch appear to have seen and read only the
title of this book: they each pass it over with the remark that it
merely treats of money; and its title certainly shows that the
author laboured under the error of considering the precious metals
as the sole constituents of wealth. If they had read farther into
it, and duly considered its contents, they might perhaps have
derived from it some wholesome lessons. Antonio Serra, although he
fell into the error of considering an abundance of gold and silver
as the tokens of wealth, nevertheless expresses himself tolerably
clearly on the causes of it.
    He certainly puts mining in the first place as the direct
source of the precious metals; but he treats very justly of the
indirect means of acquiring them. Agriculture, manufactures,
commerce, and navigation, are, according to him, the chief sources
of national wealth. The fertility of the soil is a sure source of
prosperity; manufactures are a still more fruitful source, for
several reasons, but chiefly because they constitute the foundation
of an extensive commerce. The productiveness of these sources
depends on the characteristic qualifications of the people (viz.
whether they are industrious, active, enterprising, thrifty, and so
forth), also on the nature and circumstances of the locality
(whether, for instance, a city is well situated for maritime
trade). But above all these causes, Serra ranks the form of
government, public order, municipal liberty, political guarantees,
the stability of the laws. ' No country can prosper,' says he, '
where each successive ruler enacts new laws, hence the States of
the Holy Father cannot be so prosperous as those countries whose
government and legislation are more stable. In contrast with the
former, one may observe in Venice the effect which a system of
order and legislation, which has continued for centuries, has on
the public welfare.' This is the quintessence of a system of
Political Economy which in the main, notwithstanding that its
object appears to be only the acquisition of the precious metals,
is remarkable for its sound and natural doctrine. The work of J. B.
Say, although it comprises ideas and matter on Political Economy of
which Antonio Serra had in his day no foreknowledge, is far
inferior to Serra's on the main points, and especially as respects
a due estimate of the effect of political circumstances on the
wealth of nations. Had Say studied Serra instead of laying his work
aside, he could hardly have maintained (in the first page of his
system of Political Economy) that 'the constitution of countries
cannot be taken into account in respect to Political Economy; that
the people have become rich, and become poor, under every form of
government; that the only important point is, that its
administration should be good.'
    We are far from desiring to maintain the absolute
preferableness of any one form of government compared with others.
One need only cast a glance at the Southern States of America, to
be convinced that democratic forms of government among people who
are not ripe for them can become the cause of decided
retrogression. in public prosperity. One need only look at Russia,
to perceive that people who are yet in a low degree of civilisation
are capable of making most remarkable progress in their national
well-being under an absolute monarchy. But that in no way proves
that people have become rich, i.e. have attained the highest degree
of economical well-being, under all forms of government. History
rather teaches us that such a degree of public well-being, namely,
a flourishing state of manufactures and commerce, has been attained
in those countries only whose political constitution (whether it
bear the name of democratic or aristocratic republic, or limited
monarchy) has secured to their inhabitants a high degree of
personal liberty and of security of property whose administration
has guaranteed to them a high degree of activity and power
successfully to strive for the attainment of their common objects,
and of steady continuity in those endeavours. For in a state of
highly advanced civilisation, it is not so important that the
administration should be good for a certain period, but that it
should be continuously and conformably good; that the next
administration should not destroy the good work of the former one;
that a thirty years' administration of Colbert should not be
followed by a Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, that for
successive centuries one should follow one and the same system, and
strive after one and the same object. Only under those political
constitutions in which the national interests are represented (and
not under an absolute Government, under which the State
administration is necessarily always modified according to the
individual will of the ruler) can such a steadiness and consistency
of administration be secured, as Antonio Serra rightly observes. On
the other hand, there are undoubtedly certain grades of
civilisation in which the administration by absolute power may
prove far more favourable to the economical and mental progress of
the nation (and generally is so) than that of a limited monarchy.
We refer to periods of slavery and serfdom, of barbarism and
superstition, of national disunity, and of caste privileges. For,
under such circumstances, the constitution tends to secure not only
the interests of the nation, but also the continuance of the
prevailing evils, whereas it is the interest and the nature of
absolute government to destroy the latter, and it is also possible
that an absolute ruler may arise of distinguished power and
sagacity, who may cause the nation to make advances for centuries,
and secure to its nationality existence and progress for all future
time.
    It is consequently only a conditional commonplace truth on the
faith of which J. B. Say would exclude politics from his doctrine.
In every case it is the chief desideratum that the administration
should be good; but the efficiency of the administration depends on
the form of government, and that form of government is clearly the
best which most promotes the moral and material welfare and the
future progress of any given nation. Nations have made some
progress un der all forms of government. But a high degree of
economical development has only been attained in those nations
whose form of government has been such as to secure to them a high
degree of freedom and power, of steadiness of laws and of policy,
and efficient institutions.
    Antonio Serra sees the nature of things as it actually exists,
and not through the spectacles of previous systems, or of some one
principle which he is determined to advocate and carry out. He
draws a comparison between the condition of the various States of
Italy, and perceives that the greatest degree of wealth is to be
found where there is extensive commerce; that extensive commerce
exists where there is a well-developed manufacturing power, but
that the latter is to be found where there is municipal freedom.
    The opinions of beccaria are pervaded by the false doctrines of
the physiocratic school. That author indeed either discovered, or
derived from Aristotle, the principle of the division of labour,
either before, or contemporaneously with, Adam Smith; he, however,
carries it farther than Adam Smith, inasmuch as he not only applies
it to the division of the work in a single manufactory, but shows
that the public welfare is promoted by the division of occupation
among the members of the community. At the same time he does not
hesitate, with the physiocrats, to assert that manufactures are
non-productive.
    The views of the great philosophical jurist, Filangieri, are
about the narrowest of all. Imbued with false cosmopolitanism, he
considers that England, by her protective policy, has merely given
a premium to contraband trade, and weakened her own commerce.
    Verri, as a practical statesman, could not err so widely as
that. He admits the necessity of protection to native industry
against foreign competition; but did not or could not see that such
a policy is conditional on the greatness and unity of the
nationality.

NOTES:

1. During a journey in Germany which the author undertook while
this work was in the press, he learned for the first time that
Doctors Von Ranke and Gervinus have criticised Macchiavelli's
Prince from the same point of view as himself.

2. Everything that Macchiavelli has written, whether before or
after the publication of the Prince, indicates that he was
revolving in his mind plans of this kind. How otherwise can it be
explained, why he, a civilian, a man of letters, an ambassador and
State official, who had never borne arms, should have occupied
himself so much in studying the art of war, and that he should have
been able to write a work upon it which excited the wonder of the
most distinguished soldiers of his time?

3. Frederick the Great in his Anti-Macchiavel treats of the Prince
as simply a scientific treatise on the rights and duties of princes
generally. Here it is remarkable that he, while contradicting
Macchiavelli chapter by chapter, never mentions the last or
twenty-sixth chapter, which bears the heading, 'A Summons to free
Italy from the Foreigners,' and instead of it inserts a chapter
which is not contained in Macchiavelli's work with the heading, 'On
the different kinds of Negotiations, and On the just Reasons for a
Declaration of War.'

4. First published in the work, Pensieri intorno allo scopo di
Nicolo Macchiavelli nel libro 'Il Principe.' Milano, 1810.

Chapter 29

The Industrial System (Falsely Termed by the School 'The Mercantile
System')

    At the period when great nationalities arose, owing to the
union of entire peoples brought about by hereditary monarchy and by
the centralisation of public power, commerce and navigation, and
hence wealth and naval power, existed for the most part (as we have
before shown) in republics of cities, or in leagues of such
republics. The more, however, that the institutions of these great
nationalities became developed, the more evident became the
necessity of establishing on their own territories these main
sources of power and of wealth.
    Under the conviction that they could only take root and
flourish under municipal liberty, the royal power favoured
municipal freedom and the establishment of guilds, both which it
regarded as counterpoises against the feudal aristocracy, who were
continually striving for independence, and always hostile to
national unity. But this expedient appeared insufficient, for one
reason, because the total of the advantages which individuals
enjoyed in the free cities and republics was much greater than the
total of those advantages which the monarchical governments were
able to offer, or chose to offer, in their own municipal cities; in
the second place, because it is very difficult, indeed impossible,
for a country which has always been principally engaged in
agriculture, successfully to displace in free competition those
countries which for centuries have acquired supremacy in
manufactures, commerce, and navigation; lastly, because in the
great monarchies the feudal institutions acted as hindrances to the
development of their internal agriculture, and consequently to the
growth of their internal manufactures. Hence, the nature of things
led the great monarchies to adopt such political measures as tended
to restrict the importation of foreign manufactured goods, and
foreign commerce and navigation, and to favour the progress of
their own manufactures, and their own commerce and navigation.
    Instead of raising revenue as they had previously done by
duties on the raw materials which they exported, they were
henceforth principally levied on the imported manufactured goods.
The benefits offered by the latter policy stimulated the merchants,
seamen, and manufacturers of more highly civilised cities and
countries to immigrate with their capital into the great
monarchies, and stimulated the spirit of enterprise of the subjects
of the latter. The growth of the national industry was followed by
the growth of the national freedom. The feudal aristocracy found it
necessary in their own interest to make concessions to the
industrial and commercial population, as well as to those engaged
in agriculture; hence resulted progress in agriculture as well as
in native industry and native commerce, which had a reciprocally
favourable influence on those two other factors of national wealth.
We have shown how England, in consequence of this system, and
favoured by the Reformation, made forward progress from century to
century in the development of her productive power, freedom, and
might. We have stated how in France this system was followed for
some time with success, but how it came to grief there, because the
institutions of feudalism, of the priesthood, and of the absolute
monarchy, had not yet been reformed. We have also shown how the
Polish nationality succumbed, because the elective system of
monarchy did not possess influence and steadiness enough to bring
into existence powerful municipal institutions, and to reform the
feudal aristocracy. As a result of this policy, there was created
in the place of the commercial and manufacturing city, and of the
agricultural province which chiefly existed outside the political
influence of that city, the agricultural-manufacturing-commercial
State; a nation complete in itself, an harmonious and compact
whole, in which, on the one hand, the formerly prevailing
differences between monarchy, feudal aristocracy, and citizenhood
gave place to one harmonious accord, and, on the other hand, the
closest union and reciprocally beneficial action took place between
agriculture, manufactures, and commerce. This was an immeasurably
more perfect commonwealth than the previously existing one, because
the manufacturing power, which in the municipal republic had been
confined to a narrow range, now could extend itself over a wider
sphere; because now all existing resources were placed at its
disposition; because the division of labour and the confederation
of the productive powers in the different branches of manufactures,
as well as in agriculture, were made effectual in an infinitely
greater degree; because the numerous classes of agriculturists
became politically and commercially united with the manufacturers
and merchants, and hence perpetual concord was maintained between
them; the reciprocal action between manufacturing and commercial
power was perpetuated and secured for ever; and finally, the
agriculturists were made partakers of all the advantages of
civilisation arising from manufactures and commerce. The
agricultural-manufacturing-commercial State is like a city which
spreads over a whole kingdom, or a country district raised up to be
a city. In the same proportion in which material production was
promoted by this union, the mental powers must necessarily have
been developed, the political institutions perfected, the State
revenues, the national military power, and the population,
increased. Hence we see at this day, that nation which first of all
perfectly developed the agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial
State, standing in these respects at the head of all other nations.
    The Industrial System was not defined in writing, nor was it a
theory devised by authors, it was simply acted upon in practice,
until the time of Stewart, who deduced it for the most part from
the actual English practice, just as Antonio Serra deduced his
system from a consideration of the circumstances of Venice.
Stewart's treatise, however, cannot be considered a scientific
work. The greater part of it is devoted to money, banking, the
paper circulation -- commercial crises -- the balance of trade, and
the doctrine of population: -- discussions from which even in our
day much may be learned, but which are carried on in a very
illogical and unintelligible way, and in which one and the same
idea is ten times repeated. The other branches of political economy
are either superficially treated, or passed over altogether.
Neither the productive powers, nor the elements of price, are
thoroughly discussed. Everywhere the author appears to have in view
only the experiences and circumstances of England. In a word, his
book possesses all the merits and demerits of the practice of
England, and of that of Colbert. The merits of the Industrial
System as compared with later ones, are:
    1. That it clearly recognises the value of native manufactures
and their influence on native agriculture, commerce, and
navigation, and on the civilisation and power of the nation; and
expresses itself unreservedly to that effect.
    2. That it indicates what is in general the right means whereby
a nation which is qualified for establishing a manufacturing power,
may attain a national industry.(1*)
    3. That it is based on the idea of 'the nation,' and regarding
the nations as individual entities, everywhere takes into account
the national interests and national conditions.
    On the other hand, this system is chargeable with the following
chief faults:
    1. That it does not generally recognise the fundamental
principle of the industrial development of the nation and the
conditions under which it can be brought into operation.
    2. That it consequently would mislead peoples who live in a
climate unsuited for manufacturing, and small and uncivilised
states and peoples, into the adoption of the protective system.
    3. That it always seeks to apply protection to agriculture, and
especially to the production of raw materials -- to the injury of
agriculture -- whereas agricultural industry is sufficiently
protected against foreign competition by the nature of things.
    4. That it seeks to favour manufactures unjustly by imposing
restrictions on the export of raw materials, to the detriment of
agriculture.
    5. That it does not teach the nation which has already attained
manufacturing and commercial supremacy to preserve her own
manufacturers and merchants from indolence, by permitting free
competition in her own markets.
    6. That in the exclusive pursuit of the political object, it
ignores the cosmopolitical relations of all nations, the objects of
the whole human race; and hence would mislead governments into a
prohibitory system, where a protective one would amply suffice, or
imposing duties which are practically prohibitory, when moderate
protective duties would better answer the purpose.
    Finally.
    7. That chiefly owing to his utterly ignoring the principle of
cosmopolitanism, it does not recognise the future union of all
nations, the establishment of perpetual peace, and of universal
freedom of trade, as the goal towards which all nations have to
strive, and more and more to approach.
    The subsequent schools have, however, falsely reproached this
system for considering the precious metals as the sole constituents
of wealth, whereas they are merely merchandise like all other
articles of value; and that hence it would follow that we ought to
sell as much as possible to other nations and to buy from them as
little as possible.
    As respects the former objection, it cannot be truly alleged of
either Colbert's administration or of that of the English since
George I. that they have attached an unreasonable degree of
importance to the importation of the precious metals.
    To raise their own native manufactures, their own navigation,
their foreign trade, was the aim of their commercial policy; which
indeed was chargeable with many mistakes, but which on the whole
produced important results. We have observed that since the Methuen
Treaty (1703) the English have annually exported great quantities
of the precious metals to the East Indies, without considering
these exports as prejudicial.
    The Ministers of George I when they prohibited (in 1721) the
importation of the cotton and silk fabrics of India did not assign
as a reason for that measure that a nation ought to sell as much as
possible to the foreigner, and buy as little as possible from him;
that absurd idea was grafted on to the industrial system by a
subsequent school; what they asserted was, that it is evident that
a nation can only attain to wealth and power by the export of its
own manufactured goods, and by the import from abroad of raw
materials and the necessaries of life. England has followed this
maxim of State policy to the present day, and by following it has
become rich and mighty; this maxim is the only true one for a
nation which has been long civilised, and which has already brought
its own agriculture to a high degree of development.

NOTES:

1. Stewart says (book 1. chapter xxix.): 'In order to promote
industry, a nation must act as well as permit, and protect. Could
ever the woollen manufacture have been introduced into France from
the consideration of the great advantage which England had drawn
from it. if the king had not undertaken the support of it by
granting many privileges to the undertakers, and by laying strict
prohibitions on all foreign cloths? Is there any other way of
establishing a new manufacture anywhere?'

Chapter 30

The Physiocratic or Agricultural System

    Had the great enterprise of Colbert been permitted to succeed
-- had not the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the love of
splendour and false ambition of Louis XIV, and the debauchery and
extravagance of his successors, nipped in the bud the seeds which
Colbert had sown -- if consequently a wealthy manufacturing and
commercial interest had arisen in France, if by good fortune the
enormous properties of the French clergy had been given over to the
public, if these events had resulted in the formation of a powerful
lower house of Parliament, by whose influence the feudal
aristocracy had been reformed -- the physiocratic system would
hardly have ever come to light. That system was evidently deduced
from the then existing circumstances of France, and was only
applicable to those circumstances.
    At the period of its introduction the greater part of the
landed property in France was in the hands of the clergy and the
nobility It was cultivated by a peasantry languishing under a state
of serfdom and personal oppression, who were sunk in superstition,
ignorance, indolence, and poverty The owners of the land, who
constituted its productive instruments, were devoted to frivolous
pursuits, and had neither mind for, nor interest in, agriculture.
The actual cultivators had neither the mental nor material means
for agricultural improvements. The oppression of feudalism on
agricultural production was increased by the insatiable demands
made by the monarchy on the producers, which were made more
intolerable by the freedom from taxation enjoyed by the clergy and
nobility. Under such circumstances it was impossible that the most
important branches of trade could succeed, those namely which
depend on the productiveness of native agriculture, and the
consumption of the great masses of the people; those only could
manage to thrive which produced articles of luxury for the use of
the privileged classes. The foreign trade was restricted by the
inability of the material producers to consume any considerable
quantity of the produce of tropical countries, and to pay for them
by their own surplus produce; the inland trade was oppressed by
provincial customs duties.
    Under such circumstances, nothing could be more natural than
that thoughtful men, in their investigations into the causes of the
prevailing poverty and misery, should have arrived at the
conviction, that national welfare could not be attained so long as
agriculture was not freed from its fetters, so long as the owners
of land and capital took no interest in agriculture, so long as the
peasantry remained sunk in personal subjection, in superstition,
idleness, and ignorance, so long as taxation remained undiminished
and was not equally borne by all classes, so long as internal
tariff restrictions existed, and foreign trade did not flourish.
    But these thoughtful men (we must remember) were either
physicians to the King and his Court, Court favourites, or
confidants and friends of the aristocracy and the clergy they could
not and would not declare open war against either absolute power or
against clergy and nobility: There remained to them but one method
of disseminating their views, that of concealing their plan of
reform under the obscurity of a profound system, just as, in
earlier as well as later times, ideas of political and religious
reform have been embedded in the substance of philosophical
systems. Following the philosophers of their own age and country,
who, in view of the total disorganisation of the national condition
of France, sought consolation in the wider field of philanthropy
and cosmopolitanism (much as the father of a family, in despair at
the break-up of his household, goes to seek comfort in the tavern),
so the physiocrats caught at the cosmopolitan idea of universal
free trade, as a panacea by which all prevailing evils might be
cured. When they had got hold of this point of truth by exalting
their thoughts above, they then directed them beneath, and
discovered in the 'nett revenue' of the soil a basis for their
preconceived ideas. Thence resulted the fundamental maxim of their
system, 'the soil alone yields nett revenue' therefore agriculture
is the sole source of wealth. That is a doctrine from which
wonderful consequences might be inferred -- first feudalism must
fall, and if requisite, landowning itself; then all taxation ought
to be levied on the land, as being the source of all wealth; then
the exemption from taxation enjoyed by the nobility and clergy must
cease; finally the manufacturers must be deemed an unproductive
class, who ought to pay no taxes, but also ought to have no
State-protection, hence custom-houses must be abolished.
    In short, people contrived by means of the most absurd
arguments and contentions to prove those great truths which they
had determined beforehand to prove.
    Of the nation, and its special circumstances and condition in
relation to other nations, no further account was to be taken, for
that is clear from the 'Encyclopédie Méthodique,' which says, 'The
welfare of the individual is conditional on the welfare of the
entire human race.' Here, therefore, no account was taken of any
nation, of any war, of any foreign commercial measures: history and
experience must be either ignored or misrepresented. The great
merit of this system was, that it bore the appearance of an attack
made on the policy of Colbert and on the privileges of the
manufacturers, for the benefit of the landowners; while in reality
its blows told with most effect on the special privileges of the
latter. Poor Colbert had to bear all the blame of the sufferings of
the French agriculturists, while nevertheless everyone knew that
France possessed a great industry for the first time since
Colbert's administration; and that even the dullest intellect was
aware that manufactures constitute the chief means for promoting
agriculture and commerce. The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes --
the wanton wars of Louis XIV -- the profligate expenditure of Louis
XV -- were utterly ignored by these philosophers.
    Quesnay in his writings has adduced, and replied to, point by
point, the objections which were urged against his system. One is
astonished at the mass of sound sense which he puts into the mouth
of his opponents, and at the mass of mystical absurdity which he
opposes to those objections by way of argument. Notwithstanding,
all that absurdity was accepted as wisdom by the contemporaries of
this reformer, because the tendency of his system accorded with the
circumstances of France at that time, and with the philanthropic
and cosmopolitan ideas prevalent in that century.


Chapter 31

The System of Values of Exchange (Falsely Termed by the School, The
'Industrial' System) -- Adam Smith

    Adam Smith's doctrine is, in respect to national and
international conditions, merely a continuation of the physiocratic
system. Like the latter, it ignores the very nature of
nationalities, seeks almost entirely to exclude politics and the
power of the State, presupposes the existence of a state of
perpetual peace and of universal union, underrates the value of a
national manufacturing power, and the means of obtaining it, and
demands absolute freedom of trade.
    Adam Smith fell into these fundamental errors in exactly the
same way as the physiocrats had done before him, namely, by
regarding absolute freedom in international trade as an axiom
assent to which is demanded by common sense, and by not
investigating to the bottom how far history supports this idea.
    Dugald Stewart (Adam Smith's able biographer) informs us that
Smith, at a date twenty-one years before his work was published in
1776 (viz. in 1755), claimed priority in conceiving the idea of
universal freedom of trade, at a literary party at which he was
present, in the following words:
    'Man is usually made use of by statesmen and makers of
projects, as the material for a sort of political handiwork. The
project makers, in their operations on human affairs, disturb
Nature, whereas people ought simply to leave her to herself to act
freely; in order that she may accomplish her objects. In order to
raise a State from the lowest depth of barbarism to the highest
degree of wealth, all that is requisite is peace, moderate
taxation, and good administration of justice ; everything else will
follow of its own accord in the natural course of things. All
governments which act in a contrary spirit to this natural course,
which seek to divert capital into other channels, or to restrict
the progress of the community in its spontaneous course, act
contrary to nature, and, in order to maintain their position,
become oppressive and tyrannical.'
    Adam Smith set out from this fundamental idea, and to prove it
and to illustrate it was the sole object of all his later works. He
was confirmed in this idea by Quesnay, Turgot, and the other
coryphaei of the physiocratic school, whose acquaintance he had
made in a visit to France in the year 1765.
    Smith evidently considered the idea of freedom of trade as an
intellectual discovery which would constitute the foundation of his
literary fame. How natural, therefore, it was that he should
endeavour in his work to put aside and to refute everything that
stood in the way of that idea; that he should consider himself as
the professed advocate of absolute freedom of trade, and that he
thought and wrote in that spirit.
    How could it be expected, that with such preconceived opinions,
Smith should judge of men and of things, of history and statistics,
of political measures and of their authors, in any other light than
as they confirmed or contradicted his fundamental principle?
    In the passage above quoted from Dugald Stewart, Adam Smith's
whole system is comprised as in a nutshell. The power of the State
can and ought to do nothing, except to allow justice to be
administered, to impose as little taxation as possible. Statesmen
who attempt to found a manufacturing power, to promote navigation,
to extend foreign trade, to protect it by naval power, and to found
or to acquire colonies, are in his opinion project makers who only
hinder the progress of the community. For him no nation exists, but
merely a community, i.e. a number of individuals dwelling together.
These individuals know best for themselves what branches of
occupation are most to their advantage, and they can best select
for themselves the means which promote their prosperity.
    This entire nullification of nationality and of State power,
this exaltation of individualism to the position of author of all
effective power, could be made plausible only by making the main
object of investigation to be not the power which effects, but the
thing effected, namely, material wealth, or rather the value in
exchange which the thing effected possesses. Materialism must come
to the aid of individualism, in order to conceal what an enormous
amount of power accrues to individuals from nationality, from
national unity, and from the national confederation of the
productive powers. A bare theory of values must be made to pass
current as national economy, because individuals alone produce
values, and the State, incapable of creating values, must limit its
operations to calling into activity, protecting, and promoting the
productive powers of individuals. In this combination, the
quintessence of political economy may be stated as follows, viz.:
Wealth consists in the possession of objects of exchangeable value;
objects of exchangeable value are produced by the labour of
individuals in combination with the powers of nature and with
capital. By the division of labour, the productiveness of the
labour is increased; capital is accumulated by savings, by
production exceeding consumption. The greater the total amount of
capital, so much the greater is the division of labour, and hence
the capacity to produce. Private interest is the most effectual
stimulus to labour and to economy. Therefore the highest wisdom of
statecraft consists in placing no obstacle in the way of private
industry, and in caring only for the good administration of
justice. And hence also it is folly to induce the subjects of a
State, by means of State legislative measures, to produce for them
selves anything which they can buy cheaper from abroad. A system so
consistent as this is, which sets forth the elements of wealth,
which so clearly explains the process of its production, and
apparently so completely exposes the errors of the previous
schools, could not fail, in default of any other, to meet with
acceptance. The mistake has been simply, that this system at bottom
is nothing else than a system of the private economy of all the
individual persons in a country, or of the individuals of the whole
human race, as that economy would develop and shape itself, under
a state of things in which there were no distinct nations,
nationalities, or national interests -- no distinctive political
constitutions or degrees of civilisation -- no wars or national
animosities; that it is nothing more than a theory of values; a
mere shopkeeper's or individual merchant's theory -- not a
scientific doctrine, showing how the productive powers of an entire
nation can be called into existence, increased, maintained, and
preserved -- for the special benefit of its civilisation, welfare,
might, continuance, and independence.
    This system regards everything from the shopkeeper's point of
view. The value of anything is wealth, according to it, so its sole
object is to gain values. The establishment of powers of
production, it leaves to chance, to nature, or to the providence of
God (whichever you please), only the State must have nothing at all
to do with it, nor must politics venture to meddle with the
business of accumulating exchangeable values. It is resolved to buy
wherever it can find the cheapest articles -- that the home
manufactories are ruined by their importation, matters not to it.
If foreign nations give a bounty on the export of their
manufactured goods, so much the better; it can buy them so much the
cheaper. In its view no class is productive save those who actually
produce things valuable in exchange. It well recognises how the
division of labour promotes the success of a business in detail,
but it has no perception of the effect of the division of labour as
affecting a whole nation. It knows that only by individual economy
can it increase its capital, and that only in proportion to the
increase in its capital can it extend its individual trades; but it
sets no value on the increase of the productive power, which
results from the establishment of native manufactories, or on the
foreign trade and national power which arise out of that increase.
What may become of the entire nation in the future, is to it a
matter of perfect indifference, so long as private individuals can
gain wealth. It takes notice merely of the rent yielded by land,
but pays no regard to the value of landed property; it does not
perceive that the greatest part of the wealth of a nation consists
in the value of its land and its fixed property. For the influence
of foreign trade on the value and price of landed property, and for
the fluctuations and calamities thence arising; it cares not a
straw. In short, this system is the strictest and most consistent
'mercantile system,' and it is incomprehensible how that term could
have been applied to the system of Colbert, the main tendency of
which is towards an 'industrial system' -i.e. a system which has
solely in view the founding of a national industry -- a national
commerce -- without regarding the temporary gains or losses of
values in exchange.
    Notwithstanding, we would by no means deny the great merits of
Adam Smith. He was the first who successfully applied the
analytical method to political economy. By means of that method and
an unusual degree of sagacity, he threw light on the most important
branches of the science, which were previously almost wholly
obscure. Before Adam Smith only a practice existed; his works
rendered it possible to constitute a science of political economy,
and he has contributed a greater amount of materials for that
object than all his predecessors or successors.
    But that very peculiarity of his mind by which, in analysing
the various constituent parts of political economy, he rendered
such important service, was the cause why he did not take a
comprehensive view of the community in its entirety; that he was
unable to combine individual interests in one harmonious whole;
that he would not consider the nation in preference to mere
individuals; that out of mere anxiety for the freedom of action of
the individual producers, he lost sight of the interests of the
entire nation. He who so clearly perceived the benefits of the
division of labour in a single manufactory, did not perceive that
the same principle is applicable with equal force to entire
provinces and nations.
    With this opinion, that which Dugald Stewart says of him
exactly agrees. Smith could judge individual traits of character
with extraordinary acuteness; but if an opinion was needed as to
the entire character of a man or of a book, one could not be
sufficiently astonished at the narrowness and obliquity of his
views. Nay, he was incapable of forming a correct estimate of the
character of those with whom he had lived for many years in the
most intimate friendship. 'The portrait,' says his biographer, 'was
ever full of life and expression, and had a strong resemblance to
the original if one compared it with the original from a certain
point of view; but it never gave a true and perfect representation
according to all its dimensions and circumstances.'

Chapter 32

The System of Values of Exchange (Continued) -- Jean Baptiste Say
and his School

    This author on the whole has merely endeavoured to systematise,
to elucidate, and to popularise, the materials which Adam Smith had
gathered together after an irregular fashion. In that he has
perfectly succeeded, inasmuch as he possessed in a high degree the
gift of systematisation and elucidation. Nothing new or original is
to be found in his writings, save only that he asserted the
productiveness of mental labours, which Adam Smith denied. Only,
this view, which is quite correct according to the theory of the
productive powers, stands opposed to the theory of exchangeable
values, and hence Smith is clearly more consistent than Say. Mental
labourers produce directly no exchangeable values; nay, more, they
diminish by their consumption the total amount of material
productions and savings, and hence the total of material wealth.
Moreover, the ground on which Say from his point of view includes
mental labourers among the productive class, viz. because they are
paid with exchangeable values, is an utterly baseless one, inasmuch
as those values have been already produced before they reach the
hands of the mental labourers; their possessor alone is changed,
but by that change their amount is not increased. We can only term
mental labourers productive if we regard the productive powers of
the nation, and not the mere possession of exchangeable values, as
national wealth. Say found himself opposed to Smith in this
respect, exactly as Smith had found himself opposed to the
physiocrats.
    In order to include manufacturers among the productive class,
Smith had been obliged to enlarge the idea of what constitutes
wealth; and Say on his part had no other alternative than either to
adopt the absurd view that mental labourers are not productive, as
it was handed down to him by Adam Smith, or else to enlarge the
idea of wealth as Adam Smith had done in opposition to the
physiocrats, namely, to make it comprise productive power; and to
argue, national wealth does not consist in the possession of
exchangeable values, but in the possession of power to produce,
just as the wealth of a fisherman does not consist in the
possession of fish, but in the ability and the means of continually
catching fish to satisfy his wants.
    It is noteworthy, and, so far as we are aware, not generally
known, that Jean Baptiste Say had a brother whose plain clear
common sense led him clearly to perceive the fundamental error of
the theory of values, and that J. B. Say himself expressed to his
doubting brother doubts as to the soundness of his own doctrine.
    Louis Say wrote from Nantes, that a technical language had
become prevalent in political economy which had led to much false
reasoning, and that his brother Jean himself was not free from
it.(1*) According to Louis Say, the wealth of nations does not
consist in material goods and their value in exchange, but in the
ability continuously to produce such goods. The exchange theory of
Smith and J. B. Say regards wealth from the narrow point of view of
an individual merchant, and this system, which would reform the
(so-called) mercantile system, is itself nothing else than a
restricted mercantile system.(2*) To these doubts and objections J.
B. Say replied to his brother that 'his (J. B. Say's) method
(method?) (viz. the theory of exchangeable values) was certainly
not the best, but that the difficulty was, to find a better.'(3*)
    What! difficult to find a better? Had not brother Louis, then,
found one? No, the real difficulty was that people had not the
requisite acuteness to grasp and to follow out the idea which the
brother had (certainly only in general terms) expressed; or rather,
perhaps, because it was very distasteful to have to overturn the
already established school, and to have to teach the precise
opposite of the doctrine by which one had acquired celebrity. The
only original thing in J. B. Say's writings is the form of his
system, viz. that he defined political economy as the science which
shows how material wealth is produced, distributed, and consumed.
It was by this classification and by his exposition of it that J.
B. Say made his success and also his school, and no wonder: for
here everything lay ready to his hand; he knew how to explain so
clearly and intelligibly the special process of production, and the
individual powers engaged in it; he could set forth so lucidly
(within the limits of his own narrow circle) the principle of the
division of labour, and so clearly expound the trade of
individuals. Every working potter, every huckster could understand
him, and do so the more readily, the less J. B. Say told him that
was new or unknown. For that in the work of the potter, hands and
skill (labour) must be combined with clay (natural material) in
order by means of the potter's wheel, the oven, and fuel (capital),
to produce pots (valuable products or values in exchange), had been
well known long before in every respectable potter's workshop, only
they had not known how to describe these things in scientific
language, and by means of it to generalise upon them. Also there
were probably very few hucksters who did not know before J. B.
Say's time, that by exchange both parties could gain values in
exchange, and that if anyone exported 1,000 thalers' worth of
goods, and got for them 1,500 thalers' worth of other goods from
abroad, he would gain 500 thalers.
    It was also well known before, that work leads to wealth, and
idleness to beggary; that private self-interest is the most
powerful stimulus to active industry; and that he who desires to
obtain young chickens, must not first eat the eggs. Certainly
people had not known before that all this was political economy;
but they were delighted to be initiated with so little trouble into
the deepest mysteries of the science, and thus to get rid of the
hateful duties which make our favourite luxuries so dear, and to
get perpetual peace, universal brotherhood, and the millennium into
the bargain. It is also no cause for surprise that so many learned
men and State officials ranked themselves among the admirers of
Smith and Say; for the principle of 'laissez faire et laissez
aller' demands no sagacity from any save those who first introduced
and expounded it; authors who succeeded them had nothing to do but
to reiterate, embellish, and elucidate their argument; and who
might not feel the wish and have the ability to be a great
statesman, if all one had to do was to fold one's hands in one's
bosom? It is a strange peculiarity of these systems, that one need
only adopt their first propositions, and let oneself be led
credulously and confidingly by the hand by the author, through a
few chapters, and One is lost. We must say to M. Jean Baptiste Say
at the outset that political economy is not, in our opinion, that
science which teaches only how values in exchange are produced by
individuals, distributed among them, and consumed by them; we say
to him that a statesman will know and must know, over and above
that, how the productive powers of a whole nation can be awakened,
increased, and protected, and how on the other hand they are
weakened, laid to sleep, or utterly destroyed; and how by means of
those national productive powers the national resources can be
utilised in the wisest and best manner so as to produce national
existence, national independence, national prosperity, national
strength, national culture, and a national future.
    This system (of Say) has rushed from one extreme view that the
State can and ought to regulate everything -- into the opposite
extreme -- that the State can and ought to do nothing: that the
individual is everything, and the State nothing at all. The opinion
of M. Say as to the omnipotence of individuals and the impotence of
the State verges on the ridiculous. Where he cannot forbear from
expressing a word of praise on the efficacy of Colbert's measures
for the industrial education of France, he exclaims, 'One could
hardly have given private persons credit for such a high degree of
wisdom.'
    If we turn our attention from the system to its author, we see
in him a man who, without a comprehensive knowledge of history,
without deep insight into State policy or State administration,
without political or philosophical views, with merely one idea
adopted from others in his head, rummages through history,
politics, statistics, commercial and industrial relations, in order
to discover isolated proofs and facts which may serve to support
his idea. If anyone will read his remarks on the Navigation Laws,
the Methuen Treaty, the system of Colbert, the Eden Treaty, &c. he
will find this judgment confirmed. It did not suit him to follow
out connectedly the commercial and industrial history of nations.
That nations have become rich and mighty under protective tariffs
he admits, only in his opinion they became so in spite of that
system and not in consequence of it; and he requires that we should
believe that conclusion on his word alone. He maintains that the
Dutch were induced to trade directly with the East Indies, because
Philip II forbade them to enter the harbour of Portugal; as though
the protective system would justify that prohibition, as though the
Dutch would not have found their way to the East Indies without it.
With statistics and politics M. Say is as dissatisfied as with
history: with the former because no doubt they produce the
inconvenient 'facts which he says 'have so often proved
contradictory of his system' -- with the latter because he
understood nothing at all of it. He cannot desist from his warnings
against the pitfalls into which statistical facts may mislead us,
or from reminding us that politics have nothing to do with
political economy, which sounds about as wise as if anyone were to
maintain that pewter must not be taken into account in the
consideration of a pewter platter.
    First a merchant, then a manufacturer, then an unsuccessful
politician, Say laid hold of political economy just as a man grasps
at some new undertaking when the old one cannot go on any longer.
We have his own confession on record, that he stood in doubt at
first whether he should advocate the (so-called) mercantile system,
or the system of free trade. Hatred of the Continental system (of
Napoleon) which had ruined his manufactory, and against the author
of it who had turned him out of the magistracy, determined him to
espouse the cause of absolute freedom of trade.
    The term 'freedom' in whatever connection it is used has for
fifty years past exercised a magical influence in France. Hence it
happened that Say, under the Empire as well as under the
Restoration, belonged to the Opposition, and that he incessantly
advocated economy. Thus his writings became popular for quite other
reasons than what they contained. Otherwise would it not be
incomprehensible that their popularity should have continued after
the fall of Napoleon, at a period when the adoption of Say's system
would inevitably have ruined the French manufacturers? His firm
adherence to the cosmopolitical principle under such circumstances
proves how little political insight the man had. How in little he
knew the world, is shown by his firm belief the cosmopolitical
tendencies of Canning and Huskisson. One thing only was lacking to
his fame, that neither Louis XVIII nor Charles X made him minister
of commerce and of finance. In that case history would have coupled
his name with that of Colbert, the one as the creator of the
national industry, the other as its destroyer.
    Never has any author with such small materials exercised such
a wide scientific terrorism as J. B. Say; the slightest doubt as to
the infallibility of his doctrine was branded as obscurantism; and
even men like Chaptal feared the anathemas of this
politico-economical Pope. Chaptal's work on the industry of France,
from the beginning to the end, is nothing else than an exposition
of the effects of the French protective system; he states that
expressly; he says distinctly that under the existing circumstances
of the world, prosperity for France can only be hoped for under the
system of protection. At the same time Chaptal endeavours by an
article in praise of free trade, directly in opposition to the
whole tendency of his book, to solicit pardon for his heresy from
the school of Say. Say imitated the Papacy even so far as to its
'Index.' He certainly did not prohibit heretical writings
individually by name, but he was stricter still; he prohibits all,
the non-heretical as well as the heretical; he warns the young
students of political economy not to read too many books, as they
might thus too easily be misled into errors; they ought to read
only a few, but those good books, which means in other words, 'You
ought only to read me and Adam Smith, no others.' but that none too
great sympathy should accrue to the immortal father of the school
from the adoration of his disciples, his successor and interpreter
on earth took good care, for, according to Say, Adam Smith's books
are full of confusion, imperfection, and contradictions; and he
clearly gives us to understand that one can only learn from himself
'how one ought to read Adam Smith.'
    Notwithstanding, when Say was at the zenith of his fame,
certain young heretics arose who attacked the basis of his system
so effectually and so boldly, that he preferred privately to reply
to them, and meekly to avoid any public discussion. Among these,
Tanneguy du Châtel (more than once a minister of State) was the
most vigorous and the most ingenious.
    'Selon vous, mon cher critique,' said Say to Du Châtel in a
private letter, ' il ne reste plus dans mon économie politique que
des actions sans motifs, des faits sans explication, une chaîne de
rapports dont les extrémités manquent et dont les anneaux les plus
importants sont brisés. Je partage donc l'infortune d'Adam Smith,
dont un de nos critiques a dit qu'il avait fait rétrograder
l'économie politique.'(4*) In a postscript to this letter he
remarks very naively, 'Dans le second article que vous annoncez, il
est bien inutile de revenir sur cette polémique, par laquelle nous
pouvions bien ennuyer le public.'
    At the present day the school of Smith and Say has been
exploded in France, and the rigid and spiritless influence of the
Theory of Exchangeable Values has been succeeded by a revolution
and an anarchy which neither M. Rossi nor M. Blanqui are able to
exorcise. The Saint-Simonians and the Fourrierists, with remarkable
talent at their head, instead of reforming the old doctrines, have
cast them entirely aside, and have framed for themselves a Utopian
system. Quite recently the most ingenious persons among them have
been seeking to discover the connection of their doctrines with
those of the previous schools, and to make their ideas compatible
with existing circumstances. Important results may be expected from
their labours, especially from those of the talented Michel
Chevalier. The amount of truth, and of what is practically
applicable in our day which their doctrines contain, consists
chiefly in their expounding the principle of the confederation and
the harmony of the productive powers. Their annihilation of
individual freedom and independence is their weak side; with them
the individual is entirely absorbed in the community, in direct
contradiction to the Theory of Exchangeable Values, according to
which the individual ought to be everything and the State nothing.
    It may be that the spirit of the world is tending to the
realisation of the state of things which these sects dream of or
prognosticate; in any case, however, I believe that many centuries
must elapse before that can be possible. It is given to no mortal
to estimate the progress of future centuries in discoveries and in
the condition of society. Even the mind of a Plato could not have
foretold that after the lapse of thousands of years the instruments
which do the work of society would be constructed of iron, steel,
and brass, nor could that of a Cicero have foreseen that the
printing press would render it possible to extend the
representative system over whole kingdoms, perhaps over whole
quarters of the globe, and over the entire human race. If meanwhile
it is given to only a few great minds to foresee a few instances of
the progress of future thousands of years, yet to every age is
assigned its own special task. But the task of the age in which we
live appears not to be to break up mankind into Fourrierist
'phalanstères,' in order to give each individual as nearly as
possible an equal share of mental and bodily enjoyments, but to
perfect the productive powers, the mental culture, the political
condition, and the power of whole nationalities, and by equalising
them in these respects as far as is possible, to prepare them
beforehand for universal union. For even if we admit that under the
existing circumstances of the world the immediate object which its
apostles had in view could be attained by each 'phalanstère,' what
would be its effect on the power and independence of the nation?
And would not the nation which was broken up into 'phalanstères,'
run the risk of being conquered by some less advanced nation which
continued to live in the old way, and of thus having its premature
institutions destroyed together with its entire nationality? At
present the Theory of Exchangeable Values has so completely lost
its influence, that it is almost exclusively occupied with
inquiries into the nature of Rent, and that Ricardo in his
'Principles of Political Economy' could write, 'The chief object of
political economy is to determine the laws by which the produce of
the soil ought to be shared between the landowner, the farmer, and
the labourer.'
    While some persons are firmly convinced that this science is
complete, and that nothing essential can further be added to it,
those, on the other hand, who read these writings with
philosophical or practical insight, maintain, that as yet there is
no political economy at all, that that science has yet to be
constructed; that until it is so, what goes by its name is merely
an astrology, but that it is both possible and desirable out of it
to produce an astronomy.
    Finally, we must remark, in order not to be misunderstood, that
our criticism of the writings alike of J. B. Say and of his
predecessors and successors refers only to their national and
international bearing; and that we recognise their value as
expositions of subordinate doctrines. It is evident that an author
may form very valuable views and inductions on individual branches
of a science, while all the while the basis of his system may be
entirely erroneous.

NOTES:

1. Louis Say, Etudes sur la Richesse des Nations, Preface, p. iv.

2. The following are the actual words of Louis Say (p. 10): 'La
richesse ne consiste pas dans les choses qui satisfont nos besoins
ou nos goûts, mais dans le pouvoir d'en jouir annuellement.' And
further (pp. 14 to 15): 'Le faux système mercantil, fondé sur la
richesse en métaux précieux, a été remplacé par un autre fondé sur
la richesse en vaieurs vénales ou échangeables, qui consiste à
n'évaiuer ce qui compose la richesse d'une nation que comme le fait
un marchand.' And (note, p. 14): 'L'école moderne qui refute le
système mercantil a elle-même créé un système qui lui-même doit
être appelé le système mercantil.'

3. Etudes sur la Richesse des Nations, p. 36 (quoting J. B. Say's
words): 'Que cette méthode était loin d'être bonne, mais que la
difficulté était d'en trouvor une meilleure.'

4. Say, Cours complet d'Economie politique pratique, vii. p. 378.


End
