






PART III



AS UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR







CHAPTER XV



LIFE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN--1857-1864



As I looked out upon the world during my childhood,

there loomed up within my little horizon certain

personages as ideals.  Foremost of these was the surpliced

clergyman of the parish.  So strong was my admiration

for him that my dear mother, during her entire life, never

relinquished the hope, and indeed the expectation, that I

would adopt the clerical profession.



Another object of my admiration--to whose profession

I aspired--was the village carpenter.  He ``did things,''

and from that day to this I have most admired the men

who ``do things.''



Yet another of these personages was the principal of

Cortland Academy.  As I saw him addressing his students,

or sitting in the midst of them observing with a telescope

the satellites of Jupiter, I was overawed.  A sense of my

littleness overcame me, and I hardly dared think of aspiring

to duties so exalted.



But at the age of seven a new ideal appeared.  The

family had removed from the little town where I was born

to Syracuse, then a rising village of about five thousand

inhabitants.  The railways, east and west, had just been

created,--the beginnings of what is now the New York

Central Railroad,--and every day, so far as possible, I

went down-town ``to see the cars go out.''  During a large

part of the year there was but one passenger-train in each

direction, and this was made up of but three or four small

compartment-cars drawn by a locomotive which would

now be considered ridiculously small, at the rate of twelve

to fifteen miles an hour.



Yet I doubt whether the express trains on the New York

Central, drawn by hundred-ton locomotives at a speed of

sixty miles an hour, produce on the youth of the present

generation anything like the impression made by those

simple beginnings.  The new personage who now attracted

my homage was the locomotive-driver.  To me his profession

transcended all others.  As he mounted the locomotive,

and especially as he pulled the starting-bar, all other

functions seemed insignificant.  Every day I contemplated

him; often I dreamed of him; saw him in my mind's

eye dashing through the dark night, through the rain and

hail, through drifting snow, through perils of ``wash-

outs'' and ``snake-heads,'' and no child in the middle ages

ever thought with more awe of a crusading knight leading

his troops to the Holy City than did I think of this hero

standing at his post in all weathers, conducting his train

to its destination beyond the distant hills.  It was indeed

the day of small things.  The traveler passing from New

York to Buffalo in those days changed from the steamer

at Albany to the train for Schenectady, there changed to

the train for Utica, thence took the train for Syracuse,

there stayed overnight, then took a train for Auburn,

where he found the train for Rochester, and after two more

changes arrived in Buffalo after a journey of two days

and a night, which is now made in from eight to ten hours.



But the locomotive-driver was none the less a personage,

and I must confess that my old feeling of respect for him

clings to me still.  To this hour I never see him controlling

his fiery steed without investing him with some of the

attributes which I discerned in him during my childhood. 

It is evident to me that the next heroes whom poets will

exploit will be the drivers of our railway trains and the pilots

of our ocean steamers.  One poet has, indeed, made a beginning

already,--and this poet the Secretary of State of the

United States under whom I am now serving, the Hon.

John Hay.  Still another poet, honored throughout the

world, has also found a hero in the engine-driver, and

Rudyard Kipling will no doubt be followed by others.



But my dream of becoming a locomotive-driver faded,

and while in college I speculated not a little as to what,

after all, should be my profession.  The idea of becoming

a clergyman had long since left my mind.  The medical

profession had never attracted me.  For the legal profession

I sought to prepare myself somewhat, but as I saw it

practised by the vast majority of lawyers, it seemed a

waste of all that was best in human life.  Politics were

from an early period repulsive to me, and, after my first

sight of Washington in its shabby, sleazy, dirty, unkempt

condition under the old slave oligarchy, political life

became absolutely repugnant to my tastes and desires.  At

times a longing came over me to settle down in the country,

to make an honest living from a farm--a longing

which took its origin in a visit which I had made as a child

to the farm of an uncle who lived upon the shores of

Seneca Lake.  He was a man of culture, who, by the aid

of a practical farmer and an income from other sources,

got along very well.  His roomy, old-fashioned house, his

pleasant library, his grounds sloping to the lake, his

peach-orchard, which at my visit was filled with delicious

fruit, and the pleasant paths through the neighboring

woods captivated me, and for several years the agricultural

profession lingered in my visions as the most attractive

of all.



As I now look back to my early manhood, it seems that

my natural inclination should have been toward journalism;

but although such a career proves attractive to many

of our best university-bred men now, it was not so then. 

In those days men did not prepare for it; they drifted

into it.  I do not think that at my graduation there was

one out of the one hundred and eight members of my class

who had the slightest expectation of permanently connecting

himself with a newspaper.  This seems all the more

singular since that class has since produced a large

number of prominent journalists, and among these George

Washburne Smalley, the most eminent, by far, among

American newspaper correspondents of our time; Evarts

Greene, a leading editor of Worcester; Delano Goddard,

late editor of the ``Boston Advertiser''; Kinsley Twining,

for a considerable time an editor of the ``Independent'';

Isaac Bromley, who for years delighted the Republican

party with his contributions to the editorial page of the

``Tribune''; Dr. James Morris Whiton, a leading writer

for the ``Outlook''; and others.  Yet in those days probably

not one of these ever thought of turning to journalism as

a career.  There were indeed at that time eminent editors,

like Weed, Croswell, Greeley, Raymond, and Webb, but

few college-bred men thought of journalism as a profession. 

Looking back upon all this, I feel certain that, were

I to begin life again with my present experience, that

would be the career for which I would endeavor to fit

myself.  It has in it at present many admirable men, but far

more who are manifestly unfit.  Its capacities for good or

evil are enormous, yet the majority of those at present in

it seem to me like savages who have found a watch.  I

can think of no profession in which young men properly

fitted--gifted with ideas and inspired by a real wish to do

something for their land and time--can more certainly do

good work and win distinction.  To supplant the present

race of journalistic prostitutes, who are making many of

our newspapers as foul in morals, as low in tone, and as

vile in utterance as even the worst of the French press,

might well be the ambition of leading thinkers in any of

our universities.  There is nothing so greatly needed in

our country as an uplifting of the daily press, and there

is no work promising better returns.



But during my student life in Paris and Berlin another

vista began to open before me.  I had never lost that

respect for the teaching profession which had been aroused

in my childhood by the sight of Principal Woolworth

enthroned among the students of Cortland Academy, and

this early impression was now greatly deepened by my

experience at the Sorbonne, the College of France, and the

University of Berlin.  My favorite studies at Yale had

been history and kindred subjects, but these had been

taught mainly from text-books.  Lectures were few and

dry.  Even those of President Woolsey were not inspiring;

he seemed paralyzed by the system of which he

formed a part.  But men like Arnould, St. Marc Girardin,

and Laboulaye in France, and Lepsius, Ritter, von Raumer,

and Curtius in Germany, lecturing to large bodies of

attentive students on the most interesting and instructive

periods of human history, aroused in me a new current of

ideas.  Gradually I began to ask myself the question:  Why

not help the beginnings of this system in the United States? 

I had long felt deeply the shortcomings of our American

universities, and had tried hard to devise something better;

yet my ideas as to what could really be done to improve

them had been crude and vague.  But now, in these great

foreign universities, one means of making a reform became

evident, and this was, first of all, the substitution of

lectures for recitations, and the creation of an interest

in history by treating it as a living subject having relations

to present questions.  Upon this I reflected much,

and day by day the idea grew upon me.  So far as I can

remember, there was not at that time a professor of history

pure and simple in any American university.  There

had been courses of historical lectures at a few institutions,

but they were, as a rule, spasmodic and perfunctory.  How

history was taught at Yale is shown in another chapter of

these reminiscences.  The lectures of President Sparks

had evidently trained up no school of historical professors

at Harvard.  There had been a noted professor at William

and Mary College, Virginia,--doubtless, in his time, the

best historical lecturer in the United States,--Dr. William

Dew, the notes of whose lectures, as afterward published,

were admirable; but he had left no successor.  Francis

Lieber, at the University of South Carolina, had taught

political philosophy with much depth of thought and

wealth of historical illustration; but neither there nor

elsewhere did there exist anything like systematic courses in

history such as have now been developed in so many of

our universities and colleges.



During my stay as resident graduate at Yale after my

return from Europe in 1856, I often discussed the subject

with my old friend and companion Gilman, now president

of the Carnegie Institution, and with my beloved instructor,

Professor Porter.  Both were kind enough to urge me

to remain at New Haven, assuring me that in time a

professorship would be established.  To promote this I wrote an

article on ``German Instruction in General History,''

which was well received when published in the ``New

Englander,'' and prepared sundry lectures, which were

received by the university people and by the New York press

more favorably than I now think they deserved.  But there

seemed, after all, no chance for a professorship devoted to

this line of study.  More and more, too, I felt that even if I

were called to a historical professorship at Yale, the old-

fashioned orthodoxy which then prevailed must fetter me:

I could not utter the shibboleths then demanded, and the

future seemed dark indeed.  Yet my belief in the value

of better historical instruction in our universities grew

more and more, and a most happy impulse was now given

to my thinking by a book which I read and reread--

Stanley's ``Life of Arnold.''  It showed me much, but

especially two things: first, how effective history might

be made in bringing young men into fruitful trains of

thought regarding present politics; and, secondly, how

real an influence an earnest teacher might thus exercise

upon his country.



While in this state of mind I met my class assembled at

the Yale commencement of 1856 to take the master's

degree in course, after the manner of those days.  This was

the turning-point with me.  I had been for some time more

and more uneasy and unhappy because my way did not

seem to clear; but at this commencement of 1856, while

lounging among my classmates in the college yard, I heard

some one say that President Wayland of Brown University

was addressing the graduates in the Hall of the Alumni. 

Going to the door, I looked in, and saw at the high table an

old man, strong-featured, heavy-browed, with spectacles

resting on the top of his head, and just at that moment he

spoke very impressively as follows:  ``The best field of

work for graduates is now in the WEST; our country is

shortly to arrive at a switching-off place for good or evil;

our Western States are to hold the balance of power in

the Union, and to determine whether the country shall

become a blessing or a curse in human history.''



I had never seen him before; I never saw him afterward. 

His speech lasted less than ten minutes, but it settled a

great question for me.  I went home and wrote to sundry

friends that I was a candidate for the professorship of

history in any Western college where there was a chance

to get at students, and as a result received two calls--one

to a Southern university, which I could not accept on

account of my anti-slavery opinions; the other to the

University of Michigan, which I accepted.  My old college friends

were kind enough to tender me later the professorship in

the new School of Art at Yale, but my belief was firm in

the value of historical studies.  The words of Wayland

rang in my ears, and I went gladly into the new field.



On arriving at the University of Michigan in October,

1857, although I had much to do with other students, I took

especial charge of the sophomore class.  It included many

young men of ability and force, but had the reputation of

being the most unmanageable body which had been known

there in years.  Thus far it had been under the charge of

tutors, and it had made life a burden to them.  Its preparation

for the work I sought to do was wretchedly imperfect. 

Among my duties was the examination of entrance

classes in modern geography as a preliminary to their

admission to my course in history, and I soon discovered a

serious weakness in the public-school system.  In her

preparatory schools the State of Michigan took especial

pride, but certainly at that time they were far below

their reputation.  If any subject was supposed to be

thoroughly taught in them it was geography, but I soon

found that in the great majority of my students there was

not a trace of real knowledge of physical geography and

very little of political.  With this state of things I at once

grappled, and immediately ``conditioned'' in these studies

about nine tenths of the entering class.  At first there were

many protests; but I said to my ingenuous youths that no

pedantic study was needed, that all I required was a preparation

such as would enable any one of them to read intelligently

his morning newspaper, and to this end I advised

each one of them to accept his conditions, to abjure all

learning by rote from text-books, to take up simply any

convenient atlas which came to hand, studying first the

map of our own country, with its main divisions, physical

and political, its water communications, trend of coasts,

spurring of mountains, positions of leading cities, etc., and

then to do the same thing with each of the leading countries

of Europe, and finally with the other main divisions

of the world.  To stimulate their interest and show them

what was meant, I gave a short course of lectures on

physical geography, showing some of its more striking

effects on history; then another course on political

geography, with a similar purpose; and finally notified my

young men that they were admitted to my classes in history

only under condition that, six weeks later, they should

pass an examination in geography, full, satisfactory, and

final.  The young fellows now took their conditions very

kindly, for they clearly saw the justice of them.  One

young man said to me:  ``Professor, you are entirely right

in conditioning me, but I was never so surprised in my

life; if there was anything which I supposed I knew well

it was geography; why, I have taught it, and very successfully,

in a large public school.''  On my asking him how he

taught a subject in which he was so deficient, he answered

that he had taught his pupils to ``sing'' it.  I replied that if

he would sing the answers to my questions, I would admit

him at once; but this he declined, saying that he much

preferred to accept the conditions.  In about six weeks I held

the final examinations, and their success amazed us all. 

Not a man failed, and some really distinguished themselves. 

They had all gone at the work cordially and heartily,

arranging themselves in squads and clubs for mutual

study and examination on each physical and political map;

and it is certain that by this simple, common-sense method

they learned more in six weeks than they had previously

learned in years of plodding along by rote, day after day

through text-books.



Nor was this mere ``cram.''  Their geographical

knowledge lasted and was increased, as was proved at my

historical examinations afterward.



I soon became intensely interested in my work, and

looked forward to it every day with pleasure.  The first

part of it was instruction in modern history as a basis for

my lectures which were to follow, and for this purpose I

used with the sophomores two text-books.  The first of

these was Robertson's ``Philosophical View of the Middle

Ages,'' which forms the introduction to his ``Life of

Charles the Fifth.''  Although superseded in many of

its parts by modern investigation, very defective in

several important matters, and in some things--as, for

example, in its appreciation of medieval literature--entirely

mistaken, it was, when written one hundred years ago,

recognized as a classic, and it remains so to this day.  It

was a work of genius.  Supplemented by elucidations and

extensions, it served an admirable purpose in introducing

my students to the things really worth knowing in modern

history, without confusing them with masses of pedantic

detail.



The next text-book which I took up was Dr. John Lord's

``Modern History,'' the same which President Woolsey

had used with my class during its senior year at Yale.  It

was imperfect in every respect, with no end of gaps and

errors, but it had one real merit--it interested its readers. 

It was, as every such work ought to be, largely biographic. 

There was enthusiasm, a sort of ``go,'' in Dr. Lord, and

this quality he had communicated to his book, so that, with

all its faults, it formed the best basis then obtainable for

further instruction.  Its omissions and errors I sought to

rectify--as Woolsey, I am sorry to say, had never done to

any extent--by offhand talks and by pointing out supplementary

reading, such as sundry chapters of Gibbon and

Hallam, essays by Macaulay, extracts from Lingard,

Ranke, Prescott, Motley, and others.  Once a fortnight

through the winter, the class assembled at my house

socially, ``the more attractive young women of the little city

being invited to meet them; but the social part was always

preceded by an hour and a half's reading of short passages

from eminent historians or travelers, bearing on our classroom

work during the previous fortnight.  These passages

were read by students whom I selected for the

purpose, and they proved useful from the historical,

literary, and social point of view.



For the class next above, the juniors, I took for textbook

preparation Guizot's ``History of Civilization in

Europe''--a book tinged with the doctrinairism of its

author, but a work of genius; a GREAT work, stimulating

new trains of thought, and opening new vistas of

knowledge.  This, with sundry supplementary talks, and with

short readings from Gibbon, Thierry, Guizot's ``History

of Civilization in France,'' and Sir James Stephen's

``Lectures on French History,'' served an excellent purpose.



Nor was the use of Guizot's book entirely confined to

historical purposes.  Calling attention to the Abb<e'>

Bautain's little book on extemporaneous speaking, as the best

treatise on the subject I had ever seen, I reminded my

students that these famous lectures of Guizot, which had

opened a new epoch in modern historical investigation and

instruction, were given, as regards phrasing, extemporaneously,

but that, as regards matter, they were carefully

prepared beforehand, having what Bautain calls a ``self-

developing order''; and I stated that I would allow any

member of my class who might volunteer for the purpose

to give, in his own phrasing, the substance of an entire

lecture.  For a young man thus to stand up and virtually

deliver one of Guizot's lectures required great concentration

of thought and considerable facility in expression, but

several students availed themselves of the permission, and

acquitted themselves admirably.  This seemed to me an

excellent training for effective public speaking, and

several of my old students, who have since distinguished

themselves in public life, have confessed to me that they

found it so.



My next and highest duty was giving lectures to the

senior class and students from the law school.  Into this

I threw myself heartily, and soon had the satisfaction of

seeing my large lecture-room constantly full.  The first

of these courses was on the ``Development of Civilization

during the Middle Ages''; and, as I followed the logical

rather than the chronological order,--taking up the subject,

not by a recital of events, but by a discussion of

epochs and subjects,--I thought it best to lecture without

manuscript or even notes.  This was, for me, a bold

venture.  I had never before attempted anything in the way

of extended extemporaneous speaking; and, as I entered

the old chapel of the university for my first lecture, and

saw it full of students of all classes, I avowed my trepidation

to President Tappan, who, having come to introduce

me, was seated by my side.  He was an admirable

extemporaneous speaker in the best sense, and he then and there

gave me a bit of advice which proved of real value.  He

said:  ``Let me, as an old hand, tell you one thing: never

stop dead; keep saying something.''  This course of lectures

was followed by others on modern history, one of

these being on ``German History from the Revival of

Learning and the Reformation to Modern Times,''

another on ``French History from the Consolidation of the

Monarchy to the French Revolution,'' and still another on

the ``French Revolution.''  To this latter course I gave

special attention, the foundation having been laid for it

in France, where I had visited various interesting places

and talked with interesting men who recalled events and

people of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic periods.  For

a text-book foundation I read with my lower classes

Mignet's ``History of the Revolution,'' which still

remained what Carlyle pronounced it--the best short summary

of that great period.



To further the work of my students in the lecture-room,

I published an interleaved syllabus of each course, and

was, I think, the first person in our country who ever did

this in connection with historical lectures.  It is a matter

of wonder to me that so few professors in these days resort

to this simple means of strengthening their instruction. 

It ought to be required by university statutes.  It seems

to me indispensable to anything like thorough work.  A

syllabus, properly interleaved, furnishes to a student by

far the best means of taking notes on each lecture, as well

as of reviewing the whole course afterward, and to a professor

the best means of testing the faithfulness of his

students.  As regards myself personally, there came to

me from my syllabus an especial advantage; for, as I have

shown in my political experiences, it gained for me the

friendship of Charles Sumner.



I have stated elsewhere that my zeal in teaching history

was by no means the result of a mere liking for that field

of thought.  Great as was my love for historical studies,

there was something I prized far more--and that was the

opportunity to promote a better training in thought

regarding our great national problems then rapidly

approaching solution, the greatest of all being the question

between the supporters and opponents of slavery.



In order that my work might be fairly well based, I had,

during my college days and my first stay abroad, begun

collecting the private library which has added certainly

to the pleasures, and probably to the usefulness, of my

life.  Books which are now costly rarities could then be

bought in the European capitals for petty sums.  There

is hardly any old European city which has not been, at

some time, one of my happy hunting-grounds in the chase

for rare books bearing upon history; even now, when

my collection, of which the greater part has been trans-

ferred to Cornell University, numbers not far short of

forty thousand volumes, the old passion still flames up at

times; and during the inditing of this chapter I have

secured two series of manuscripts of very great value in

illustrating the evolution of modern civilization.  My reason

for securing such original material was not the desire

to possess rarities and curiosities.  I found that passages

actually read from important originals during my lectures

gave a reality and vividness to my instruction which were

otherwise unattainable.  A citation of the ipsissima verba

of Erasmus, or Luther, or Melanchthon, or Peter Canisius,

or Louis XIV, or Robespierre, or Marat, interested my

students far more than any quotation at second hand could

do.  No rhetoric could impress on a class the real spirit

and strength of the middle ages as could one of my

illuminated psalters or missals; no declamation upon the

boldness of Luther could impress thinking young men as

did citations from his ``Erfurt Sermon,'' which, by weakening

his safe-conduct, put him virtually at the mercy of

his enemies at the Diet of Worms; no statements as to the

fatuity of Robespierre could equal citations from an original

copy of his ``Report on the Moral and Religious

Considerations which Ought to Govern the Republic''; all

specifications of the folly of Marat paled before the

ravings in the original copies of his newspaper, ``L'Ami

du Peuple''; no statistics regarding the paper-money

craze in France could so impress its actuality on students

as did the seeing and handling of French revolutionary

assignats and mandats, many of them with registration

numbers clearly showing the enormous quantities of this

currency then issued; no illustration, at second hand,

of the methods of the French generals during the

Revolutionary period could produce the impression given

by a simple exhibition of the broadsides issued by the

proconsuls of that period; no description of the collapse

of the triumvirate and the Reign of Terror could

equal a half-hour's reading from the ``Moniteur'';

and all accounts of the Empire were dim compared

to grandiose statements read from the original bulletins

of Napoleon.



In this way alone can history be made real to students. 

Both at my lectures and in the social gatherings at my

house, I laid out for my classes the most important originals

bearing upon their current work; and it was no small

pleasure to point out the relations of these to the events

which had formed the subject of our studies together.  I

say ``our studies together,'' because no one of my students

studied more hours than myself.  They stimulated me

greatly.  Most of them were very near my own age; several

were older.  As a rule, they were bright, inquiring,

zealous, and among them were some of the best minds I

have ever known.  From among them have since come

senators, members of Congress, judges, professors,

lawyers, heads of great business enterprises, and foreign

ministers.  One of them became my successor in the

professorship in the University of Michigan and the

presidency of Cornell, and, in one field, the leading American

historian of his time.  Another became my predecessor in

the embassy to Germany.  Though I had what might be

fairly called ``a good start'' of these men, it was necessary

to work hard to maintain my position; but such labor was

then pleasure.



Nor was my work confined to historical teaching.  After

the fashion of that time, I was called upon to hear the

essays and discussions of certain divisions of the upper

classes.  This demanded two evenings a week through two

terms in each year, and on these evenings I joyfully went

to my lecture-room, not infrequently through drifts of

snow, and, having myself kindled the fire and lighted the

lamps, awaited the discussion.  This subsidiary work,

which in these degenerate days is done by janitors, is

mentioned here as showing the simplicity of a bygone

period.  The discussions thus held were of a higher range

than any I had known at Yale, and some were decidedly

original.  One deserves especial mention.  A controversy

having arisen in Massachusetts and spread throughout the

country regarding the erection of a statue of Daniel Webster


in front of the State House at Boston, and bitter opposition

having been aroused by his seventh-of-March

speech, two groups of my student-disputants agreed to

take up this subject and model their speeches upon those

of Demosthenes and Aeschines on the crown, which they

were then reading in the original.  It was a happy thought,

and well carried out.







CHAPTER XVI



UNIVERSITY LIFE IN THE WEST--1857-1864





It must be confessed that all was not plain sailing

in my new position.  One difficulty arose from my

very youthful, not to say boyish, appearance.  I was,

indeed, the youngest member of the faculty; but at

twenty-four years one has the right to be taken for a

man, and it was vexatious to be taken for a youth of

seventeen.  At my first arrival in the university town

I noticed, as the train drew up to the station, a number

of students, evidently awaiting the coming of such

freshmen as might be eligible to the various fraternities;

and, on landing, I was at once approached by a sophomore,

who asked if I was about to enter the university.  For an

instant I was grievously abashed, but pulling myself

together, answered in a sort of affirmative way; and at this

he became exceedingly courteous, taking pains to pilot me

to a hotel, giving me much excellent advice, and even

insisting on carrying a considerable amount of my baggage. 

Other members of fraternities joined us, all most courteous

and kind, and the d<e'>nouement came only at the

registration of my name in the hotel book, when they

recognized in me ``the new professor.''  I must say to

their credit that, although they were for a time laughed

at throughout the university, they remained my warm

personal friends.



But after I had discharged the duties of my professorship

for a considerable period, this same difficulty existed. 

On a shooting excursion, an old friend and myself came,

and, being very hungry, asked for bread and milk.  My

companion being delayed outside, cleaning the guns, the

farmer's wife left me and went out to talk with him.  I

continued eating my bread and milk voraciously, and

shortly afterward they entered, he laughing heartily and

she looking rather shamefaced.  On my asking the cause

he declined for a time to state it, but at length said that

she had come out to warn him that if he did not come in

pretty soon ``that boy would eat up all the bread and milk

in the house.''  This story leaked out, and even appeared

in a local paper, but never, I think, did me any harm.



Another occurrence, shortly afterward, seemed likely

for a time to be more serious.  The sophomore class,

exuberant and inventive as ever, were evidently determined

to ``try it on'' their young professor--in fact, to treat me

as they had treated their tutors.  Any mistake made by a

student at a quiz elicited from sundry benches expressions

of regret much too plaintive, or ejaculations of contempt

much too explosive; and from these and various similar

demonstrations which grew every day among a certain set

in my class-room, it was easy to see that a trial of strength

must soon come, and it seemed to me best to force the

fighting.  Looking over these obstreperous youths I noticed

one tall, black-bearded man with a keen twinkle in his eye,

who was evidently the leader.  There was nothing in him

especially demonstrative.  He would occasionally nod in

this direction, or wink in that, or smile in the other; but

he was solemn when others were hilarious, unconcerned

when others applauded.  It was soon clear to me that in

him lay the key to the situation, and one day, at the close

of the examination, I asked him to remain.  When we were

alone I said to him, in an easy-going way, ``So, F----, I

see that either you or I must leave the university.''  He

at once bristled up, feigned indignation, and said that he

could not understand me.  This I pooh-poohed, saying that

we understood each other perfectly; that I had been only

recently a student myself; that, if the growing trouble in

the class continued, either he or I must give it up, and

added, ``I believe the trustees will prefer your departure to

mine.''  At this he protested that he had made no

demonstrations, to which I answered that if I put him on his

honor he would not deny that he was the real center of

the difficulty; that the others were, comparatively, men of

small account; and that, with him gone, the backbone of

the whole difficulty would be broken.  He seemed

impressed by this view--possibly he was not wholly

displeased at the importance it gave him; and finally he

acknowledged that perhaps he had been rather foolish, and

suggested that we try to live together a little longer.  I

answered cordially, we shook hands at parting, and there

was never any trouble afterward.  I soon found what sort

of questions interested him most, took especial pains to

adapt points in my lectures to his needs, and soon had no

stronger friend in the university.



But his activity finally found a less fortunate outcome. 

A year or two afterward came news of a terrible affair in

the university town.  A student was lying dead at the

coroner's rooms, and on inquiry it was found that his

death was the result of a carousal in which my friend F----

was a leading spirit.  Eight men were concerned, of

whom four were expelled--F---- being one--and four suspended. 

On leaving, he came to me and thanked me most

heartily for what I had done for him, said that the action

of the faculty was perfectly just, that no other course was

open to us, but that he hoped yet to show us all that he

could make a man of himself.  He succeeded.  Five years

later he fell as a general at the head of his brigade at

Gettysburg.



In addition to my regular work at the university, I

lectured frequently in various cities throughout Michigan

and the neighboring States.  It was the culminating period

of the popular-lecture system, and through the winter

months my Friday and Saturday evenings were generally

given to this sort of duty.  It was, after its fashion, what

in these days is called ``university extension''; indeed, the

main purpose of those members of the faculty thus

invited to lecture was to spread the influence of the

university.  But I received from the system more than I gave to

it; for it gave me not only many valuable acquaintances

throughout the West, but it brought to Ann Arbor the best

men then in the field, among them such as Emerson, Curtis,

Whipple, Wendell Phillips, Carl Schurz, Moncure

Conway, Bayard Taylor, and others noted then, but, alas,

how few of them remembered now!  To have them by my

fireside and at my table was one of the greatest pleasures

of a professorial life.  It was at the beginning of my

housekeeping; and under my roof on the university

grounds we felt it a privilege to welcome these wise men

from the East, and to bring the faculty and students into

closer relations with them.



As regards the popular-lecture pulpit, my main wish

was to set people thinking on various subjects, and

especially regarding slavery and ``protection.''  This

presently brought a storm upon me.  Some years before there

had settled in the university town a thin, vociferous lawyer,

past his prime, but not without ideas and force.  He

had for many years been a department subordinate at

Washington; but, having accumulated some money, he had

donned what was then known as senatorial costume--

namely, a blue swallow-tailed coat, and a buff vest, with

brass buttons--and coming to this little Michigan town

he had established a Whig paper, which afterward became

Republican.  He was generally credited, no doubt justly,

with a determination to push himself into the United

States Senate; but this determination was so obvious that

people made light of it, and he never received the honor

of a nomination to that or any other position.  The main

burden of his editorials was the greatness of Henry Clay,

and the beauties of a protective tariff, his material being

largely drawn from a book he had published some years

before; and, on account of the usual form of his arguments,

he was generally referred to, in the offhand Western

way, as ``Old Statistics.''



In a public lecture based upon my Russian experiences,

I had incidentally attacked paternal government, and

especially such developments of it as tariffs for protection. 

The immediate result was a broadside from this

gentleman's paper, and this I answered in an article which

was extensively copied throughout the State.  At this he

evidently determined to crush this intruder upon his

domain.  That an ``upstart''--a ``mere school-teacher''--

should presume to reply to a man like himself, who had

sat at the feet of Henry Clay, and was old enough to be

my father, was monstrous presumption; but that a professor

in the State university of a commonwealth largely

Republican should avow free-trade opinions was akin to

treason, and through twelve successive issues of his

paper he lashed me in all the moods and tenses.  As these

attacks soon became scurrilous, I made no reply to any

after the first; but his wrath was increased when he saw

my reply quoted by the press throughout the State and his

own diatribes neglected.  Among his more serious charges

I remember but one, and this was that I had evidently

come into the State as a secret emissary of Van Burenism. 

But I recalled the remark of my enemy's idol, Henry

Clay, to the effect that no one should ever reply to an

attack by an editor, a priest, or a woman, since each of

them is sure to have the last word.  This feeling was soon

succeeded by indifference; for my lecture-rooms, both at

the university and throughout the State, were more and

more frequented, and it became clear that my opponent's

attacks simply advertised me.  The following year I had

my revenge.  From time to time debates on current topics

were held at the city hall, the participants being generally

young professional men; but, the subject of a tariff for

protection having been announced, my old enemy declared,

several weeks beforehand, his intention of taking part in

the discussion.  Among my students that winter was one

of the most gifted young scholars and speakers I have

ever known.  Not long after his graduation he was sent

to the United States Senate from one of the more important

Western States, and nothing but his early death

prevented his attaining a national reputation.  He was a man

of convictions, strong and skilful in impressing them upon

his hearers, of fine personal appearance, with a pleasing

voice, and in every way fitted to captivate an audience. 

Him I selected as the David who was to punish the

protectionist Goliath.  He had been himself a protectionist,

having read Greeley's arguments in the ``New York

Tribune,'' but he had become a convert to my views, and

day after day and week after week I kept him in training

on the best expositions of free trade, and, above all, on

Bastiat's ``Sophisms of Protection.''  On the appointed

evening the city hall was crowded, and my young David

having modestly taken a back seat, the great Goliath

appeared at the front in full senatorial costume, furbished

up for the occasion, with an enormous collection of books

and documents; and, the subject being announced, he arose,

assumed his most imposing senatorial attitude, and began

a dry, statistical oration.  His manner was harsh, his

matter wearisome; but he plodded on through an hour

--and then my David arose.  He was at his best.  In

five minutes he had the audience fully with him.  Every

point told.  From time to time the house shook with

applause; and at the close of the debate, a vote of the meeting

being taken after the usual fashion in such assemblies, my

old enemy was left in a ridiculous minority.  Not only

free-traders, but even protectionists voted against him. 

As he took himself very seriously, he was intensely

mortified, and all the more so when he learned from one of my

students that I now considered that we were ``even.''[4]





[4] The causes of my change of views on the question of

``protection'' are given in my political reminiscences.





The more I threw myself into the work of the university

the more I came to believe in the ideas on which it was

founded, and to see that it was a reality embodying many

things of which I had previously only dreamed.  Up to

that time the highest institutions of learning in the United

States were almost entirely under sectarian control.  Even

the University of Virginia, which Thomas Jefferson had

founded as a center of liberal thought, had fallen under

the direction of sectarians, and among the great majority

of the Northern colleges an unwritten law seemed to

require that a university president should be a clergyman. 

The instruction in the best of these institutions was, as I

have shown elsewhere, narrow, their methods outworn,

and the students, as a rule, confined to one simple, single,

cast-iron course, in which the great majority of them took

no interest.  The University of Michigan had made a

beginning of something better.  The president was Dr.

Henry Philip Tappan, formerly a Presbyterian clergyman,

a writer of repute on philosophical subjects, a strong

thinker, an impressive orator, and a born leader of men,

who, during a visit to Europe, had been greatly impressed

by the large and liberal system of the German universities,

and had devoted himself to urging a similar system

in our own country.  On the Eastern institutions--save,

possibly, Brown--he made no impression.  Each of them

was as stagnant as a Spanish convent, and as self-satisfied

as a Bourbon duchy; but in the West he attracted

supporters, and soon his ideas began to show themselves

effective in the State university over which he had been

called to preside.



The men he summoned about him were, in the main,

admirably fitted to aid him.  Dearest of all to me, though

several years my senior, was Henry Simmons Frieze,

professor of Latin.  I had first met him at the University of

Berlin, had then traveled with him through Germany and

Italy, and had found him one of the most charming men

I had ever met--simple, modest, retiring to a fault, yet a

delightful companion and a most inspiring teacher.  There

was in him a combination which at first seemed singular;

but experience has since shown me that it is by no means

unnatural, for he was not only an ideal professor of Latin,

but a gifted musician.  The first revelation of this latter

quality was made to me in a manner which showed his

modesty.  One evening during our student days at Berlin,

at a reception given by the American minister of that

period,--Governor Vroom of New Jersey,--I heard the

sound of music coming from one of the more distant

apartments.  It was a sonata of Beethoven, wonderfully

interpreted, showing not only skill but deep feeling.  On

my asking my neighbors who the performer might be,

no one seemed to know, until, at last, some one suggested

that it might be Professor Frieze.  I made my way through

the crowd toward the room from which the sounds came,

but before arriving there the music had ended; and when I

met the professor shortly afterward, and asked him if he

had been the musician, his reply was so modest and evasive

that I thought the whole thing a mistake and said nothing

more about it.  On our way to Italy some months

later, I observed that, as we were passing through Bohemia,

he jotted down in his note-book the quaint songs of the

peasants and soldiers, and a few weeks later still he gave an

exhibition of his genius.  Sitting down one evening at the

piano on the little coasting steamer between Genoa and

Civit<a!> Vecchia, he began playing, and though it has

been my good fortune to hear all the leading pianists

of my time, I have never heard one who seemed to interpret

the masterpieces of music more worthily.  At Ann Arbor

I now came to know him intimately.  Once or twice a

week he came to my house, and, as mine was the only grand

piano in the town, he enjoyed playing upon it.  His

extemporizations were flights of genius.  At these gatherings

he was inspired by two other admirable musicians, one

being my dear wife, and the other Professor Brunnow, the

astronomer.  Nothing could be more delightful than their

interpretations together of the main works of Beethoven

Handel, Mozart, Haydn, Weber, and other masters.  On

one of these evenings, when I happened to speak of the

impression made upon me at my first hearing of a choral

in a German church, Frieze began playing Luther's hymn,

``Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott,'' throwing it into all

forms and keys, until we listened to his improvisations

in a sort of daze which continued until nearly midnight. 

Next day, at St. Andrew's Church, he, as usual, had charge

of the organ.  Into his opening voluntary he wove the

music of the preceding evening, the ``Feste Burg''; it

ran through all the chants of the morning service; it

pervaded the accompaniment to the hymns; it formed the

undertone of all the interludes; it was not relinquished

until the close of the postlude.  And the same was true of

the afternoon service.  I have always insisted that, had he

lived in Germany, he would have been a second Beethoven. 

This will seem a grossly exaggerated tribute, but I do not

hesitate to maintain it.  So passionately was he devoted

to music that at times he sent his piano away from his

house in order to shun temptation to abridge his professorial

work, and especially was this the case when he was

preparing his edition of Vergil.  A more lovely spirit

never abode in mortal frame.  No man was ever more

generally beloved in a community; none, more lamented at

his death.  The splendid organ erected as a memorial to

him in the great auditorium of the university; the noble

monument which his students have placed over his grave;

his portrait, which hangs in one of the principal rooms;

the society which commemorates his name--all combine

to show how deeply he was respected and beloved.



Entwined also with my happiest recollections is Brunnow,

professor of astronomy and director of the observatory. 

His eminence in his department was widely recognized,

as was shown when he was afterward made

director of the Dudley Observatory at Albany, N. Y., and,

finally, astronomer royal of Ireland.  His musical abilities,

in connection with those of Frieze, aided to give a delightful

side to this period of my life.  There was in him a quiet

simplicity which led those who knew him best to love him

most, but it occasionally provoked much fun among the

students.  On one occasion, President Tappan, being

suddenly called out of town, requested Brunnow, who had

married his daughter and was an inmate of his family, to

find some member of the faculty to take his place at

morning prayers next day.  Thereupon Brunnow visited sev-

eral professors, his first question to each of them being,

with his German use of the consonants, ``Professor, can

you BRAY?'' and henceforward this was added to the many

standing jokes upon him in the student world.



I also found at the university other admirable men, and

among those to whom I became specially attached was

Thomas M. Cooley.  When he had become chief justice

of the State, and the most eminent writer of his time on the

Constitution of the United States, he was still the same

man, gentle, simple, and kindly.  Besides these were

such well-known professors as Fasquelle in modern

literature; Williams, Douglass, and Winchell in science;

Boise in Greek; Palmer, Sager, and Gunn in medicine

and surgery; Campbell and Walker in law.  Of these

Judge Campbell was to me one of the main attractions

of the place--a profound lawyer, yet with a kindly humor

which lighted up all about him.  He was especially interested

in the early French history of the State, to which he

had been drawn by his study of the titles to landed property

in Detroit and its neighborhood, and some of his discoveries

were curious.  One of these had reference to an

island in the straits near Detroit known as ``Skillagalee,''

which had puzzled him a long time.  The name seemed to be

Irish, and the question was how an Irish name could have

been thus applied.  Finally he found on an old map an earlier

name.  It was <I^>le aus Galets, or Pebble Island, which, in

the mouths of Yankee sailors, had taken this apparently

Celtic form.  Another case was that of a river in Canada

emptying into the straits not far from Detroit.  It was

known as ``Yellow Dog River''; but, on rummaging

through the older maps, he discovered that the earlier

name was River St. John.  To account for the transformation

was at first difficult, but the mystery was finally

unraveled: the Rivi<e!>re St. Jean became, in the Canadian

patois, Rivi<e!>re Saan Jawne, and gradually Rivi<e!>re Chien

Jaune; recent geographers had simply translated it into

English.



The features which mainly distinguished the University

of Michigan from the leading institutions of the East

were that it was utterly unsectarian, that various courses

of instruction were established, and that options were

allowed between them.  On these accounts that university

holds a most important place in the history of American

higher education; for it stands practically at the beginning

of the transition from the old sectarian college to the

modern university, and from the simple, single, cast-iron

course to the form which we now know, in which various

courses are presented, with free choice between them.  The

number of students was about five hundred, and the faculty

corresponded to these in numbers.  Now that the

university includes over four thousand students, with a

faculty in proportion, those seem the days of small

things; but to me at that period it was all very grand.  It

seemed marvelous that there were then very nearly as

many students at the University of Michigan as at Yale;

and, as a rule, they were students worth teaching--hardy,

vigorous, shrewd, broad, with faith in the greatness of

the country and enthusiasm regarding the nation's future. 

It may be granted that there was, in many of them, a

lack of elegance, but there was neither languor nor

cynicism.  One seemed, among them, to breathe a purer,

stronger air.  Over the whole institution Dr. Tappan

presided, and his influence, both upon faculty and students,

was, in the main, excellent.  He sympathized heartily with

the work of every professor, allowed to each great liberty,

yet conducted the whole toward the one great end of

developing a university more and more worthy of our

country.  His main qualities were of the best.  Nothing

could be better than his discussions of great questions of

public policy and of education.  One of the noblest

orations I have ever heard was an offhand speech of his on

receiving for the university museum a cast of the Laoco<o:>n

from the senior class; yet this speech was made without

preparation, and in the midst of engrossing labor.  He

often showed, not only the higher qualities required in a

position like his, but a remarkable shrewdness and tact in

dealing with lesser questions.  Typical was one example,

which taught me much when, in after years, I was called

to similar duties at Cornell.  The present tower and chime

of the University of Michigan did not then exist; between

the two main buildings on the university grounds there

was simply a wooden column, bearing a bell of moderate

size, which was rung at every lecture-hour by the principal

janitor.  One cold winter night those of us living in the

immediate neighborhood heard the sound of axe-strokes. 

Presently there came a crash, and all was still.  Next

morning, at the hour for chapel, no bell was rung; it

was found that the column had been cut down and the bell

carried off.  A president of less shrewdness would have

declaimed to the students on the enormity of such a

procedure, and have accentuated his eloquence with threats. 

Not so Dr. Tappan.  At the close of the morning prayers

he addressed the students humorously.  There was a great

attendance, for all wished to know how he would deal

with the affair.  Nothing could be better than his matter

and manner.  He spoke somewhat on this wise:  ``Gentlemen,

there has doubtless been a mistake in the theory of

some of you regarding the college bell.  It would seem

that some have believed that if the bell were destroyed,

time would cease, and university exercises would be

suspended.  But, my friends, time goes on as ever, without

the bell as with it; lectures and exercises of every sort

continue, of course, as usual.  The only thing which has

occurred is that some of you have thought it best to

dispense with the aid in keeping time which the regents of

the university have so kindly given you.  Knowing that

large numbers of you were not yet provided with watches,

the regents very thoughtfully provided the bell, and a man

to ring it for you at the proper hours; and they will doubtless

be pleased to learn that you at last feel able to dispense

with it, and save them the expense of maintaining

it.  You are trying an interesting experiment.  In most

of the leading European universities, students get along

perfectly without a bell; why should we not?  In the interests 

of the finances of the university, I am glad to see

you trying this experiment, and will only suggest that it

be tried thoroughly.  Of course the rolls will be called in the

lecture-rooms promptly, as usual, and you will, of course,

be present.  If the experiment succeeds, it will enable us

to dispense with a university bell forever; but if, after a

suitable time, you decide that it is better to have the bell

back again to remind you of the hours, and if you will make

a proper request to the regents through me, I trust that

they will allow you to restore it to its former position.''



The students were greatly amused to see the matter

taken in this way.  They laughingly acknowledged themselves

outwitted, and greeted the doctor's speech with applause. 

All of the faculty entered into the spirit of the

matter; rolls were called perhaps rather more promptly

than formerly, and students not present were marked

rather more mercilessly than of old.  There was evidently

much reluctance on their part to ask for excuses, in view

of the fact that they had themselves abolished the bell

which had enabled them to keep the time; and one morning,

about a month or six weeks later, after chapel, a big

jolly student rose and asked permission to make a motion. 

This motion was that the president of the university be

requested to allow the students to restore the bell to its

former position.  The proposal was graciously received by

the doctor, put by him after the usual parliamentary manner,

carried unanimously, and, a few mornings later, the

bell was found in its old place on a new column, was rung

as usual, and matters went on after the old fashion.



Every winter Dr. Tappan went before the legislature

to plead the cause of the university, and to ask for

appropriations.  He was always heard with pleasure, since he

was an excellent speaker; but certain things militated

against him.  First of all, he had much to say of the

excellent models furnished by the great German universities,

and especially by those of Prussia.  This gave demagogues

in the legislature, anxious to make a reputation in

buncombe, a great chance.  They orated to the effect that

we wanted an American and not a Prussian system.  Moreover,

some unfortunate legends were developed.  Mrs.

Tappan, a noble and lovely woman belonging to the

Livingston family, had been brought up in New York and

New England, and could hardly suppress her natural

preference for her old home and friends.  A story grew

that in an assembly of Michigan ladies she once remarked

that the doctor and herself considered themselves as

``missionaries to the West.''  This legend spread far and

wide.  It was resented, and undoubtedly cost the doctor dear.



The worst difficulty by far which he had to meet was the

steady opposition of the small sectarian colleges scattered

throughout the State.  Each, in its own petty interest,

dreaded the growth of any institution better than itself;

each stirred the members of the legislature from its locality

to oppose all aid to the State university; each, in its

religious assemblages, its synods, conferences, and the

like, sought to stir prejudice against the State institution

as ``godless.''  The result was that the doctor, in spite of

his eloquent speeches, became the butt of various wretched

demagogues in the legislature, and he very rarely secured

anything in the way of effective appropriations.  The

university had been founded by a grant of public lands from

the United States to Michigan; and one of his arguments

was based on the fact that an immensely valuable tract, on

which a considerable part of the city of Toledo now stands,

had been taken away from the university without any

suitable remuneration.  But even this availed little, and

it became quite a pastime among demagogues at the

State Capitol to bait the doctor.  On one of these occasions

he was inspired to make a prophecy.  Disgusted at the

poor, cheap blackguardism, he shook the dust of the legislature

off his feet, and said:  ``The day will come when my

students will take your places, and then something will be

done.''  That prophecy was fulfilled.  In a decade the

leading men in the legislature began to be the graduates

of the State university; and now these graduates are

largely in control, and they have dealt nobly with their

alma mater.  The State has justly become proud of it, and

has wisely developed it.



Dr. Tappan's work was great, indeed.  He stood not

only at the beginning of the institution at Ann Arbor, but

really at the beginning of the other universities of the

Western States, from which the country is gaining so

much at present, and is sure to gain vastly more in the

future.  The day will come when his statue will commemorate

his services.



But there was another feature in his administration to

which I refer with extreme reluctance.  He had certain

``defects of his qualities.''  Big, hearty, frank, and

generous, he easily became the prey of those who wrought

upon his feelings; and, in an evil hour, he was drawn into

a quarrel not his own, between two scientific professors. 

This quarrel became exceedingly virulent; at times it

almost paralyzed the university, and finally it convulsed the

State.  It became the main object of the doctor's thoughts. 

The men who had drawn him into it quietly retired under

cover, and left him to fight their battle in the open.  He

did this powerfully, but his victories were no less calamitous

than his defeats; for one of the professors, when

overcome, fell back upon the church to which he belonged,

and its conference was led to pass resolutions warning

Christian people against the university.  The forces of

those hostile to the institution were marshaled to the sound

of the sectarian drum.  The quarrel at last became political;

and when the doctor unwisely entered the political

field in hopes of defeating the candidates put forward by

his opponents, he was beaten at the polls, and his resignation

followed.  A small number of us, including Judge

Cooley and Professors Frieze, Fasquelle, Boise, and myself,

simply maintained an ``armed neutrality,'' standing

by the university, and refusing to be drawn into this

whirlpool of intrigue and objurgation.  Personally, we

loved the doctor.  Every one of us besought him to give up

the quarrel, but in vain.  He would not; he could not.  It

went on till the crash came.  He was virtually driven from

the State, retired to Europe, and never returned.



Years afterward, the citizens of Michigan in all parts of

the State sought to make amends to him.  The great body

of the graduates, who loved and respected him, with leading

men throughout the commonwealth, joined in a letter

inviting him to return as a public guest; but he declined,

and never again saw his native land.  His first main place

of residence was Basel, where, at the university, he

superintended the education of his grandson, who, at a later

period, became a professor at Heidelberg.  Finally, he

retired to a beautiful villa on the shores of Lake Leman

and there, with his family about him, peacefully followed

his chosen studies.  At his death he was buried amid the

vineyards and orchards of Vevey.



Though I absolutely refused to be drawn into any of

his quarrels, my relations with the doctor remained kindly

and not a single feeling was left which marred my visit

to him in after years at Basel, or my later pilgrimage to

his grave on the shores of Lake Leman.  To no man is any

success I may have afterward had in the administration

of Cornell University so greatly due as to him.



In this summary I have hardly touched upon the most

important part of my duty,--namely, the purpose of my

lecture-courses, with their relations to that period in the

history of our country, and to the questions which thinking

men, and especially thinking young men, were then

endeavoring to solve,--since all this has been given in my

political reminiscences.



So much for my main work at the University of Michigan. 

But I had one recreation which was not without its

uses.  The little city of Ann Arbor is a beautiful place on

the Huron River, and from the outset interested me. 

Even its origin had a peculiar charm.  About a quarter

of a century before my arrival, three families came from

the East to take up the land which they had bought

of the United States; and, as their three holdings touched

each other at one corner, they brought boughs of trees

to that spot and erected a sort of hut, or arbor, in which

to live until their log houses were finished.  On coming

together in this arbor they discovered that the

Christian name of each of the three wives was Ann:

hence the name of the place; and this fact gave a

poetic coloring to it which was a permanent pleasure to

me.  It was an unending satisfaction to reflect that no

misguided patriot had been allowed to inflict upon that

charming university town the name of ``Athens,'' or 

``Oxford,'' or ``Socratopolis,'' or ``Anacreonsburg,'' or

``Platoville,'' or ``Emporium,'' or ``Eudaimonia.''  What, but

for those three good women, the name might have been,

may be judged from the fact that one of the founders of

the university did his best to have it called a

``Katholo<e:>pistemiad''!



But there was one drawback.  The ``campus,'' on which

stood the four buildings then devoted to instruction,

greatly disappointed me.  It was a flat, square inclosure

of forty acres, unkempt and wretched.  Throughout

its whole space there were not more than a score of

trees outside the building sites allotted to professors;

unsightly plank walks connected the buildings, and in

every direction were meandering paths, which in dry weather

were dusty and in wet weather muddy.  Coming, as

I did, from the glorious elms of Yale, all this distressed

me, and one of my first questions was why no trees had

been planted.  The answer was that the soil was so hard

and dry that none would grow.  But on examining

the territory in the neighborhood, especially the little

inclosures about the pretty cottages of the town, I found

fine large trees, and among them elms.  At this, without

permission from any one, I began planting trees within the

university inclosure; established, on my own account,

several avenues; and set out elms to overshadow them. 

Choosing my trees with care, carefully protecting and

watering them during the first two years, and gradually

adding to them a considerable number of evergreens, I

preached practically the doctrine of adorning the campus. 

Gradually some of my students joined me; one class after

another aided in securing trees and in planting them,

others became interested, until, finally, the university

authorities made me ``superintendent of the grounds,''

and appropriated to my work the munificent sum of

seventy-five dollars a year.  So began the splendid growth

which now surrounds those buildings.  These trees became

to me as my own children.  Whenever I revisit Ann Arbor

my first care is to go among them, to see how they prosper,

and especially how certain peculiar examples are flourishing;

and at my recent visit, forty-six years after their

planting, I found one of the most beautiful academic

groves to be seen in any part of the world.



The most saddening thing during my connection with

the university I have touched upon in my political

reminiscences.  Three years after my arrival the Civil War

broke out, and there came a great exodus of students into

the armies, the vast majority taking up arms for the

Union, and a few for the Confederate States.  The very

noblest of them thus went forth--many of them, alas!

never to return, and among them not a few whom I loved

as brothers and even as my own children.  Of all the

experiences of my life, this was among the most saddening.



My immediate connection with the University of Michigan

as resident professor of history lasted about six years;

and then, on account partly of business interests which

resulted from the death of my father, partly of my election

to the New York State Senate, and partly of my

election to the presidency of Cornell University, I resided

in central New York, but retained a lectureship at the

Western institution.  I left the work and the friends who

had become so dear to me with the greatest reluctance, and

as long as possible I continued to revisit the old scenes,

and to give courses of lectures.  But at last my duties at

Cornell absolutely forbade this, and so ended a connection

which was to me one of the most fruitful in useful

experiences and pregnant thoughts that I have ever known.


