




Part IV





Of the Effect of Utility upon the Sentiment of Approbation


Consisting of One Section





Chap. I





Of the beauty which the appearance of Utility bestows upon all


the productions of art, and of the extensive influence of this


species of Beauty





    That utility is one of the principal sources of beauty has


been observed by every body, who has considered with any


attention what constitutes the nature of beauty. The conveniency


of a house gives pleasure to the spectator as well as its


regularity, and he is as much hurt when he observes the contrary


defect, as when he sees the correspondent windows of different


forms, or the door not placed exactly in the middle of the


building. That the fitness of any system or machine to produce


the end for which it was intended, bestows a certain propriety


and beauty upon the whole, and renders the very thought and


contemplation of it agreeable, is so very obvious that nobody has


overlooked it.


    The cause too, why utility pleases, has of late been assigned


by an ingenious and agreeable philosopher, who joins the greatest


depth of thought to the greatest elegance of expression, and


possesses the singular and happy talent of treating the


abstrusest subjects not only with the most perfect perspicuity,


but with the most lively eloquence. The utility of any object,


according to him, pleases the master by perpetually suggesting to


him the pleasure or conveniency which it is fitted to promote.


Every time he looks at it, he is put in mind of this pleasure;


and the object in this manner becomes a source of perpetual


satisfaction and enjoyment. The spectator enters by sympathy into


the sentiments of the master, and necessarily views the object


under the same agreeable aspect. When we visit the palaces of the


great, we cannot help conceiving the satisfaction we should enjoy


if we ourselves were the masters, and were possessed of so much


artful and ingeniously contrived accommodation. A similar account


is given why the appearance of inconveniency should render any


object disagreeable both to the owner and to the spectator.


    But that this fitness, this happy contrivance of any


production of art, should often be more valued, than the very end


for which it was intended; and that the exact adjustment of the


means for attaining any conveniency or pleasure, should


frequently be more regarded, than that very conveniency or


pleasure, in the attainment of which their whole merit would seem


to consist, has not, so far as I know, been yet taken notice of


by any body. That this however is very frequently the case, may


be observed in a thousand instances, both in the most frivolous


and in the most important concerns of human life.


    When a person comes into his chamber, and finds the chairs


all standing in the middle of the room, he is angry with his


servant, and rather than see them continue in that disorder,


perhaps takes the trouble himself to set them all in their places


with their backs to the wall. The whole propriety of this new


situation arises from its superior conveniency in leaving the


floor free and disengaged. To attain this conveniency he


voluntarily puts himself to more trouble than all he could have


suffered from the want of it; since nothing was more easy, than


to have set himself down upon one of them, which is probably what


he does when his labour is over. What he w.anted therefore, it


seems, was not so much this conveniency, as that arrangement of


things which promotes it. Yet it is this conveniency which


ultimately recommends that arrangement, and bestows upon it the


whole of its propriety and beauty.


    A watch, in the same manner, that falls behind above two


minutes in a day, is despised by one curious in watches. He sells


it perhaps for a couple of guineas, and purchases another at


fifty, which will not lose above a minute in a fortnight. The


sole use of watches however, is to tell us what o'clock it is,


and to hinder us from breaking any engagement, or suffering any


other inconveniency by our ignorance in that particular point.


But the person so nice with regard to this machine, will not


always be found either more scrupulously punctual than other men,


or more anxiously concerned upon any other account, to know


precisely what time of day it is. What interests him is not so


much the attainment of this piece of knowledge, as the perfection


of the machine which serves to attain it.


    How many people ruin themselves by laying out money on


trinkets of frivolous utility? What pleases these lovers of toys


is not so much the utility, as the aptness of the machines which


are fitted to promote it. All their pockets are stuffed with


little conveniencies. They contrive new pockets, unknown in the


clothes of other people, in order to carry a greater number. They


walk about loaded with a multitude of baubles, in weight and


sometimes in value not inferior to an ordinary Jew's-box, some of


which may sometimes be of some little use, but all of which might


at all times be very well spared, and of which the whole utility


is certainly not worth the fatigue of bearing the burden.


    Nor is it only with regard to such frivolous objects that our


conduct is influenced by this principle; it is often the secret


motive of the most serious and important pursuits of both private


and public life.


    The poor man's son, whom heaven in its anger has visited with


ambition, when he begins to look around him, admires the


condition of the rich. He finds the cottage of his father too


small for his accommodation, and fancies he should be lodged more


at his ease in a palace. He is displeased with being obliged to


walk a-foot, or to endure the fatigue of riding on horseback. He


sees his superiors carried about in machines, and imagines that


in one of these he could travel with less inconveniency. He feels


himself naturally indolent, and willing to serve himself with his


own hands as little as possible; and judges, that a numerous


retinue of servants would save him from a great deal of trouble.


He thinks if he had attained all these, he would sit still


contentedly, and be quiet, enjoying himself in the thought of the


happiness and tranquillity of his situation. He is enchanted with


the distant idea of this felicity. It appears in his fancy like


the life of some superior rank of beings, and, in order to arrive


at it, he devotes himself for ever to the pursuit of wealth and


greatness. To obtain the conveniencies which these afford, he


submits in the first year, nay in the first month of his


application, to more fatigue of body and more uneasiness of mind


than he could have suffered through the whole of his life from


the want of them. He studies to distinguish himself in some


laborious profession. With the most unrelenting industry he


labours night and day to acquire talents superior to all his


competitors. He endeavours next to bring those talents into


public view, and with equal assiduity solicits every opportunity


of employment. For this purpose he makes his court to all


mankind; he serves those whom he hates, and is obsequious to


those whom he despises. Through the whole of his life he pursues


the idea of a certain artificial and elegant repose which he may


never arrive at, for which he sacrifices a real tranquillity that


is at all times in his power, and which, if in the extremity of


old age he should at last attain to it, he will find to be in no


respect preferable to that humble security and contentment which


he had abandoned for it. It is then, in the last dregs of life,


his body wasted with toil and diseases, his mind galled and


ruffled by the memory of a thousand injuries and disappointments


which he imagines he has met with from the injustice of his


enemies, or from the perfidy and ingratitude of his friends, that


he begins at last to find that wealth and greatness are mere


trinkets of frivolous utility, no more adapted for procuring ease


of body or tranquillity of mind than the tweezer-cases of the


lover of toys; and like them too, more troublesome to the person


who carries them about with him than all the advantages they can


afford him are commodious. There is no other real difference


between them, except that the conveniencies of the one are


somewhat more observable than those of the other. The palaces,


the gardens, the equipage, the retinue of the great, are objects


of which the obvious conveniency strikes every body. They do not


require that their masters should point out to us wherein


consists their utility. Of our own accord we readily enter into


it, and by sympathy enjoy and thereby applaud the satisfaction


which they are fitted to afford him. But the curiosity of a


tooth-pick, of an ear-picker, of a machine for cutting the nails,


or of any other trinket of the same kind, is not so obvious.


Their conveniency may perhaps be equally great, but it is not so


striking, and we do not so readily enter into the satisfaction of


the man who possesses them. They are therefore less reasonable


subjects of vanity than the magnificence of wealth and greatness;


and in this consists the sole advantage of these last. They more


effectually gratify that love of distinction so natural to man.


To one who was to live alone in a desolate island it might be a


matter of doubt, perhaps, whether a palace, or a collection of


such small conveniencies as are commonly contained in a


tweezer-case, would contribute most to his happiness and


enjoyment. If he is to live in society, indeed, there can be no


comparison, because in this, as in all other cases, we constantly


pay more regard to the sentiments of the spectator, than to those


of the person principally concerned, and consider rather how his


situation will appear to other people, than how it will appear to


himself. If we examine, however, why the spectator distinguishes


with such admiration the condition of the rich and the great, we


shall find that it is not so much upon account of the superior


ease or pleasure which they are supposed to enjoy, as of the


numberless artificial and elegant contrivances for promoting this


ease or pleasure. He does not even imagine that they are really


happier than other people: but he imagines that they possess more


means of happiness. And it is the ingenious and artful adjustment


of those means to the end for which they were intended, that is


the principal source of his admiration. But in the languor of


disease and the weariness of old age, the pleasures of the vain


and empty distinctions of greatness disappear. To one, in this


situation, they are no longer capable of recommending those


toilsome pursuits in which they had formerly engaged him. In his


heart he curses ambition, and vainly regrets the ease and the


indolence of youth, pleasures which are fled for ever, and which


he has foolishly sacrificed for what, when he has got it, can


afford him no real satisfaction. In this miserable aspect does


greatness appear to every man when reduced either by spleen or


disease to observe with attention his own situation, and to


consider what it is that is really wanting to his happiness.


Power and riches appear then to be, what they are, enormous and


operose machines contrived to produce a few trifling


conveniencies to the body, consisting of springs the most nice


and delicate, which must be kept in order with the most anxious


attention, and which in spite of all our care are ready every


moment to burst into pieces, and to crush in their ruins their


unfortunate possessor. They are immense fabrics, which it


requires the labour of a life to raise, which threaten every


moment to overwhelm the person that dwells in them, and which


while they stand, though they may save him from some smaller


inconveniencies, can protect him from none of the severer


inclemencies of the season. They keep off the summer shower, not


the winter storm, but leave him always as much, and sometimes


more exposed than before, to anxiety, to fear, and to sorrow; to


diseases, to danger, and to death.


    But though this splenetic philosophy, which in time of


sickness or low spirits is familiar to every man, thus entirely


depreciates those great objects of human desire, when in better


health and in better humour, we never fail to regard them under a


more agreeable aspect. Our imagination, which in pain and sorrow


seems to be confined and cooped up within our own persons, in


times of ease and prosperity expands itself to every thing around


us. We are then charmed with the beauty of that accommodation


which reigns in the palaces and oeconomy of the great; and admire


how every thing is adapted to promote their ease, to prevent


their wants, to gratify their wishes, and to amuse and entertain


their most frivolous desires. If we consider the real


satisfaction which all these things are capable of affording, by


itself and separated from the beauty of that arrangement which is


fitted to promote it, it will always appear in the highest degree


contemptible and trifling. But we rarely view it in this abstract


and philosophical light. We naturally confound it in our


imagination with the order, the regular and harmonious movement


of the system, the machine or oeconomy by means of which it is


produced. The pleasures of wealth and greatness, when considered


in this complex view, strike the imagination as something grand


and beautiful and noble, of which the attainment is well worth


all the toil and anxiety which we are so apt to bestow upon it.


    And it is well that nature imposes upon us in this manner. It


is this deception which rouses and keeps in continual motion the


industry of mankind. It is this which first prompted them to


cultivate the ground, to build houses, to found cities and


commonwealths, and to invent and improve all the sciences and


arts, which ennoble and embellish human life; which have entirely


changed the whole face of the globe, have turned the rude forests


of nature into agreeable and fertile plains, and made the


trackless and barren ocean a new fund of subsistence, and the


great high road of communication to the different nations of the


earth. The earth by these labours of mankind has been obliged to


redouble her natural fertility, and to maintain a greater


multitude of inhabitants. It is to no purpose, that the proud and


unfeeling landlord views his extensive fields, and without a


thought for the wants of his brethren, in imagination consumes


himself the whole harvest that grows upon them. The homely and


vulgar proverb, that the eye is larger than the belly, never was


more fully verified than with regard to him. The capacity of his


stomach bears no proportion to the immensity of his desires, and


will receive no more than that of the meanest peasant. The rest


he is obliged to distribute among those, who prepare, in the


nicest manner, that little which he himself makes use of, among


those who fit up the palace in which this little is to be


consumed, among those who provide and keep in order all the


different baubles and trinkets, which are employed in the


oeconomy of greatness; all of whom thus derive from his luxury


and caprice, that share of the necessaries of life, which they


would in vain have expected from his humanity or his justice. The


produce of the soil maintains at all times nearly that number of


inhabitants which it is capable of maintaining. The rich only


select from the heap what is most precious and agreeable. They


consume little more than the poor, and in spite of their natural


selfishness and rapacity, though they mean only their own


conveniency, though the sole end which they propose from the


labours of all the thousands whom they employ, be the


gratification of their own vain and insatiable desires, they


divide with the poor the produce of all their improvements. They


are led by an invisible hand to make nearly the same distribution


of the necessaries of life, which would have been made, had the


earth been divided into equal portions among all its inhabitants,


and thus without intending it, without knowing it, advance the


interest of the society, and afford means to the multiplication


of the species. When Providence divided the earth among a few


lordly masters, it neither forgot nor abandoned those who seemed


to have been left out in the partition. These last too enjoy


their share of all that it produces. In what constitutes the real


happiness of human life, they are in no respect inferior to those


who would seem so much above them. In ease of body and peace of


mind, all the different ranks of life are nearly upon a level,


and the beggar, who suns himself by the side of the highway,


possesses that security which kings are fighting for.


    The same principle, the same love of system, the same regard


to the beauty of order, of art and contrivance, frequently serves


to recommend those institutions which tend to promote the public


welfare. When a patriot exerts himself for the improvement of any


part of the public police, his conduct does not always arise from


pure sympathy with the happiness of those who are to reap the


benefit of it. It is not commonly from a fellow-feeling with


carriers and waggoners that a public-spirited man encourages the


mending of high roads. When the legislature establishes premiums


and other encouragements to advance the linen or woollen


manufactures, its conduct seldom proceeds from pure sympathy with


the wearer of cheap or fine cloth, and much less from that with


the manufacturer or merchant. The perfection of police, the


extension of trade and manufactures, are noble and magnificent


objects. The contemplation of them pleases us, and we are


interested in whatever can tend to advance them. They make part


of the great system of government, and the wheels of the


political machine seem to move with more harmony and ease by


means of them. We take pleasure in beholding the perfection of so


beautiful and grand a system, and we are uneasy till we remove


any obstruction that can in the least disturb or encumber the


regularity of its motions. All constitutions of government,


however, are valued only in proportion as they tend to promote


the happiness of those who live under them. This is their sole


use and end. From a certain spirit of system, however, from a


certain love of art and contrivance, we sometimes seem to value


the means more than the end, and to be eager to promote the


happiness of our fellow-creatures, rather from a view to perfect


and improve a certain beautiful and orderly system, than from any


immediate sense or feeling of what they either suffer or enjoy.


There have been men of the greatest public spirit, who have shown


themselves in other respects not very sensible to the feelings of


humanity. And on the contrary, there have been men of the


greatest humanity, who seem to have been entirely devoid of


public spirit. Every man may find in the circle of his


acquaintance instances both of the one kind and the other. Who


had ever less humanity, or more public spirit, than the


celebrated legislator of Muscovy? The social and well-natured


James the First of Great Britain seems, on the contrary, to have


had scarce any passion, either for the glory or the interest of


his country. Would you awaken the industry of the man who seems


almost dead to ambition, it will often be to no purpose to


describe to him the happiness of the rich and the great; to tell


him that they are generally sheltered from the sun and the rain,


that they are seldom hungry, that they are seldom cold, and that


they are rarely exposed to weariness, or to want of any kind. The


most eloquent exhortation of this kind will have little effect


upon him. If you would hope to succeed, you must describe to him


the conveniency and arrangement of the different apartments in


their palaces; you must explain to him the propriety of their


equipages, and point out to him the number, the order, and the


different offices of all their attendants. If any thing is


capable of making impression upon him, this will. Yet all these


things tend only to keep off the sun and the rain, to save them


from hunger and cold, from want and weariness. In the same


manner, if you would implant public virtue in the breast of him


who seems heedless of the interest of his country, it will often


be to no purpose to tell him, what superior advantages the


subjects of a well-governed state enjoy; that they are better


lodged, that they are better clothed, that they are better fed.


These considerations will commonly make no great impression. You


will be more likely to persuade, if you describe the great system


of public police which procures these advantages, if you explain


the connexions and dependencies of its several parts, their


mutual subordination to one another, and their general


subserviency to the happiness of the society; if you show how


this system might be introduced into his own country, what it is


that hinders it from taking place there at present, how those


obstructions might be removed, and all the several wheels of the


machine of government be made to move with more harmony and


smoothness, without grating upon one another, or mutually


retarding one another's motions. It is scarce possible that a man


should listen to a discourse of this kind, and not feel himself


animated to some degree of public spirit. He will, at least for


the moment, feel some desire to remove those obstructions, and to


put into motion so beautiful and so orderly a machine. Nothing


tends so much to promote public spirit as the study of politics,


of the several systems of civil government, their advantages and


disadvantages, of the constitution of our own country, its


situation, and interest with regard to foreign nations, its


commerce, its defence, the disadvantages it labours under, the


dangers to which it may be exposed, how to remove the one, and


how to guard against the other. Upon this account political


disquisitions, if just, and reasonable, and practicable, are of


all the works of speculation the most useful. Even the weakest


and the worst of them are not altogether without their utility.


They serve at least to animate the public passions of men, and


rouse them to seek out the means of promoting the happiness of


the society. 





Chap. II





Of the beauty which the appearance of Utility bestows upon the


characters and actions of men; and how far the perception of this


beauty may be regarded as one of the original principles of


approbation





    The characters of men, as well as the contrivances of art, or


the institutions of civil government, may be fitted either to


promote or to disturb the happiness both of the individual and of


the society. The prudent, the equitable, the active, resolute,


and sober character promises prosperity and satisfaction, both to


the person himself and to every one connected with him. The rash,


the insolent, the slothful, effeminate, and voluptuous, on the


contrary, forebodes ruin to the individual, and misfortune to all


who have any thing to do with him. The first turn of mind has at


least all the beauty which can belong to the most perfect machine


that was ever invented for promoting the most agreeable purpose:


and the second, all the deformity of the most awkward and clumsy


contrivance. What institution of government could tend so much to


promote the happiness of mankind as the general prevalence of


wisdom and virtue? All government is but an imperfect remedy for


the deficiency of these. Whatever beauty, therefore, can belong


to civil government upon account of its utility, must in a far


superior degree belong to these. On the contrary, what civil


policy can be so ruinous and destructive as the vices of men? The


fatal effects of bad government arise from nothing, but that it


does not sufficiently guard against the mischiefs which human


wickedness gives occasion to.


    This beauty and deformity which characters appear to derive


from their usefulness or inconveniency, are apt to strike, in a


peculiar manner, those who consider, in an abstract and


philosophical light, the actions and conduct of mankind. When a


philosopher goes to examine why humanity is approved of, or


cruelty condemned, he does not always form to himself, in a very


clear and distinct manner, the conception of any one particular


action either of cruelty or of humanity, but is commonly


contented with the vague and indeterminate idea which the general


names of those qualities suggest to him. But it is in particular


instances only that the propriety or impropriety, the merit or


demerit of actions is very obvious and discernible. It is only


when particular examples are given that we perceive distinctly


either the concord or disagreement between our own affections and


those of the agent, or feel a social gratitude arise towards him


in the one case, or a sympathetic resentment in the other. When


we consider virtue and vice in an abstract and general manner,


the qualities by which they excite these several sentiments seem


in a great measure to disappear, and the sentiments themselves


become less obvious and discernible. On the contrary, the happy


effects of the one and the fatal consequences of the other seem


then to rise up to the view, and as it were to stand out and


distinguish themselves from all the other qualities of either.


    The same ingenious and agreeable author who first explained


why utility pleases, has been so struck with this view of things,


as to resolve our whole approbation of virtue into a perception


of this species of beauty which results from the appearance of


utility. No qualities of the mind, he observes, are approved of


as virtuous, but such as are useful or agreeable either to the


person himself or to others; and no qualities are disapproved of


as vicious but such as have a contrary tendency. And Nature,


indeed, seems to have so happily adjusted our sentiments of


approbation and disapprobation, to the conveniency both of the


individual and of the society, that after the strictest


examination it will be found, I believe, that this is universally


the case. But still I affirm, that it is not the view of this


utility or hurtfulness which is either the first or principal


source of our approbation and disapprobation. These sentiments


are no doubt enhanced and enlivened by the perception of the


beauty or deformity which results from this utility or


hurtfulness. But still, I say, they are originally and


essentially different from this perception.


    For first of all, it seems impossible that the approbation of


virtue should be a sentiment of the same kind with that by which


we approve of a convenient and well-contrived building; or that


we should have no other reason for praising a man than that for


which we commend a chest of drawers.


    And secondly, it will be found, upon examination, that the


usefulness of any disposition of mind is seldom the first ground


of our approbation; and that the sentiment of approbation always


involves in it a sense of propriety quite distinct from the


perception of utility. We may observe this with regard to all the


qualities which are approved of as virtuous, both those which,


according to this system, are originally valued as useful to


ourselves, as well as those which are esteemed on account of


their usefulness to others.


    The qualities most useful to ourselves are, first of all,


superior reason and understanding, by which we are capable of


discerning the remote consequences of all our actions, and of


foreseeing the advantage or detriment which is likely to result


from them: and secondly, self-command, by which we are enabled to


abstain from present pleasure or to endure present pain, in order


to obtain a greater pleasure or to avoid a greater pain in some


future time. In the union of those two qualities consists the


virtue of prudence, of all the virtues that which is most useful


to the individual.


    With regard to the first of those qualities, it has been


observed on a former occasion, that superior reason and


understanding are originally approved of as just and right and


accurate, and not merely as useful or advantageous. It is in the


abstruser sciences, particularly in the higher parts of


mathematics, that the greatest and most admired exertions of


human reason have been displayed. But the utility of those


sciences, either to the individual or to the public, is not very


obvious, and to prove it, requires a discussion which is not


always very easily comprehended. It was not, therefore, their


utility which first recommended them to the public admiration.


This quality was but little insisted upon, till it became


necessary to make some reply to the reproaches of those, who,


having themselves no taste for such sublime discoveries,


endeavoured to depreciate them as useless.


    That self-command, in the same manner, by which we restrain


our present appetites, in order to gratify them more fully upon


another occasion, is approved of, as much under the aspect of


propriety, as under that of utility. When we act in this manner,


the sentiments which influence our conduct seem exactly to


coincide with those of the spectator. The spectator does not feel


the solicitations of our present appetites. To him the pleasure


which we are to enjoy a week hence, or a year hence, is just as


interesting as that which we are to enjoy this moment. When for


the sake of the present, therefore, we sacrifice the future, our


conduct appears to him absurd and extravagant in the highest


degree, and he cannot enter into the principles which influence


it. On the contrary, when we abstain from present pleasure, in


order to secure greater pleasure to come, when we act as if the


remote object interested us as much as that which immediately


presses upon the senses, as our affections exactly correspond


with his own, he cannot fail to approve of our behaviour: and as


he knows from experience, how few are capable of this


self-command, he looks upon our conduct with a considerable


degree of wonder and admiration. Hence arises that eminent esteem


with which all men naturally regard a steady perseverance in the


practice of frugality, industry, and application, though directed


to no other purpose than the acquisition of fortune. The resolute


firmness of the person who acts in this manner, and in order to


obtain a great though remote advantage, not only gives up all


present pleasures, but endures the greatest labour both of mind


and body, necessarily commands our approbation. That view of his


interest and happiness which appears to regulate his conduct,


exactly tallies with the idea which we naturally form of it.


There is the most perfect correspondence between his sentiments


and our own, and at the same time, from our experience of the


common weakness of human nature, it is a correspondence which we


could not reasonably have expected. We not only approve,


therefore, but in some measure admire his conduct, and think it


worthy of a considerable degree of applause. It is the


consciousness of this merited approbation and esteem which is


alone capable of supporting the agent in this tenour of conduct.


The pleasure which we are to enjoy ten years hence interests us


so little in comparison with that which we may enjoy to-day, the


passion which the first excites, is naturally so weak in


comparison with that violent emotion which the second is apt to


give occasion to, that the one could never be any balance to the


other, unless it was supported by the sense of propriety, by the


consciousness that we merited the esteem and approbation of every


body, by acting in the one way, and that we became the proper


objects of their contempt and derision by behaving in the other.


    Humanity, justice, generosity, and public spirit, are the


qualities most useful to others. Wherein consists the propriety


of humanity and justice has been explained upon a former


occasion, where it was shewn how much our esteem and approbation


of those qualities depended upon the concord between the


affections of the agent and those of the spectators.


    The propriety of generosity and public spirit is founded upon


the same principle with that of justice. Generosity is different


from humanity. Those two qualities, which at first sight seem so


nearly allied, do not always belong to the same person. Humanity


is the virtue of a woman, generosity of a man. The fair-sex, who


have commonly much more tenderness than ours, have seldom so much


generosity. That women rarely make considerable donations, is an


observation of the civil law.(1*) Humanity consists merely in the


exquisite fellow-feeling which the spectator entertains with the


sentiments of the persons principally concerned, so as to grieve


for their sufferings, to resent their injuries, and to rejoice at


their good fortune. The most humane actions require no


self-denial, no self-command, no great exertion of the sense of


propriety. They consist only in doing what this exquisite


sympathy would of its own accord prompt us to do. But it is


otherwise with generosity. We never are generous except when in


some respect we prefer some other person to ourselves, and


sacrifice some great and important interest of our own to an


equal interest of a friend or of a superior. The man who gives up


his pretensions to an office that was the great object of his


ambition, because he imagines that the services of another are


better entitled to it; the man who exposes his life to defend


that of his friend, which he judges to be of more importance;


neither of them act from humanity, or because they feel more


exquisitely what concerns that other person than what concerns


themselves. They both consider those opposite interests, not in


the light in which they naturally appear to themselves, but in


that in which they appear to others. To every bystander, the


success or preservation of this other person may justly be more


interesting than their own; but it cannot be so to themselves.


When to the interest of this other person, therefore, they


sacrifice their own, they accommodate themselves to the


sentiments of the spectator, and by an effort of magnanimity act


according to those views of things which, they feel, must


naturally occur to any third person. The soldier who throws away


his life in order to defend that of his officer, would perhaps be


but little affected by the death of that officer, if it should


happen without any fault of his own; and a very small disaster


which had befallen himself might excite a much more lively


sorrow. But when he endeavours to act so as to deserve applause,


and to make the impartial spectator enter into the principles of


his conduct, he feels, that to every body but himself, his own


life is a trifle compared with that of his officer, and that when


he sacrifices the one to the other, he acts quite properly and


agreeably to what would be the natural apprehensions of every


impartial bystander.


    It is the same case with the greater exertions of public


spirit. When a young officer exposes his life to acquire some


inconsiderable addition to the dominions of his sovereign, it is


not because the acquisition of the new territory is, to himself,


an object more desireable than the preservation of his own life.


To him his own life is of infinitely more value than the conquest


of a whole kingdom for the state which he serves. But when he


compares those two objects with one another, he does not view


them in the light in which they naturally appear to himself, but


in that in which they appear to the nation he fights for. To them


the success of the war is of the highest importance; the life of


a private person of scarce any consequence. When he puts himself


in their situation, he immediately feels that he cannot be too


prodigal of his blood, if, by shedding it, he can promote so


valuable a purpose. In thus thwarting, from a sense of duty and


propriety, the strongest of all natural propensities, consists


the heroism of his conduct. There is many an honest Englishman,


who, in his private station, would be more seriously disturbed by


the loss of a guinea, than by the national loss of Minorca, who


yet, had it been in his power to defend that fortress, would have


sacrificed his life a thousand times rather than, through his


fault, have let it fall into the hands of the enemy. When the


first Brutus led forth his own sons to a capital punishment,


because they had conspired against the rising liberty of Rome, he


sacrificed what, if he had consulted his own breast only, would


appear to be the stronger to the weaker affection. Brutus ought


naturally to have felt much more for the death of his own sons,


than for all that probably Rome could have suffered from the want


of so great an example. But he viewed them, not with the eyes of


a father, but with those of a Roman citizen. He entered so


thoroughly into the sentiments of this last character, that he


paid no regard to that tie, by which he himself was connected


with them; and to a Roman citizen, the sons even of Brutus seemed


contemptible, when put into the balance with the smallest


interest of Rome. In these and in all other cases of this kind,


our admiration is not so much founded upon the utility, as upon


the unexpected, and on that account the great, the noble, and


exalted propriety of such actions. This utility, when we come to


view it, bestows upon them, undoubtedly, a new beauty, and upon


that account still further recommends them to our approbation.


This beauty, however, is chiefly perceived by men of reflection


and speculation, and is by no means the quality which first


recommends such actions to the natural sentiments of the bulk of


mankind.


    It is to be observed, that so far as the sentiment of


approbation arises from the perception of this beauty of utility,


it has no reference of any kind to the sentiments of others. If


it was possible, therefore, that a person should grow up to


manhood without any communication with society, his own actions


might, notwithstanding, be agreeable or disagreeable to him on


account of their tendency to his happiness or disadvantage. He


might perceive a beauty of this kind in prudence, temperance, and


good conduct, and a deformity in the opposite behaviour: he might


view his own temper and character with that sort of satisfaction


with which we consider a well-contrived machine, in the one case;


or with that sort of distaste and dissatisfaction with which we


regard a very awkward and clumsy contrivance, in the other. As


these perceptions, however, are merely a matter of taste, and


have all the feebleness and delicacy of that species of


perceptions, upon the justness of which what is properly called


taste is founded, they probably would not be much attended to by


one in this solitary and miserable condition. Even though they


should occur to him, they would by no means have the same effect


upon him, antecedent to his connexion with society, which they


would have in consequence of that connexion. He would not be cast


down with inward shame at the thought of this deformity; nor


would he be elevated with secret triumph of mind from the


consciousness of the contrary beauty. He would not exult from the


notion of deserving reward in the one case, nor tremble from the


suspicion of meriting punishment in the other. All such


sentiments suppose the idea of some other being, who is the


natural judge of the person that feels them; and it is only by


sympathy with the decisions of this arbiter of his conduct, that


he can conceive, either the triumph of self-applause, or the


shame of self-condemnation.





NOTES:





1. Raro mulieres donare solent.







