






BOOK IV







I



B.C. 395. With the fall of the year Agesilaus reached Phrygia--the

Phrygia of Pharnabazus--and proceeded to burn and harry the district.

City after city was taken, some by force and some by voluntary

surrender. To a proposal of Spithridates to lead him into

Paphlagonia,[1] where he would introduce the king of the country to

him in conference and obtain his alliance, he readily acceded. It was

a long-cherished ambition of Agesilaus to alienate some one of the

subject nations from the Persian monarch, and he pushed forward

eagerly.



[1] See Hartman ("An. Xen." p. 339), who suggests {Otun auto} for {sun

    auto}.



On his arrival in Paphlagonia, King Otys[2] came, and an alliance was

made. (The fact was, he had been summoned by the king to Susa and had

not gone up.) More than that, through the persuasion of Spithridates

he left behind as a parting gift to Agesilaus one thousand cavalry and

a couple of thousand peltasts. Agesilaus was anxious in some way to

show his gratitude to Spithridates for such help, and spoke as

follows:--"Tell me," he said to Spithridates, "would you not like to

give your daughter to King Otys?" "Much more would I like to give

her," he answered, "than he to take her--I an outcast wanderer, and he

lord of a vast territory and forces." Nothing more was said at the

time about the marriage; but when Otys was on the point of departure

and came to bid farewell, Agesilaus, having taken care that

Spithridates should be out of the way, in the presence of the Thirty

broached the subject:[3] "Can you tell me, Otys, to what sort of

family Spithridates belongs?" "To one of the noblest in Persia,"

replied the king. Agesilaus: "Have you observed how beautiful his son

is?" Otys: "To be sure; last evening I was supping with him."

Agesilaus: "And they tell me his daughter is yet more beautiful."

Otys: "That may well be; beautiful she is." Agesilaus: "For my part,

as you have proved so good a friend to us, I should like to advise you

to take this girl to wife. Not only is she very beautiful--and what

more should a husband ask for?--but her father is of noble family, and

has a force at his back large enough to retaliate on Pharnabazus for

an injury. He has made the satrap, as you see, a fugitive and a

vagabond in his own vast territory. I need not tell you," he added,

"that a man who can so chastise an enemy is well able to benefit a

friend; and of this be assured: by such an alliance you will gain not

the connection of Spithridates alone, but of myself and the

Lacedaemonians, and, as we are the leaders of Hellas, of the rest of

Hellas also. And what a wedding yours will be! Were ever nuptials

celebrated on so grand a scale before? Was ever bride led home by such

an escort of cavalry and light-armed troops and heavy infantry, as

shall escort your wife home to your palace?" Otys asked: "Is

Spithridates of one mind with you in this proposal?" and Agesilaus

answered: "In good sooth he did not bid me make it for him. And for my

own part in the matter, though it is, I admit, a rare pleasure to

requite an enemy, yet I had far rather at any time discover some good

fortune for my friends." Otys: "Why not ask if your project pleases

Spithridates too?" Then Agesilaus, turning to Herippidas and the rest

of the Thirty, bade them go to Spithridates; "and give him such good

instruction," he added, "that he shall wish what we wish." The Thirty

rose and retired to administer their lesson. But they seemed to tarry

a long time, and Agesilaus asked: "What say you, King Otys--shall we

summon him hither ourselves? You, I feel certain, are better able to

persuade him than the whole Thirty put together." Thereupon Agesilaus

summoned Spithridates and the others. As they came forward, Herippidas

promptly delivered himself thus: "I spare you the details, Agesilaus.

To make a long story short, Spithridates says, 'He will be glad to do

whatever pleases you.'" Then Agesilaus, turning first to one and then

to the other: "What pleases me," said he, "is that you should wed a

daughter--and you a wife--so happily.[4] But," he added, "I do not see

how we can well bring home the bride by land till spring." "No, not by

land," the suitor answered, "but you might, if you chose, conduct her

home at once by sea." Thereupon they exchanged pledges to ratify the

compact; and so sent Otys rejoicing on his way.



[2] See "Ages." iii. 4, where he is called Cotys.



[3] I.e. "Spartan counsellors."



[4] Or, "and may the wedding be blest!"



Agesilaus, who had not failed to note the king's impatience, at once

fitted out a ship of war and gave orders to Callias, a Lacedaemonian,

to escort the maiden to her new home; after which he himself began his

march on Dascylium. Here was the palace of Pharnabazus. It lay in the

midst of abundant supplies. Here, too, were most fair hunting grounds,

offering the hunter choice between enclosed parks[5] and a wide

expanse of field and fell; and all around there flowed a river full of

fish of every sort; and for the sportsman versed in fowling, winged

game in abundance.



[5] Lit. "paradises." See "Anab." I. ii. 7; "Cyrop." I. iv. 11.



In these quarters the Spartan king passed the winter, collecting

supplies for the army either on the spot or by a system of forage. On

one of these occasions the troops, who had grown reckless and scornful

of the enemy through long immunity from attack, whilst engaged in

collecting supplies were scattered over the flat country, when

Pharnabazus fell upon them with two scythe-chariots and about four

hundred horse. Seeing him thus advancing, the Hellenes ran together,

mustering possibly seven hundred men. The Persian did not hesitate,

but placing his chariots in front, supported by himself and the

cavalry, he gave the command to charge. The scythe-chariots charged

and scattered the compact mass, and speedily the cavalry had laid low

in the dust about a hundred men, while the rest retreated hastily,

under cover of Agesilaus and his hoplites, who were fortunately near.



It was the third or fourth day after this that Spithridates made a

discovery: Pharnabazus lay encamped in Caue, a large village not more

than eighteen miles[6] away. This news he lost no time in reporting to

Herippidas. The latter, who was longing for some brilliant explout,

begged Agesilaus to furnish him with two thousand hoplites, an equal

number of peltasts, and some cavalry--the latter to consist of the

horsemen of Spithridates, the Paphlagonians, and as many Hellene

troopers as he might perchance persuade to follow him. Having got the

promise of them from Agesilaus, he proceeded to take the auspices.

Towards late afternoon he obtained favourable omens and broke off the

sacrifice. Thereupon he ordered the troops to get their evening meal,

after which they were to present themselves in front of the camp. But

by the time darkness had closed in, not one half of them had come out.

To abandon the project was to call down the ridicule of the rest of

the Thirty. So he set out with the force to hand, and about daylight,

falling on the camp of Pharnabazus, put many of his advanced guard of

Mysians to the sword. The men themselves made good their escape in

different directions, but the camp was taken, and with it divers

goblets and other gear such as a man like Pharnabazus would have, not

to speak of much baggage and many baggage animals. It was the dread of

being surrounded and besieged, if he should establish himself for long

at any one spot, which induced Pharnabazus to flee in gipsy fashion

from point to point over the country, carefully obliterating his

encampments. Now as the Paphlagonians and Spithridates brought back

the captured property, they were met by Herippidas with his brigadiers

and captains, who stopped them and[7] relieved them of all they had;

the object being to have as large a list as possible of captures to

deliver over to the officers who superintended the sale of booty.[8]

This treatment the Asiatics found intolerable. They deemed themselves

at once injured and insulted, got their kit together in the night, and

made off in the direction of Sardis to join Ariaeus without mistrust,

seeing that he too had revolted and gone to war with the king. On

Agesilaus himself no heavier blow fell during the whole campaign than

the desertion of Spithridates and Megabates and the Paphlagonians.



[6] Lit. "one hundred and sixty stades."



[7] Or, "captains posted to intercept them, who relieved . . ." See

    "Anab." IV. i. 14.



[8] See "Pol. Lac." xiii. 11, for these officers.



Now there was a certain man of Cyzicus, Apollophanes by name; he was

an old friend of Pharnabazus, and at this time had become a friend

also of Agesilaus.[9] This man informed Agesilaus that he thought he

could bring about a meeting between him and Pharnabazus, which might

tend to friendship; and having so got ear of him, he obtained pledges

of good faith between his two friends, and presented himself with

Pharnabazus at the trysting-place, where Agesilaus with the Thirty

around him awaited their coming, reclined upon a grassy sward.

Pharnabazus presently arrived clad in costliest apparel; but just as

his attendants were about to spread at his feet the carpets on which

the Persians delicately seat themselves, he was touched with a sense

of shame at his own luxury in sight of the simplicity of Agesilaus,

and he also without further ceremony seated himself on the bare

ground. And first the two bade one another hail, and then Pharnabazus

stretched out his right hand and Agesilaus his to meet him, and the

conversation began. Pharnabazus, as the elder of the two, spoke first.

"Agesilaus," he said, "and all you Lacedaemonians here present, while

you were at war with the Athenians I was your friend and ally; it was

I who furnished the wealth that made your navy strong on sea; on land

I fought on horseback by your side, and pursued your enemies into the

sea.[10] As to duplicity like that of Tissaphernes, I challenge you to

accuse me of having played you false by word or deed. Such have I ever

been; and in return how am I treated by yourselves to-day?--in such

sort that I cannot even sup in my own country unless, like the wild

animals, I pick up the scraps you chance to leave. The beautiful

palaces which my father left me as an heirloom, the parks[11] full of

trees and beasts of the chase in which my heart rejoiced, lie before

my eyes hacked to pieces, burnt to ashes. Maybe I do not comprehend

the first principles of justice and holiness; do you then explain to

me how all this resembles the conduct of men who know how to repay a

simple debt of gratitude." He ceased, and the Thirty were ashamed

before him and kept silence.[12]



[9] "Ages." v. 4; Plut. "Ages." xi. (Clough, iv. p. 14).



[10] See "Hell." I. i. 6.



[11] Lit. "paradises."



[12] Theopompus of Chios, the historian (b. B.C. 378, fl. B.C. 333),

    "in the eleventh book [of his {Suntazis Ellenikon}] borrowed

    Xenophon's lively account of the interview between Agesilaus and

    Pharnabazus (Apollonius apud Euseb. B, "Praep. Evang." p. 465)."

    See "Hist. Lit. of Anc. Gr.," Muller and Donaldson, ii. p. 380.



At length, after some pause, Agesilaus spoke. "I think you are aware,"

he said, "Pharnabazus, that within the states of Hellas the folk of

one community contract relations of friendship and hospitality with

one another;[13] but if these states should go to war, then each man

will side with his fatherland, and friend will find himself pitted

against friend in the field of battle, and, if it so betide, the one

may even deal the other his death-blow. So too we to-day, being at war

with your sovereign lord the king, must needs regard as our enemy all

that he calls his; not but that with yourself personally we should

esteem it our high fortune to be friends. If indeed it were merely an

exchange of service--were you asked to give up your lord the king and

to take us as your masters in his stead, I could not so advise you;

but the fact is, by joining with us it is in your power to-day to bow

your head to no man, to call no man master, to reap the produce of

your own domain in freedom--freedom, which to my mind is more precious

than all riches. Not that we bid you to become a beggar for the sake

of freedom, but rather to use our friendship to increase not the

king's authority, but your own, by subduing those who are your fellow-

slaves to-day, and who to-morrow shall be your willing subjects. Well,

then, freedom given and wealth added--what more would you desire to

fill the cup of happiness to overflowing?" Pharnabazus replied: "Shall

I tell you plainly what I will do?" "That were but kind and courteous

on your part," he answered. "Thus it stands with me, then," said

Pharnabazus. "If the king should send another general, and if he

should wish to rank me under this new man's orders, I, for my part, am

willing to accept your friendship and alliance; but if he offers me

the supreme command--why, then, I plainly tell you, there is a certain

something in the very name ambition which whispers me that I shall war

against you to the best of my ability."[14] When he heard that,

Agesilaus seized the satrap's hand, exclaiming: "Ah, best of mortals,

may the day arrive which sends us such a friend! Of one thing rest

assured. This instant I leave your territory with what haste I may,

and for the future--even in case of war--as long as we can find foes

elsewhere our hands shall hold aloof from you and yours."



[13] Or, add, "we call them guest friends."



[14] Or, "so subtle a force, it seems, is the love of honour that."

    Grote, "H. G." ix. 386; cf. Herod. iii. 57 for "ambition,"

    {philotimia}.



And with these words he broke up the meeting. Pharnabazus mounted his

horse and rode away, but his son by Parapita, who was still in the

bloom of youth, lingered behind; then, running up to Agesilaus, he

exclaimed: "See, I choose you as my friend." "And I accept you,"

replied the king. "Remember, then," the lad answered, and with the

word presented the beautiful javelin in his hand to Agesilaus, who

received it, and unclasping a splendid trapping[15] which his

secretary, Idaeus, had round the neck of his charger, he gave it in

return to the youth; whereupon the boy leapt on his horse's back and

galloped after his father.[16] At a later date, during the absence of

Pharnabazus abroad, this same youth, the son of Parapita, was deprived

of the government by his brother and driven into exile. Then Agesilaus

took great interest in him, and as he had a strong attachment to the

son of Eualces, an Athenian, Agesilaus did all he could to have this

friend of his, who was the tallest of the boys, admitted to the two

hundred yards race at Olympia.



[15] {phalara}, bosses of gold, silver, or other metals, cast or

    chased, with some appropriate device in relief, which were worn as

    an ornamental trapping for horses, affixed to the head-stall or to

    a throat-collar, or to a martingale over the chest.--Rich's

    "Companion to Lat. Dict. and Greek Lex.," s.v.



[16] See Grote, ix. 387; Plut. "Ages." xiv. (Clough, iv. 15); "Ages."

    iii. 5. The incident is idealised in the "Cyrop." I. iv. 26 foll.

    See "Lyra Heroica": CXXV. A Ballad of East and West--the incident

    of the "turqoise-studded rein."



B.C. 394. But to return to the actual moment. Agesilaus was as good as

his word, and at once marched out of the territory of Pharnabazus. The

season verged on spring. Reaching the plain of Thebe,[17] he encamped

in the neighbourhood of the temple of Artemis of Astyra,[18] and there

employed himself in collecting troops from every side, in addition to

those which he already had, so as to form a complete armament. These

preparations were pressed forward with a view to penetrating as far as

possible into the interior. He was persuaded that every tribe or

nation placed in his rear might be considered as alienated from the

king.



[17] "Anab." VII. viii. 7.



[18] Vide Strab. xiii. 606, 613. Seventy stades from Thebe.







II



Such were the concerns and projects of Agesilaus. Meanwhile the

Lacedaemonians at home were quite alive to the fact that moneys had

been sent into Hellas, and that the bigger states were leagued

together to declare war against them. It was hard to avoid the

conclusion that Sparta herself was in actual danger, and that a

campaign was inevitable. While busy, therefore, with preparations

themselves, they lost no time in despatching Epicydidas to fetch

Agesilaus. That officer, on his arrival, explained the position of

affairs, and concluded by delivering a peremptory summons of the state

recalling him to the assistance of the fatherland without delay. The

announcement could not but come as a grievous blow to Agesilaus, as he

reflected on the vanished hopes, and the honours plucked from his

grasp. Still, he summoned the allies and announced to them the

contents of the despatch from home. "To aid our fatherland," he added,

"is an imperative duty. If, however, matters turn out well on the

other side, rely upon it, friends and allies, I will not forget you,

but I shall be back anon to carry out your wishes." When they heard

the announcement many wept, and they passed a resolution, one and all,

to assist Agesilaus in assisting Lacedaemon; if matters turned out

well there, they undertook to take him as their leader and come back

again to Asia; and so they fell to making preparations to follow him.



Agesilaus, on his side, determined to leave behind him in Asia Euxenus

as governor, and with him a garrison numbering no less than four

thousand troops, which would enable him to protect the states in Asia.

But for himself, as on the one hand he could see that the majority of

the soldiers would far rather stay behind than undertake service

against fellow-Hellenes, and on the other hand he wished to take as

fine and large an army with him as he could, he offered prizes first

to that state or city which should continue the best corps of troops,

and secondly to that captain of mercenaries who should join the

expedition with the best equipped battalion of heavy infantry,

archers, and light infantry. On the same principle he informed the

chief cavalry officers that the general who succeeded in presenting

the best accoutred and best mounted regiment would receive from

himself some victorious distinction. "The final adjudication," he

said, "would not be made until they had crossed from Asia into Europe

and had reached the Chersonese; and this with a view to impress upon

them that the prizes were not for show but for real campaigners."[1]

These consisted for the most part of infantry or cavalry arms and

accoutrements tastefully furnished, besides which there were chaplets

of gold. The whole, useful and ornamental alike, must have cost nearly

a thousand pounds,[2] but as the result of this outlay, no doubt, arms

of great value were procured for the expedition.[3] When the

Hellespont was crossed the judges were appointed. The Lacedaemonians

were represented by Menascus, Herippidas, and Orsippus, and the allies

by one member from each state. As soon as the adjudication was

complete, the army commenced its march with Agesilaus at its head,

following the very route taken by the great king when he invaded

Hellas.



[1] Or, "that the perfection of equipment was regarded as anticipative

    of actual service in the field." Cobet suggests for {eukrinein}

    {dieukrinein}; cf. "Oecon." viii. 6.



[2] Lit. "at least four talents" = 975 pounds.



[3] Or, "beyond which, the arms and material to equip the expedition

    were no doubt highly costly."



Meanwhile the ephors had called out the ban, and as Agesipolis was

still a boy, the state called upon Aristodemus, who was of the royal

family and guardian of the young king, to lead the expedition; and now

that the Lacedaemonians were ready to take the field and the forces of

their opponents were duly mustered, the latter met[4] to consider the

most advantageous method of doing battle.



[4] At Corinth. See above, III. iv. 11; below, V. iv. 61, where the

    victory of Nixos is described but not localised.



Timolaus of Corinth spoke: "Soldiers of the allied forces," he said,

"the growth of Lacedaemon seems to me just like that of some mighty

river--at its sources small and easily crossed, but as it farther and

farther advances, other rivers discharge themelves into its channel,

and its stream grows ever more formidable. So is it with the

Lacedaemonians. Take them at the starting-point and they are but a

single community, but as they advance and attach city after city they

grow more numerous and more resistless. I observe that when people

wish to take wasps' nests--if they try to capture the creatures on the

wing, they are liable to be attacked by half the hive; whereas, if

they apply fire to them ere they leave their homes, they will master

them without scathe themselves. On this principle I think it best to

bring about the battle within the hive itself, or, short of that, as

close to Lacedaemon as possible."[5]



[5] Or, "if not actually at Lacedaemon, then at least as near as

    possible to the hornet's nest."



The arguments of the speaker were deemed sound, and a resolution was

passed in that sense; but before it could be carried out there were

various arrangements to be made. There was the question of headship.

Then, again, what was the proper depth of line to be given to the

different army corps? for if any particular state or states gave too

great a depth to their battle line they would enable the enemy to turn

their flank. Whilst they were debating these points, the

Lacedaemonians had incorporated the men of Tegea and the men of

Mantinea, and were ready to debouch into the bimarine region.[6] And

as the two armies advanced almost at the same time, the Corinthians

and the rest reached the Nemea,[7] and the Lacedaemonians and their

allies occupied Sicyon. The Lacedaemonians entered by Epieiceia, and

at first were severely handled by the light-armed troops of the enemy,

who discharged stones and arrows from the vantage-ground on their

right; but as they dropped down upon the Gulf of Corinth they advanced

steadily onwards through the flat country, felling timber and burning

the fair land. Their rivals, on their side, after a certain forward

movement,[8] paused and encamped, placing the ravine in front of them;

but still the Lacedaemonians advanced, and it was only when they were

within ten furlongs[9] of the hostile position that they followed suit

and encamped, and then they remained quiet.



[6] I.e. "the shores of the Corinthian Gulf." Or, "upon the strand or

    coast road or coast land of Achaia" [aliter {ten aigialon}(?) the

    Strand of the Corinthian Gulf, the old name of this part of

    Achaia].



[7] Or, "the district of Nemea."



[8] {epelthontes}, but see Grote ("H. G." ix. 425 note), who prefers

    {apelthontes} = retreated and encamped.



[9] Lit. "ten stades." For the numbers below, see Grote, "H. G." ix.

    422, note 1.



And here I may state the numbers on either side. The Lacedaemonian

heavy-armed infantry levies amounted to six thousand men. Of Eleians,

Triphylians, Acroreians, and Lasionians, there must have been nearly

three thousand, with fifteen hundred Sicyonians, while Epidaurus,

Troezen, Hermione, and Halieis[10] contributed at least another three

thousand. To these heavy infantry troops must be added six hundred

Lacedaemonian cavalry, a body of Cretan archers about three hundred

strong, besides another force of slingers, at least four hundred in

all, consisting of Marganians, Letrinians, and Amphidolians. The men

of Phlius were not represented. Their plea was they were keeping "holy

truce." That was the total of the forces on the Lacedaemonian side.

There was collected on the enemy's side six thousand Athenian heavy

infantry, with about, as was stated, seven thousand Argives, and in

the absence of the men of Orchomenus something like five thousand

Boeotians. There were besides three thousand Corinthians, and again

from the whole of Euboea at least three thousand. These formed the

heavy infantry. Of cavalry the Boeotians, again in the absence of the

Orchomenians, furnished eight hundred, the Athenians[11] six hundred,

the Chalcidians of Euboea one hundred, the Opuntian Locrians[12]

fifty. Their light troops, including those of the Corinthians, were

more numerous, as the Ozolian Locrians, the Melians, and

Arcarnanians[13] helped to swell their numbers.



[10] Halieis, a seafaring people (Strabo, viii. 373) and town on the

    coast of Hermionis; Herod. vii. 137; Thuc. i. 105, ii. 56, iv. 45;

    Diod. xi. 78; "Hell." VI. ii. 3.



[11] For a treaty between Athens and Eretria, B.C. 395, see Hicks, 66;

    and below, "Hell." IV. iii. 15; Hicks, 68, 69; Diod. xiv. 82.



[12] See above, "Hell." III. v. 3.



[13] See below, "Hell." IV. vi. 1; ib. vii. 1; VI. v. 23.



Such was the strength of the two armies. The Boeotians, as long as

they occupied the left wing, showed no anxiety to join battle, but

after a rearrangement which gave them the right, placing the Athenians

opposite the Lacedaemonians, and themselves opposite the Achaeans, at

once, we are told,[14] the victims proved favourable, and the order

was passed along the lines to prepare for immediate action. The

Boeotians, in the first place, abandoning the rule of sixteen deep,

chose to give their division the fullest possible depth, and,

moreover, kept veering more and more to their right, with the

intention of overlapping their opponent's flank. The consequence was

that the Athenians, to avoid being absolutely severed, were forced to

follow suit, and edged towards the right, though they recognised the

risk they ran of having their flank turned. For a while the

Lacedaemonians had no idea of the advance of the enemy, owing to the

rough nature of the ground,[15] but the notes of the paean at length

announced to them the fact, and without an instant's delay the

answering order "prepare for battle" ran along the different sections

of their army. As soon as their troops were drawn up, according to the

tactical disposition of the various generals of foreign brigades, the

order was passed to "follow the lead," and then the Lacedaemonians on

their side also began edging to their right, and eventually stretched

out their wing so far that only six out of the ten regimental

divisions of the Athenians confronted the Lacedaemonians, the other

four finding themselves face to face with the men of Tegea. And now

when they were less than a furlong[16] apart, the Lacedaemonians

sacrificed in customary fashion a kid to the huntress goddess,[17] and

advanced upon their opponents, wheeling round their overlapping

columns to outflank his left. As the two armies closed, the allies of

Lacedaemon were as a rule fairly borne down by their opponents. The

men of Pellene alone, steadily confronting the Thespiaeans, held their

ground, and the dead of either side strewed the position.[18] As to

the Lacedaemonians themselves: crushing that portion of the Athenian

troops which lay immediately in front of them, and at the same time

encircling them with their overlapping right, they slew man after man

of them; and, absolutely unscathed themselves, their unbroken columns

continued their march, and so passed behind the four remaining

divisions[19] of the Athenians before these latter had returned from

their own victorious pursuit. Whereby the four divisions in question

also emerged from battle intact, except for the casualties inflicted

by the Tegeans in the first clash of the engagement. The troops next

encountered by the Lacedaemonians were the Argives retiring. These

they fell foul of, and the senior polemarch was just on the point of

closing with them "breast to breast" when some one, it is said,

shouted, "Let their front ranks pass." This was done, and as the

Argives raced past, their enemies thrust at their unprotected[20]

sides and killed many of them. The Corinthians were caught in the same

way as they retired, and when their turn had passed, once more the

Lacedaemonians lit upon a portion of the Theban division retiring from

the pursuit, and strewed the field with their dead. The end of it all

was that the defeated troops in the first instance made for safety to

the walls of their city, but the Corinthians within closed the gates,

whereupon the troops took up quarters once again in their old

encampment. The Lacedaemonians on their side withdrew to the point at

which they first closed with the enemy, and there set up a trophy of

victory. So the battle ended.



[14] Or, "then they lost no time in discovering that the victims

    proved favourable."



[15] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 428; cf. Lys. "pro Mant." 20.



[16] Lit. "a stade."



[17] Lit. "our Lady of the Chase." See "Pol. Lac." xiii. 8.



[18] Lit. "men on either side kept dropping at their post."



[19] Lit. "tribes."



[20] I.e. "right."







III



Meanwhile Agesilaus was rapidly hastening with his reinforcements from

Asia. He had reached Amphipolis when Dercylidas brought the news of

this fresh victory of the Lacedaemonians; their own loss had been

eight men, that of the enemy considerable. It was his business at the

same time to explain that not a few of the allies had fallen also.

Agesilaus asked, "Would it not be opportune, Dercylidas, if the cities

that have furnished us with contingents could hear of this victory as

soon as possible?" And Dercylidas replied: "The news at any rate is

likely to put them in better heart." Then said the king: "As you were

an eye-witness there could hardly be a better bearer of the news than

yourself." To this proposal Dercylidas lent a willing ear--to travel

abroad[1] was his special delight--and he replied, "Yes, under your

orders." "Then you have my orders," the king said. "And you may

further inform the states from myself that we have not forgotten our

promise; if all goes well over here we shall be with them again ere

long." So Dercylidas set off on his travels, in the first instance to

the Hellespont;[2] while Agesilaus crossed Macedonia, and arrived in

Thessaly. And now the men of Larissa, Crannon, Scotussa, and

Pharsalus, who were allies of the Boeotians--and in fact all the

Thessalians except the exiles for the time being--hung on his heels[3]

and did him damage.



[1] See "Pol. Lac." xiv. 4.



[2] See below, "Hell." IV. viii. 3.



[3] See "Ages." ii. 2; Grote, "H. G." ix. 420, note 2.



For some while he marched his troops in a hollow square,[4] posting

half his cavalry in front and half on his rear; but finding that the

Thessalians checked his passage by repeated charges from behind, he

strengthened his rearguard by sending round the cavalry from his van,

with the exception of his own personal escort.[5] The two armies stood

confronted in battle order; but the Thessalians, not liking the notion

of a cavalry engagement with heavy infantry, turned, and step by step

retreated, while the others followed them with considerable caution.

Agesilaus, perceiving the error under which both alike laboured, now

sent his own personal guard of stalwart troopers with orders that both

they and the rest of the horsemen should charge at full gallop,[6] and

not give the enemy the chance to recoil. The Thessalians were taken

aback by this unexpected onslaught, and half of them never thought of

wheeling about, whilst those who did essay to do so presented the

flanks of their horses to the charge,[7] and were made prisoners.

Still Polymarchus of Pharsalus, the general in command of their

cavalry, rallied his men for an instant, and fell, sword in hand, with

his immediate followers. This was the signal for a flight so

precipitate on the part of the Thessalians, that their dead and dying

lined the road, and prisoners were taken; nor was any halt made until

they reached Mount Narthacius. Here, then, midway between Pras and

Narthacius, Agesilaus set up a trophy, halting for the moment, in

unfeigned satisfaction at the exploit. It was from antagonists who

prided themselves on their cavalry beyond everything that he had

wrested victory, with a body of cavalry of his own mustering. Next day

he crossed the mountains of Achaea Phthiotis, and for the future

continued his march through friendly territory until he reached the

confines of Boeotia.



[4] See Rustow and Kochly, S. 187 foll.



[5] See Thuc. v. 72; Herod. vi. 56, viii. 124.



[6] Lit. "and bids them pass the order to the others and themselves to

    charge," etc.



[7] See "Horsemanship," vii. 16; Polyb. iv. 8.



Here, at the entrance of that territory, the sun (in partial

eclipse)[8] seemed to appear in a crescent shape, and the news reached

him of the defeat of the Lacedaemonians in a naval engagement, and the

death of the admiral Peisander. Details of the disaster were not

wanting. The engagement of the hostile fleets took place off Cnidus.

Pharnabazus, the Persian admiral, was present with the Phoenician

fleet, and in front of him were ranged the ships of the Hellenic

squadron under Conon. Peisander had ventured to draw out his squadron

to meet the combined fleets, though the numerical inferiority of his

fleet to that of the Hellenic navy under Conon was conspicuous, and he

had the mortification of seeing the allies who formed his left wing

take to flight immediately. He himself came to close quarters with the

enemy, and was driven on shore, on board his trireme, under pressure

of the hostile rams. The rest, as many as were driven to shore,

deserted their ships and sought safety as best they could in the

territory of Cnidus. The admiral alone stuck to his ship, and fell

sword in hand.



[8] B.C. 394, August 14.



It was impossible for Agesilaus not to feel depressed by those tidings

at first; on further reflection, however, it seemed to him that the

moral quality of more than half his troops well entitled them to share

in the sunshine of success, but in the day of trouble, when things

looked black, he was not bound to take them into his confidence.

Accordingly he turned round and gave out that he had received news

that Peisander was dead, but that he had fallen in the arms of victory

in a sea-fight; and suiting his action to the word, he proceeded to

offer sacrifice in return for good tidings,[9] distributing portions

of the victims to a large number of recipients. So it befell that in

the first skirmish with the enemy the troops of Agesilaus gained the

upper hand, in consequence of the report that the Lacedaemonians had

won a victory by sea.



[9] "Splendide mendax." For the ethics of the matter, see "Mem." IV.

    ii. 17; "Cyrop." I. vi. 31.



To confront Agesilaus stood an army composed of the Boeotians,

Athenians, Argives, Corinthians, Aenianians, Euboeans, and both

divisions of the Locrians. Agesilaus on his side had with him a

division[10] of Lacedaemonians, which had crossed from Corinth, also

half the division from Orchomenus; besides which there were the

neodamodes[11] from Lacedaemon, on service with him already; and in

addition to these the foreign contingent under Herippidas;[12] and

again the quota furnished by the Hellenic cities in Asia, with others

from the cities in Europe which he had brought over during his

progress; and lastly, there were additional levies from the spot--

Orchomenian and Phocian heavy infantry. In light-armed troops, it must

be admitted, the numbers told heavily in favour of Agesilaus, but the

cavalry[13] on both sides were fairly balanced.



[10] Lit. "a mora"; for the numbers, see "Ages." ii. 6; Plut. "Ages."

    17; Grote, "H. G." ix. 433.



[11] I.e. "enfranchised helots."



[12] See "Ages." ii. 10, 11; and above, "Hell." III. iv. 20.



[13] See Hicks, op. cit. 68.



Such were the forces of either party. I will describe the battle

itself, if only on account of certain features which distinguish it

from the battles of our time. The two armies met on the plain of

Coronea--the troops of Agesilaus advancing from the Cephisus, the

Thebans and their allies from the slopes of Helicon. Agesilaus

commanded his own right in person, with the men of Orchomenus on his

extreme left. The Thebans formed their own right, while the Argives

held their left. As they drew together, for a while deep silence

reigned on either side; but when they were not more than a furlong[14]

apart, with the loud hurrah[15] the Thebans, quickening to a run,

rushed furiously[16] to close quarters; and now there was barely a

hundred yards[17] breadth between the two armies, when Herippidas with

his foreign brigade, and with them the Ionians, Aeolians, and

Hellespontines, darted out from the Spartans' battle-lines to greet

their onset. One and all of the above played their part in the first

rush forward; in another instant they were[18] within spear-thrust of

the enemy, and had routed the section immediately before them. As to

the Argives, they actually declined to receive the attack of

Agesilaus, and betook themselves in flight to Helicon. At this moment

some of the foreign division were already in the act of crowning

Agesilaus with the wreath of victory, when some one brought him word

that the Thebans had cut through the Orchomenians and were in among

the baggage train. At this the Spartan general immediately turned his

army right about and advanced against them. The Thebans, on their

side, catching sight of their allies withdrawn in flight to the base

of the Helicon, and anxious to get across to their own friends, formed

in close order and tramped forward stoutly.



[14] Lit. "a stade."



[15] Lit. "Alalah."



[16] Like a tornado.



[17] Lit. "about three plethra."



[18] Or, "All these made up the attacking columns . . . and coming

    within . . . routed . . ."



At this point no one will dispute the valour of Agesilaus, but he

certainly did not choose the safest course. It was open to him to make

way for the enemy to pass, which done, he might have hung upon his

heels and mastered his rear. This, however, he refused to do,

preferring to crash full front against the Thebans. Thereupon, with

close interlock of shield wedged in with shield, they shoved, they

fought, they dealt death,[19] they breathed out life, till at last a

portion of the Thebans broke their way through towards Helicon, but

paid for that departure by the loss of many lives. And now the victory

of Agesilaus was fairly won, and he himself, wounded, had been carried

back to the main line, when a party of horse came galloping up to tell

him that something like eighty of the enemy, under arms, were

sheltering under the temple, and they asked what they ought to do.

Agesilaus, though he was covered with wounds, did not, for all that,

forget his duty to God. He gave orders to let them retire unscathed,

and would not suffer any injury to be done to them. And now, seeing it

was already late, they took their suppers and retired to rest.



[19] Or, "they slew, they were slain." In illustration of this famous

    passage, twice again worked up in "Ages." ii. 12, and "Cyrop."

    VII. i. 38, commented on by Longinus, {peri upsous}, 19, and

    copied by Dio Cassius, 47, 45, I venture to quote a passage from

    Mr. Rudyard Kipling, "With the Main Guard," p. 57, Mulvaney

    loquitur: "The Tyrone was pushin' an' pushin' in, an' our men was

    sweerin' at thim, an' Crook was workin' away in front av us all,

    his sword-arm swingin' like a pump-handle an' his revolver

    spittin' like a cat. But the strange thing av ut was the quiet

    that lay upon. 'Twas like a fight in a dhrame--excipt for thim

    that wus dead."



But with the morning Gylis the polemarch received orders to draw up

the troops in battle order, and to set up a trophy, every man crowned

with a wreath in honour of the god, and all the pipers piping. Thus

they busied themselves in the Spartan camp. On their side the Thebans

sent heralds asking to bury their dead, under a truce; and in this

wise a truce was made. Agesilaus withdrew to Delphi, where on arrival

he offered to the god a tithe of the produce of his spoils--no less

than a hundred talents.[20] Gylis the polemarch meanwhile withdrew

into Phocis at the head of his troops, and from that district made a

hostile advance into Locris. Here nearly a whole day was spent by the

men in freely helping themselves to goods and chattels out of the

villages and pillaging the corn;[21] but as it drew towards evening

the troops began to retire, with the Lacedaemonians in the rear. The

Locrians hung upon their heels with a heavy pelt of stones and

javelins. Thereupon the Lacedaemonians turned short round and gave

chase, laying some of their assailants low. Then the Locrians ceased

clinging to their rear, but continued their volleys from the vantage-

ground above. The Lacedaemonians again made efforts to pursue their

persistent foes even up the slope. At last darkness descended on them,

and as they retired man after man dropped, succumbing to the sheer

difficulty of the ground; some in their inability to see what lay in

front, or else shot down by the enemy's missiles. It was then that

Gylis the polemarch met his end, as also Pelles, who was on his

personal staff, and the whole of the Spartans present without

exception--eighteen or thereabouts--perished, either crushed by stones

or succumbing to other wounds. Indeed, except for timely aid brought

from the camp where the men were supping, the chances are that not a

man would have escaped to tell the tale.



[20] = 25,000 pounds nearly.



[21 Or, "not to speak of provisions."







IV



This incident ended the campaign. The army as a whole was disbanded,

the contingents retiring to their several cities, and Agesilaus home

across the Gulf by sea.



B.C. 393. Subsequently[1] the war between the two parties recommenced.

The Athenians, Boeotians, Argives, and the other allies made Corinth

the base of their operations; the Lacedaemonians and their allies held

Sicyon as theirs. As to the Corinthians, they had to face the fact

that, owing to their proximity to the seat of war, it was their

territory which was ravaged and their people who perished, while the

rest of the allies abode in peace and reaped the fruits of their lands

in due season. Hence the majority of them, including the better class,

desired peace, and gathering into knots they indoctrinated one another

with these views.



[1] B.C. 393. See Grote, ix. p. 455, note 2 foll.; "Hell." IV. viii.

    7.



B.C. 392.[2] On the other hand, it could hardly escape the notice of

the allied powers, the Argives, Athenians, and Boeotians, as also

those of the Corinthians themselves who had received a share of the

king's moneys, or for whatever reason were most directly interested in

the war, that if they did not promptly put the peace party out of the

way, ten chances to one the old laconising policy would again hold the

field. It seemed there was nothing for it but the remedy of the knife.

There was a refinement of wickedness in the plan adopted. With most

people the life even of a legally condemned criminal is held sacred

during a solemn season, but these men deliberately selected the last

day of the Eucleia,[3] when they might reckon on capturing more

victims in the crowded market-place, for their murderous purposes.

Their agents were supplied with the names of those to be gotten rid

of, the signal was given, and then, drawing their daggers, they fell

to work. Here a man was struck down standing in the centre of a group

of talkers, and there another seated; a third while peacably enjoying

himself at the play; a fourth actually whilst officiating as a judge

at some dramatic contest.[4] When what was taking place became known,

there was a general flight on the part of the better classes. Some

fled to the images of the gods in the market-place, others to the

altars; and here these unhallowed miscreants, ringleaders and

followers alike, utterly regardless of duty and law, fell to

butchering their victims even within the sacred precincts of the gods;

so that even some of those against whom no hand was lifted--honest,

law-abiding folk--were filled with sore amazement at sight of such

impiety. In this way many of the elder citizens, as mustering more

thickly in the market-place, were done to death. The younger men,

acting on a suspicion conceived by one of their number, Pasimelus, as

to what was going to take place, kept quiet in the Kraneion;[5] but

hearing screams and shouting and being joined anon by some who had

escaped from the affair, they took the hint, and, running up along the

slope of the Acrocorinthus, succeeded in repelling an attack of the

Argives and the rest. While they were still deliberating what they

ought to do, down fell a capital from its column--without assignable

cause, whether of earthquake or wind. Also, when they sacrificed, the

aspect of the victims was such that the soothsayers said it was better

to descend from that position.



[2] Others assign the incidents of this whole chapter iv. to B.C. 393.



[3] The festival of Artemis Eucleia.



[4] See Diod. xiv. 86.



[5] See Paus. II. ii. 4.



So they retired, in the first instance prepared to go into exile

beyond the territory of Corinth. It was only upon the persuasion of

their friends and the earnest entreaties of their mothers and sisters

who came out to them, supported by the solemn assurance of the men in

power themselves, who swore to guarantee them against evil

consequences, that some of them finally consented to return home.

Presented to their eyes was the spectacle of a tyranny in full

exercise, and to their minds the consciousness of the obliteration of

their city, seeing that boundaries were plucked up and the land of

their fathers had come to be re-entitled by the name of Argos instead

of Corinth; and furthermore, compulsion was put upon them to share in

the constitution in vogue at Argos, for which they had ltitle

appetite, while in their own city they wielded less power than the

resident aliens. So that a party sprang up among them whose creed was,

that life was not worth living on such terms: their endeavour must be

to make their fatherland once more the Corinth of old days--to restore

freedom to their city, purified from the murderer and his pollution

and fairly rooted in good order and legality.[6] It was a design worth

the venture: if they succeeded they would become the saviours of their

country; if not--why, in the effort to grasp the fairest flower of

happiness, they would but overreach, and find instead a glorious

termination to existence.



[6] {eunomia}. See "Pol. Ath." i. 8; Arist. "Pol." iv. 8, 6; iii. 9,

    8; v. 7, 4.



It was in furtherance of this design that two men--Pasimelus and

Alcimenes--undertook to creep through a watercourse and effect a

meeting with Praxitas the polemarch of the Lacedaemonians, who was on

garrison duty with his own division in Sicyon. They told him they

could give him ingress at a point in the long walls leading to

Lechaeum. Praxitas, knowing from previous experience that the two men

might be relied upon, believed their statement; and having arranged

for the further detention in Sicyon of the division which was on the

point of departure, he busied himself with plans for the enterprise.

When the two men, partly by chance and partly by contrivance, came to

be on guard at the gate where the tophy now stands, without further

ado Praxitas presented himself with his division, taking with him also

the men of Sicyon and the whole of the Corinthian exiles.[7] Having

reached the gate, he had a qualm of misgiving, and hesitated to step

inside until he had first sent in a man on whom he could rely to take

a look at things within. The two Corinthians introduced him, and made

so simple and straightforward a representation[8] that the visitor was

convinced, and reported everything as free of pitfalls as the two had

asserted. Then the polemarch entered, but owing to the wide space

between the double walls, as soon as they came to form in line within,

the intruders were impressed by the paucity of their numbers. They

therefore erected a stockade, and dug as good a trench as they could

in front of them, pending the arrival of reinforcements from the

allies. In their rear, moreover, lay the guard of the Boeotians in the

harbour. Thus they passed the whole day which followed the night of

ingress without striking a blow.



[8] Or, "showed him the place in so straightforward a manner."



On the next day, however, the Argive troops arrived in all haste,

hurrying to the rescue, and found the enemy duly drawn up. The

Lacedaemonians were on their own right, the men of Sicyon next, and

leaning against the eastern wall the Corinthian exiles, one hundred

and fifty strong.[9] Their opponents marshalled their lines face to

face in correspondence: Iphicrates with his mercenaries abutting on

the eastern wall; next to them the Argives, whilst the Corinthians of

the city held their left. In the pride inspired by numbers they began

advancing at once. They overpowered the Sicyonians, and tearing

asunder the stockade, pursued them to the sea and here slew numbers of

them. At that instant Pasimachus, the cavalry general, at the head of

a handful of troopers, seeing the Sicyonians sore presed, made fast

the horses of his troops to the trees, and relieving the Sicyonians of

their heavy infantry shields, advanced with his volunteers against the

Argives. The latter, seeing the Sigmas on the shields and taking them

to be "Sicyonians," had not the slightest fear. Whereupon, as the

story goes, Pasimachus, exclaiming in his broad Doric, "By the twin

gods! these Sigmas will cheat you, you Argives," came to close

quarters, and in that battle of a handful against a host, was slain

himself with all his followers. In another quarter of the field,

however, the Corinthian exiles had got the better of their opponents

and worked their way up, so that they were now touching the city

circumvallation walls.



[9] See Grote, ix. p. 333 foll.



The Lacedaemonians, on their side, perceiving the discomfiture of the

Sicyonians, sprang out with timely aid, keeping the palisade-work on

their left. But the Argives, discovering that the Lacedaemonians were

behind them, wheeled round and came racing back, pouring out of the

palisade at full speed. Their extreme right, with unprotected flanks

exposed, fell victims to the Lacedaemonians; the rest, hugging the

wall, made good their retreat in dense masses towards the city. Here

they encountered the Corinthian exiles, and discovering that they had

fallen upon foes, swerved aside in the reverse direction. In this

predicament some mounted by the ladders of the city wall, and, leaping

down from its summit, were destroyed;[10] others yielded up their

lives, thrust through, as they jostled at the foot of the steps;

others again were literally trampled under one another's feet and

suffocated.



[10] Or, "plunged from its summit into perdition." See Thuc. ii. 4.



The Lacedaemonians had no difficulty in the choice of victims; for at

that instant a work was assigned to them to do,[11] such as they could

hardly have hoped or prayed for. To find delivered into their hands a

mob of helpless enemies, in an ecstasy of terror, presenting their

unarmed sides in such sort that none turned to defend himself, but

each victim rather seemed to contribute what he could towards his own

destruction--if that was not divine interposition, I know now what to

call it. Miracle or not, in that little space so many fell, and the

corpses lay piled so thick, that eyes familiar with the stacking of

corn or wood or piles of stones were called upon to gaze at layers of

human bodies. Nor did the guard of the Boeotians in the port

itself[12] escape death; some were slain upon the ramparts, others on

the roofs of the dock-houses, which they had scaled for refuge.

Nothing remained but for the Corinthians and Argives to carry away

their dead under cover of a truce; whilst the allies of Lacedaemon

poured in their reinforcements. When these were collected, Praxitas

decided in the first place to raze enough of the walls to allow a free

broadway for an army on march. This done, he put himself at the head

of his troops and advanced on the road to Megara, taking by assault,

first Sidus and next Crommyon. Leaving garrisons in these two

fortresses, he retraced his steps, and finally fortifying Epieiceia as

a garrison outpost to protect the territory of the allies, he at once

disbanded his troops and himself withdrew to Lacedaemon.



[11] Or, "Heaven assigned to them a work . . ." Lit. "The God . . ."



[12] I.e. "of Lechaeum."



B.C. 392-391.[13] After this the great armaments of both belligerents

had ceased to exist. The states merely furnished garrisons--the one

set at Corinth, the other set at Sicyon--and were content to guard the

walls. Though even so, a vigorous war was carried on by dint of the

mercenary troops with which both sides were furnished.



[13] So Grote and Curtius; al. B.C. 393.



A signal incident in the period was the invasion of Phlius by

Iphicrates. He laid an ambuscade, and with a small body of troops

adopting a system of guerilla war, took occasion of an unguarded sally

of the citizens of Phlius to inflict such losses on them, that though

they had never previously received the Lacedaemonians within their

walls, they received them now. They had hitherto feared to do so lest

it might lead to the restoration of the banished members of their

community, who gave out that they owed their exile to their

Lacedaemonian sympathies;[14] but they were now in such abject fear of

the Corinthian party that they sent to fetch the Lacedaemonians, and

delivered the city and citadel to their safe keeping. These latter,

however, well disposed to the exiles of Phlius, did not, at the time

they held the city, so much as breathe the thought of bringing back

the exiles; on the contrary, as soon as the city seemed to have

recovered its confidence, they took their departure, leaving city and

laws precisely as they had found them on their entry.



[14] Lit. "laconism."



To return to Iphicrates and his men: they frequently extended their

incursions even into Arcadia in many directions,[15] following their

usual guerilla tactics, but also making assaults on fortified posts.

The heavy infantry of the Arcadians positively refused to face them in

the field, so profound was the terror in which they held these light

troops. In compensation, the light troops themselves entertained a

wholesome dread of the Lacedaemonians, and did not venture to approach

even within javelin-range of their heavy infantry. They had been

taught a lesson when, within that distance, some of the younger

hoplites had made a dash at them, catching and putting some of them to

the sword. But however profound the contempt of the Lacedaemonians for

these light troops, their contempt for their own allies was deeper.

(On one occasion[16] a reinforcement of Mantineans had sallied from

the walls between Corinth and Lechaeum to engage the peltasts, and had

no sooner come under attack than they swerved, losing some of their

men as they made good their retreat. The Lacedaemonians were unkind

enough to poke fun at these unfortunates. "Our allies," they said,

"stand in as much awe of these peltasts as children of the bogies and

hobgoblins of their nurses." For themselves, starting from Lechaeum,

they found no difficulty in marching right round the city of Corinth

with a single Lacedaemonian division and the Corinthian exiles.)[17]



[15] See Thuc. ii. 4.



[16] See Grote, ix. 472 note. Lechaeum was not taken by the

    Lacedaemonians until the Corinthian long walls had been rebuilt by

    the Athenians. Possibly the incidents in this section (S. 17)

    occurred after the capture of Lechaeum. The historian introduces

    them parenthetically, as it were, in illustration of his main

    topic--the success of the peltasts.



[17] Or, adopting Schneider's conjecture, {estratopedeuonto}, add "and

    encamping."



The Athenians, on their side, who felt the power of the Lacedaemonians

to be dangerously close, now that the walls of Corinth had been laid

open, and even apprehended a direct attack upon themselves, determined

to rebuild the portion of the wall severed by Praxitas. Accordingly

they set out with their whole force, including a suite of stonelayers,

masons, and carpenters, and within a few days erected a quite splendid

wall on the side facing Sicyon towards the west,[18] and then

proceeded with more leisure to the completion of the eastern portion.



[18] See Thuc. vi. 98.



To turn once more to the other side: the Lacedaemonians, indignant at

the notion that the Argives should be gathering the produce of their

lands in peace at home, as if war were a pastime, marched against

them. Agesilaus commanded the expedition, and after ravaging their

territory from one end to the other, crossed their frontier at

Tenea[19] and swooped down upon Corinth, taking the walls which had

been lately rebuilt by the Athenians. He was supported on the sea side

by his brother Teleutias[20] with a naval force of about twelve

triremes, and the mother of both was able to congratulate herself on

the joint success of both her sons; one having captured the enemy's

walls by land and the other his ships and naval arsenal by sea, on the

same day. These achievements sufficed Agesilaus for the present; he

disbanded the army of the allies and led the state troops home.



[19] Reading {Tenean}, Koppen's emendation for {tegean}. In the

    parallel passage ("Ages." ii. 17) the text has {kata ta stena}.

    See Grote, "H. G." ix. 471.



[20] See below, IV. viii. 11.







V



B.C. 390.[1] Subsequently the Lacedaemonians made a second expedition

against Corinth. They heard from the exiles that the citizens

contrived to preserve all their cattle in Peiraeum; indeed, large

numbers derived their subsistence from the place. Agesilaus was again

in command of the expedition. In the first instance he advanced upon

the Isthmus. It was the month of the Isthmian games,[2] and here he

found the Argives engaged in conducting the sacrifice to Poseidon, as

if Corinth were Argos. So when they perceived the approach of

Agesilaus, the Argives and their friends left the offerings as they

lay, including the preparations for the breakfast, and retired with

undisguised alarm into the city by the Cenchrean road.[3] Agesilaus,

though he observed the movement, refrained from giving chase, but

taking up his quarters in the temple, there proceeded to offer victims

to the god himself, and waited until the Corinthian exiles had

celebrated the sacrifice to Poseidon, along with the games. But no

sooner had Agesilaus turned his back and retired, than the Argives

returned and celebrated the Isthmian games afresh; so that in this

particular year there were cases in which the same competitors were

twice defeated in this or that contest, or conversely, the same man

was proclaimed victor twice over.



[1] Al. B.C. 392. The historian omits the overtures for peace, B.C.

    391 (or 391-390) referred to in Andoc. "De Pace." See Jebb, "Att.

    Or." i. 83, 108; Grote, "H. G." ix. 474; Curtius, "H. G." Eng. tr.

    iv. 261.



[2] Grote and Curtius believe these to be the Isthmian games of 390

    B.C., not of 392 B.C., as Sauppe and others suppose. See Peter,

    "Chron. Table," p. 89, note 183; Jowett, "Thuc." ii. 468, note on

    VIII. 9, 1.



[3] Lit. "road to Cenchreae."



On the fourth day Agesilaus led his troops against Peiraeum, but

finding it strongly defended, he made a sudden retrograde march after

the morning meal in the direction of the capital, as though he

calculated on the betrayal of the city. The Corinthians, in

apprehension of some such possible catastrophe, sent to summon

Iphicrates with the larger portion of his light infantry. These passed

by duly in the night, not unobserved, however, by Agesilaus, who at

once turned round at break of day and advanced on Piraeum. He himself

kept to the low ground by the hot springs,[4] sending a division to

scale the top of the pass. That night he encamped at the hot springs,

while the division bivouacked in the open, in possession of the pass.

Here Agesilaus distinguished himself by an invention as seasonable as

it was simple. Among those who carried provisions for the division not

one had thought of bringing fire. The altitude was considerable; there

had been a fall of rain and hail towards evening and the temperature

was low; besides which, the scaling party were clad in thin garments

suited to the summer season. There they sat shivering in the dark,

with scarcely heart to attack their suppers, when Agesilaus sent up to

them as many as ten porters carrying fire in earthen pots. One found

his way up one way, one another, and presently there were many

bonfires blazing--magnificently enough, since there was plenty of wood

to hand; so that all fell to oiling themselves and many supped over

again. The same night the sky was lit up by the blaze of the temple of

Poseidon--set on fire no one knows how.



[4] Near mod. Lutraki.



When the men in Piraeum perceived that the pass was occupied, they at

once abandoned all thought of self-defence and fled for refuge to the

Heraion[5]--men and women, slaves and free-born, with the greater part

of their flocks and herds. Agesilaus, with the main body, meanwhile

pursued his march by the sea-shore, and the division, simultaneously

descending from the heights, captured the fortified position of Oenoe,

appropriating its contents. Indeed, all the troops on that day reaped

a rich harvest in the supplies they brought in from various

farmsteads. Presently those who had escaped into the Heraion came out,

offering to leave it to Agesilaus to decide what he would do with

them. He decided to deliver up to the exiles all those concerned with

the late butchery, and that all else should be sold. And so from the

Heraion streamed out a long line of prisoners, whilst from other sides

embassies arrived in numbers; and amongst these a deputation from the

Boeotians, anxious to learn what they should do to obtain peace. These

latter Agesilaus, with a certain loftiness of manner, affected not

even to see, although Pharax,[6] their proxenus, stood by their side

to introduce them. Seated in a circular edifice on the margin of the

lake,[7] he surveyed the host of captives and valuables as they were

brought out. Beside the prisoners, to guard them, stepped the

Lacedaemonian warriors from the camp, carrying their spears--and

themselves plucked all gaze their way, so readily will success and the

transient fortune of the moment rivet attention. But even while

Agesilaus was still thus seated, wearing a look betokening

satisfaction at some great achievement, a horseman came galloping up;

the flanks of his charger streamed with sweat. To the many inquiries

what news he brought, the rider responded never a word; but being now

close beside Agesilaus, he leaped from his horse, and running up to

him with lowering visage narrated the disaster of the Spartan

division[8] at Lechaeum. At these tidings the king sprang instantly

from his seat, clutching his spear, and bade his herald summon to a

meeting the generals, captains of fifties, and commanders of foreign

brigades.[9] When these had rapidly assembled he bade them, seeing

that the morning meal had not yet been tasted, to swallow hastily what

they could, and with all possible speed to overtake him. But for

himself, he, with the officers of the royal staff,[10] set off at once

without breakfast. His bodyguard, with their heavy arms, accompanied

him with all speed--himself in advance, the officers following behind.

In this fashion he had already passed beyond the warm springs, and was

well within the plateau of Lechaeum, when three horsemen rode up with

further news: the dead bodies had been picked up. On receipt of these

tidings he commanded the troops to order arms, and having rested them

a little space, led them back again to the Heraion. The next day he

spent in disposing of the captured property.[11]



[5] Or, "Heraeum," i.e. sanctuary of Hera, on a promontory so called.

    See Leake, "Morea," iii. 317.



[6] See "Hell." III. ii. 12, if the same.



[7] Or, "on the round pavilion by the lake" (mod. Vuliasmeni).



[8] Technically "mora."



[9] Lit. the polemarchs, penteconters, and xenagoi.



[10] See "Pol. Lac." xiii. 1.



[11] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 480, in reference to "Ages." vii. 6.



The ambassadors of the Boeotians were then summoned, and, being asked

to explain the object of their coming, made no further mention of the

word "peace," but replied that, if there was nothing to hinder it,

they wished to have a pass to their own soldiers within the capital.

The king answered with a smile: "I know your desire is not so much to

see your soldiers as to feast your eyes on the good fortune of your

friends, and to measure its magnitude. Wait then, I will conduct you

myself; with me you will be better able to discover the true value of

what has taken place." And he was as good as his word. Next day he

sacrificed, and led his army up to the gates of Corinth. The trophy he

respected, but not one tree did he leave standing--chopping and

burning, as proof positive that no one dared to face him in the field.

And having so done, he encamped about Lechaeum; and as to the Theban

ambassadors, in lieu of letting them pass into the city, he sent them

off by sea across to Creusis.



But in proportion to the unwontedness of such a calamity befalling

Lacedaemonians, a widespread mourning fell upon the whole Laconian

army, those alone excepted whose sons or fathers or brothers had died

at their post. The bearing of these resembled that of conquerors,[12]

as with bright faces they moved freely to and fro, glorying in their

domestic sorrow. Now the tragic fate which befell the division was on

this wise: It was the unvaried custom of the men of Amyclae to return

home at the Hyacinthia,[13] to join in the sacred paean, a custom not

to be interrupted by active service or absence from home or for any

other reason. So, too, on this occasion, Agesilaus had left behind all

the Amyclaeans serving in any part of his army at Lechaeum. At the

right moment the general in command of the garrison at that place had

posted the garrison troops of the allies to guard the walls during his

absence, and put himself at the head of his division of heavy infantry

with that of the cavalry,[14] and led the Amyclaeans past the walls of

Corinth. Arrived at a point within three miles or so[15] of Sicyon,

the polemarch turned back himself in the direction of Lechaeum with

his heavy infantry regiment, six hundred strong, giving orders to the

cavalry commandant to escort the Amyclaeans with his division as far

as they required, and then to turn and overtake him. It cannot be said

that the Lacedaemonians were ignorant of the large number of light

troops and heavy infantry inside Corinth, but owing to their former

successes they arrogantly presumed that no one would attack them.

Within the capital of the Corinthians, however, their scant numbers--a

thin line of heavy infantry unsupported by light infantry or cavalry--

had been noted; and Callias, the son of Hipponicus,[16] who was in

command of the Athenian hoplites, and Iphicrates at the head of his

peltasts, saw no risk in attacking with the light brigade. Since if

the enemy continued his march by the high road, he would be cut up by

showers of javelins on his exposed right flank; or if he were tempted

to take the offensive, they with their peltasts, the nimblest of all

light troops, would easily slip out of the grasp of his hoplites.



[12] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 488.



[13] Observed on three days of the month Hecatombaeus (= July). See

    Muller's "Dorians," ii. 360. For Amyclae, see Leake, "Morea," i.

    ch. iv. p. 145 foll.; Baedeker's "Greece," p. 279.



[14] See below, "Hell." VI. iv. 12; and "Pol. Lac." xi. 4, xiii. 4.



[15] Lit. "twenty or thirty stades."



[16] See Cobet, "Prosop. Xen." p. 67 foll.



With this clearly-conceived idea they led out their troops; and while

Callias drew up his heavy infantry in line at no great distance from

the city, Iphicrates and his peltasts made a dash at the returning

division.



The Lacedaemonians were presently within range of the javelins.[17]

Here a man was wounded, and there another dropped, not to rise again.

Each time orders were given to the attendant shield-bearers[18] to

pick up the men and bear them into Lechaeum; and these indeed were the

only members of the mora who were, strictly speaking, saved. Then the

polemarch ordered the ten-years-service men[19] to charge and drive

off their assailants. Charge, however, as they might, they took

nothing by their pains--not a man could they come at within javelin

range. Being heavy infantry opposed to light troops, before they could

get to close quarters the enemy's word of command sounded "Retire!"

whilst as soon as their own ranks fell back, scattered as they were in

consequence of a charge where each man's individual speed had told,

Iphicrates and his men turned right about and renewed the javelin

attack, while others, running alongside, harassed their exposed flank.

At the very first charge the assailants had shot down nine or ten,

and, encouraged by this success, pressed on with increasing audacity.

These attacks told so severely that the polemarch a second time gave

the order (and this time for the fifteen-years-service men) to charge.

The order was promptly obeyed, but on retiring they lost more men than

on the first occasion, and it was not until the pick and flower of the

division had succumbed that they were joined by their returning

cavalry, in whose company they once again attempted a charge. The

light infantry gave way, but the attack of the cavalry was feebly

enforced. Instead of pressing home the charge until at least they had

sabred some of the enemy, they kept their horses abreast of their

infantry skirmishers,[20] charging and wheeling side by side.



[17] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 467, note on the improvements of

    Iphicrates.



[18] Grote, "H. G." ix. 484; cf. "Hell." IV. viii. 39; "Anab." IV. ii.

    20; Herod. ix. 10-29.



[19] Youngest rank and file, between eighteen and twenty-eight years

    of age, who formed the first line. The Spartan was liable to

    service at the age of eighteen. From twenty-eight to thirty-three

    he would belong to the fifteen-years-service division (the second

    line); and so on. See below, IV. vi. 10.



[20] See Thuc. iv. 125.



Again and again the monotonous tale of doing and suffering repeated

itself, except that as their own ranks grew thinner and their courage

ebbed, the courage of their assailants grew bolder and their numbers

increased. In desperation they massed compactly upon the narrow slope

of a hillock, distant a couple of furlongs[21] or so from the sea, and

a couple of miles[22] perhaps from Lechaeum. Their friends in

Lechaeum, perceiving them, embarked in boats and sailed round until

they were immediately under the hillock. And now, in the very slough

of despair, being so sorely troubled as man after man dropped dead,

and unable to strike a blow, to crown their distress they saw the

enemy's heavy infantry advancing. Then they took to flight; some of

them threw themselves into the sea; others--a mere handful--escaped

with the cavalry into Lechaeum. The death-roll, including those who

fell in the second fight and the final flight, must have numbered two

hundred and fifty slain, or thereabouts.[23] Such is the tale of the

destruction of the Lacedaemonian mora.



[21] Lit. "two stades."



[22] Lit. "sixteen or seventeen stades."



[23] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 486.



Subsequently, with the mutilated fragment of the division, Agesilaus

turned his back upon Lechaeum, leaving another division behind to

garrison that port. On his passage homewards, as he wound his way

through the various cities, he made a point of arriving at each as

late in the day as possible, renewing his march as early as possible

next morning. Leaving Orchomenus at the first streak of dawn, he

passed Mantinea still under cover of darkness. The spectacle of the

Mantineans rejoicing at their misfortune would have been too severe an

ordeal for his soldiers.



But Iphicrates had not yet reached the summit of his good fortune.

Success followed upon success. Lacedaemonian garrisons had been placed

in Sidus and Crommyon by Praxitas when he took these fortresses, and

again in Oenoe, when Peiraeum was taken quite lately by Agesilaus. One

and all of these now fell into the hands of Iphicrates. Lechaeum still

held out, garrisoned as it was by the Lacedaemonians and their allies;

while the Corinthian exiles, unable since[24] the disaster of the mora

any longer to pass freely by land from Sicyon, had the sea passage

still open to them, and using Lechaeum as their base,[25] kept up a

game of mutual annoyance with the party in the capital.



[24] Lit. "owing to."



[25] The illustrative incidents narrated in chapter iv. 17 may belong

    to this period.







VI



B.C. 390-389.[1] At a later date the Achaeans, being in possession of

Calydon, a town from old times belonging to Aetolia, and having

further incorporated the Calydonians as citizens,[2] were under the

necessity of garrisoning their new possession. The reason was, that

the Arcarnanians were threatening the place with an army, and were

aided by contingents from Athens and Boeotia, who were anxious to help

their allies.[3] Under the strain of this combined attack the Achaeans

despatched ambassadors to Lacedaemon, who on arrival complained of the

unfair conduct of Lacedaemon towards themselves. "We, sirs," they

said, "are ever ready to serve in your armies, in obedience to

whatever orders you choose to issue; we follow you whithersoever you

think fit to lead; but when it comes to our being beleaguered by the

Acarnanians, with their allies the Athenians and Boeotians, you show

not the slightest concern. Understand, then, that if things go on thus

we cannot hold out; but either we must give up all part in the war in

Peloponnesus and cross over in full force to engage the Arcarnanians,

or we must make peace with them on whatever terms we can." This

language was a tacit threat that if they failed to obtain the

assistance they felt entitled to from Lacedaemon they would quit the

alliance.



[1] According to others (who suppose that the Isthmia and the events

    recorded in chapter v. 1-19 above belong to B.C. 392), we have now

    reached B.C. 391.



[2] Or, "having conferred a city organisation on the Calydonians."



[3] See Thuc. ii. 68.



The ephors and the assembly concluded that there was no alternative

but to assist the Achaeans in their campaign against the Acarnanians.

Accordingly they sent out Agesilaus with two divisions and the proper

complement of allies. The Achaeans none the less marched out in full

force themselves. No sooner had Agesilaus crossed the gulf than there

was a general flight of the population from the country districts into

the towns, whilst the flocks and herds were driven into remote

districts that they might not be captured by the troops. Being now

arrived on the frontier of the enemy's territory, Agesilaus sent to

the general assembly of the Acarnanians at Stratus,[4] warning them

that unless they chose to give up their alliance with the Boeotians

and Athenians, and to take instead themselves and their allies, he

would ravage their territory through its length and breadth, and not

spare a single thing. When they turned a deaf ear to this summons, the

other proceeded to do what he threatened, systematically laying the

district waste, felling the timber and cutting down the fruit-trees,

while slowly moving on at the rate of ten or twelve furlongs a day.

The Acarnanians, owing to the snail-like progress of the enemy, were

lulled into a sense of security. They even began bringing down their

cattle from their alps, and devoted themselves to the tillage of far

the greater portion of their fields. But Agesilaus only waited till

their rash confidence reached its climax; then on the fifteenth or

sixteenth day after he head first entered the country he sacrificed at

early dawn, and before evening had traversed eighteen miles[5] or so

of country to the lake[6] round which were collected nearly all the

flocks and herds of the Acarnanians, and so captured a vast quantity

of cattle, horses, and grazing stock of all kinds, besides numerous

slaves.



[4] "The Akarnanians had, in early times, occupied the hill of Olpai

    as a place for judicial proceedings common to the whole nation"

    (see Thuc. iii. 105). "But in Thucydides' own time Stratos had

    attained its position as the greatest city of Akarnania, and

    probably the Federal Assemblies were already held there" (Thuc.

    ii. 80). "In the days of Agesilaos we find Stratos still more

    distinctly marked as the place of Federal meeting."--Freeman,

    "Hist. Fed. Gov." ch. iv. p. 148 foll., "On the constitution of

    the League."



[5] Lit. "one hundred and sixty stades."



[6] See Thuc. ii. 80; vi. 106.



Having secured this prize, he stayed on the spot the whole of the

following day, and devoted himself to disposing of the captured

property by public sale. While he was thus engaged, a large body of

Arcarnanian light infantry appeared, and availing themselves of the

position in which Agesilaus was encamped against the mountain side,

assailed him with volleys of sling-stones and rocks from the

razor-edge of the mountain, without suffering any scathe themselves.

By this means they succeeded in dislodging and forcing his troops down

into the level plain, and that too at an hour when the whole camp was

engaged in preparations for the evening meal. As night drew on, the

Acarnanians retired; sentinels were posted, and the troops slept in

peace.



Next day Agesilaus led off his army. The exit from the plain and

meadow-land round the lake was a narrow aperture through a close

encircling range of hills. In occupation of this mountain barrier the

Acarnanians, from the vantage-ground above, poured down a continuous

pelt of stones and other missiles, or, creeping down to the fringes,

dogged and annoyed them so much that the army was no longer able to

proceed. If the heavy infantry or cavalry made sallies from the main

line they did no harm to their assailants, for the Acarnanians had

only to retire and they had quickly gained their strongholds. It was

too severe a task, Agesilaus thought, to force his way through the

narrow pass so sorely beset. He made up his mind, therefore, to charge

that portion of the enemy who dogged his left, though these were

pretty numerous. The range of hills on this side was more accessible

to heavy infantry and horse alike. During the interval needed for the

inspection of victims, the Acarnanians kept plying them with javelins

and bullets, and, coming into close proximity, wounded man after man.

But presently came the word of command, "Advance!" and the fifteen-

years-service men of the heavy infantry[7] ran forward, accompanied by

the cavalry, at a round pace, the general himself steadily following

with the rest of the column. Those of the Acarnanians who had crept

down the mountain side at that instant in the midst of their

sharpshooting turned and fled, and as they climbed the steep, man

after man was slain. When, however, the top of the pass was reached,

there stood the hoplites of the Acarnanians drawn up in battle line,

and supported by the mass of their light infantry. There they steadily

waited, keeping up a continuous discharge of missiles the while, or

launching their long spears; whereby they dealt wounds to the cavalry

troopers and death in some cases to the horses. But when they were all

but within the clutches of the advancing heavy infantry[8] of the

Lacedaemonians their firmness forsook them; they swerved and fled, and

there died of them on that day about three hundred. So ended the

affair.



[7] I.e. "the first two ranks." See above, IV. v. 14.



[8] See "Ages." ii. 20, for an extraordinary discrepancy.



Agesilaus set up a trophy of victory, and afterwards making a tour of

the country, he visited it with fire and sword.[9] Occasionally, in

obedience to pressure put upon him by the Achaeans, he would assault

some city, but did not capture a single one. And now, as the season of

autumn rapidly approached, he prepared to leave the country; whereupon

the Achaeans, who looked upon his exploits as abortive, seeing that

not a single city, willingly or unwillingly, had as yet been detached

from their opponents, begged him, as the smallest service he could

render them, at any rate to stay long enough in the country to prevent

the Acarnanians from sowing their corn. He answered that the course

they suggested ran counter to expediency. "You forget," he said, "that

I mean to invade your enemies again next summer; and therefore the

larger their sowing now, the stronger will be their appetite for peace

hereafter." With this retort he withdrew overland through Aetolia, and

by roads, moreover, which no army, small or great, could possibly have

traversed without the consent of the inhabitants. The Aetolians,

however, were only too glad to yield the Spartan king a free passage,

cherishing hopes as they did that he would aid them to recover

Naupactus. On reaching Rhium[10] he crossed the gulf at that point and

returned homewards, the more direct passage from Calydon to

Peloponnesus being effectually barred by an Athenian squadron

stationed at Oeniadae.



[9] Or lit. "burning and felling."



[10] Or Antirrhium (as more commonly called).







VII



B.C. 389-388.[1] On the expiration of winter, and in fulfilment of his

promise to the Achaeans, Agesilaus called out the ban once more with

early spring to invade the Acarnanians. The latter were apprised of

his intention, and, being persuaded that owing to the midland

situation of their cities they would just as truly be blockaded by an

enemy who chose to destroy their corn as they would be if besieged

with entrenchments in regular form, they sent ambassadors to

Lacedaemon, and made peace with the Achaeans and alliance with the

Lacedaemonians. Thus closes this page of history concerning the

affairs of Arcarnania.



[1] According to others, B.C. 390.



To turn to the next. There was a feeling on the part of the

Lacedaemonians[2] that no expedition against Athens or Boeotia would

be safe so long as a state so important and so close to their own

frontier as Argos remained in open hostility behind them. Accordingly

they called out the ban against Argos. Now when Agesipolis learnt that

the duty of leadership devolved on him, and, moreover, that the

sacrifices before crossing the frontier were favourable, he went to

Olympia and consulted the will of the god. "Would it be lawful to

him," he inquired, "not to accept the holy truce, on the ground that

the Argives made the season for it[3] depend not on a fixed date, but

on the prospect of a Lacedaemonian invasion?" The god indicated to the

inquirer that he might lawfully repudiate any holy truce which was

fraudulently antedated.[4] Not content with this, the young king, on

leaving Olympia, went at once to Delphi, and at that shrine put the

same question to Apollo: "Were his views in accordance with his

Father's as touching the holy truce?"--to which the son of Zeus made

answer: "Yea, altogether in accordance."[5]



[2] Or, "It was agreed by the Lacedaemonians."



[3] I.e. "the season of the Carneia."



[4] Or, "wrongfully put forward." See below, V. i. 29; iii. 28; Paus.

    III. v. 8; Jebb. "Att. Or." i. p. 131; Grote, "H. G." ix. 494

    foll.; Jowett, "Thuc." ii. 315; note to Thuc. V. liv. 3.



[5] Grote; cf. Aristot. "Rhet." ii. 33.



Then without further hesitation, picking up his army at Phlius (where,

during his absence to visit the temples, the troops had been

collecting), he advanced by Nemea into the enemy's territory. The

Argives, on their side, perceiving that they would be unable to hinder

his advance, in accordance with their custom sent a couple of heralds,

garlanded, and presented their usual plea of a holy truce. Agesipolis

answered them curtly that the gods were not satisfied with the justice

of their plea, and, refusing to accept the truce, pushed forward,

causing thereby great perplexity and consternation throughout the

rural districts and the capital itself.



But while he was getting his evening meal that first evening in the

Argive territory--just at the moment when the after-dinner libation

had been poured out--the god sent an earthquake; and with one consent

the Lacedaemonians, beginning with the officers of the royal quarters,

sang the sacred hymn of Poseidon. The soldiers, in general, expected

to retreat, arguing that, on the occurrence of an earthquake once

before, Agis had retired from Elis. But Agesipolis held another view:

if the god had sent his earthquake at the moment when he was

meditating invasion, he should have understood that the god forbade

his entrance; but now, when the invasion was a thing effected, he must

needs take it as a signal of his approval.[6] Accordingly next morning

he sacrificed to Poseidon, and advanced a short distance further into

the country.



[6] Or, "interpret the signal as a summons to advance."



The late expedition of Agesilaus into Argos[7] was still fresh in

men's minds, and Agesipolis was eager to ascertain from the soldiers

how close his predecessor had advanced to the fortification walls; or

again, how far he had gone in ravaging the open country--not unlike a

competitor in the pentathlon,[8] eager to cap the performance of his

rival in each event. On one occasion it was only the discharge of

missiles from the towers which forced him to recross the trenches

round the walls; on another, profiting by the absence of the majority

of the Argives in Laconian territory, he came so close to the gates

that their officers actually shut out their own Boeotian cavalry on

the point of entering, in terror lest the Lacedaemonians might pour

into the town in company, and these Boeotian troopers were forced to

cling, like bats to a wall, under each coign of vantage beneath the

battlements. Had it not been for the accidental absence of the

Cretans,[9] who had gone off on a raid to Nauplia, without a doubt

numbers of men and horses would have been shot down. At a later date,

while encamping in the neighbourhood of the Enclosures,[10] a thunder-

bolt fell into his camp. One or two men were struck, while others died

from the effect of the concussion on their brains. At a still later

period he was anxious to fortify some sort of garrison outpost in the

pass of Celusa,[11] but upon offering sacrifice the victims proved

lobeless,[12] and he was constrained to lead back and disband his army

--not without serious injury inflicted on the Argives, as the result

of an invasion which had taken them wholly by surprise.



[7] See above, "Hell." IV. iv. 19.



[8] The pentathlon of Olympia and the other great games consisted of

    five contests, in the following order--(1) leaping, (2) discus-

    throwing, (3) javelin-throwing, (4) running, (5) wrestling. Cf.

    Simonides, {alma podokeien diskon akonta palen}, where, "metri

    gratia," the order is inverted. The competitors were drawn in

    pairs. The odd man who drew a bye in any particular round or heat

    was called the "ephedros." The successful athletes of the pairs,

    that is, those who had won any three events out of five, would

    then again be drawn against each other, and so on until only two

    were left, between whom the final heat took place. See, for an

    exhaustive discussion of the subject, Prof. Percy Gardner, "The

    Pentathlon of the Greeks" ("Journal of Hellenic Studies," vol. i.

    9, p. 210 foll. pl. viii.), from whom this note is taken.



[9] See Thuc. vii. 57.



[10] {peri tas eirktas}--what these were no one knows, possibly a

    stone quarry used as a prison. Cf. "Cyrop." III. i. 19; "Mem." II.

    i. 5; see Grote, "H. G." ix. 497; Paus. III. v.. 8.



[11] Or Celossa. See Strabo, viii. 382.



[12] I.e. "hopeless." See above, III. iv. 15.







VIII



394 B.C. Such were the land operations in the war. Meanwhile another

series of events was being enacted on the sea and within the seaboard

cities; and these I will now narrate in detail. But I shall confine my

pen to the more memorable incidents, and others of less account I

shall pass over.



In the first place, then, Pharnabazus and Conon, after defeating the

Lacedaemonians in the naval engagement of Cnidus, commenced a tour of

inspection round the islands and the maritime states, expelling from

them, as they visited them, one after another the Spartan

governors.[1] Everywhere they gave consolatory assurances to the

citizens that they had no intention of establishing fortress citadels

within their walls, or in any way interfering with their self-

government.[2] Such words fell soothingly upon the ears of those to

whom they were addressed; the proposals were courteously accepted; all

were eager to present Pharnabazus with gifts of friendship and

hospitality. The satrap, indeed, was only applying the instructions of

his master Conon on these matters--who had taught him that if he acted

thus all the states would be friendly to him, whereas, if he showed

any intention to enslave them, the smallest of them would, as Conon

insisted, be capable of causing a world of trouble, and the chances

were, if apprehensions were once excited, he would find himself face

to face with a coalition of united Hellas. To these admonitions

Pharnabazus lent a willing ear.



[1] Lit. "the Laconian harmosts."



[2] See Hicks, 70, "Honours to Konon," Inscript. found at Erythrae in

    Ionia. Cf. Diod. xiv. 84.



Accordingly, when disembarking at Ephesus, he presented Conon with a

fleet of forty sail,[3] and having further instructed him to meet him

at Sestos,[4] set off himself by land along the coast to visit his own

provinces. For here it should be mentioned that his old enemy

Dercylidas happened to be in Abydos at the time of the sea-fight;[5]

nor had he at a later date suffered eclipse with the other

governors,[6] but on the contrary, had kept tight hold of Abydos and

still preserved it in attachment to Lacedaemon. The course he had

adopted was to summon a meeting of the Abydenians, when he made them a

speech as follows: "Sirs, to-day it is possible for you, who have

before been friends to my city, to appear as benefactors of the

Lacedaemonians. For a man to prove faithful to his friends in the

heyday of their good fortune is no great marvel; but to prove

steadfast when his friends are in misfortune--that is a service

monumental for all time. But do not mistake me. It does not follow

that, because we have been defeated in a great sea-fight, we are

therefore annihilated.[7] Certainly not. Even in old days, you will

admit, when Athens was mistress of the sea, our state was not

powerless to benefit friends or chastise enemies. Moreover, in

proportion as the rest of the cities have joined hands with fortune to

turn their backs upon us, so much the more certainly will the grandeur

of your fidelity shine forth. Or, is any one haunted by the fear that

we may find ourselves blockaded by land and sea?--let him consider

that at present there is no Hellenic navy whatever on the seas, and if

the barbarian attempts to clutch the empire of the sea, Hellas will

not sit by and suffer it; so that, if only in self-defence, she must

inevitably take your side."



[3] See Diod. xiv. 83.



[4] See above, "Hell." II. i. 27 foll.



[5] See above, "Hell." IV. iii. 3.



[6] Lit. "harmosts."



[7] Or, "we are beaten, ergo, it is all over with us."



To this the Abydenians lent no deaf ears, but rather responded with

willingness approaching enthusiasm--extending the hand of fellowship

to the ex-governors, some of whom were already flocking to Abydos as a

harbour of refuge, whilst others they sent to summon from a distance.



So when a number of efficient and serviceable men had been collected,

Dercylidas ventured to cross over to Sestos--lying, as it does, not

more than a mile[8] distant, directly facing Abydos. There he not only

set about collecting those who held lands in the Chersonese through

Lacedaemonian influence, but extended his welcome also to the

governors[9] who had been driven out of European states.[10] He

insisted that, if they came to think of it, not even was their case

desperate, reminding them that even in Asia, which originally belonged

to the Persian monarch, places were to be found--such as the little

state of Temnos, or Aegae, and others, capable of administering their

affairs, unsubjected to the king of Persia. "But," he added, "if you

want a strong impregnable position, I cannot conceive what better you

can find than Sestos. Why, it would need a combined naval and military

force to invest that port." By these and such like arguments he

rescued them from the lethargy of despair.



[8] Lit. "eight stades."



[9] Lit. "harmosts."



[10] See Demos. "de Cor." 96.



Now when Pharnabazus found Abydos and Sestos so conditioned, he gave

them to understand that unless they chose to eject the Lacedaemonians,

he would bring war to bear upon them; and when they refused to obey,

having first assigned to Conon as his business to keep the sea closed

against them, he proceeded in person to ravage the territory of the

men of Abydos. Presently, finding himself no nearer the fulfilment of

his object--which was their reduction--he set off home himself and

left it to Conon the while so to conciliate the Hellespontine states

that as large a naval power as possible might be mustered against the

coming spring. In his wrath against the Lacedaemonians, in return for

the treatment he had received from them, his paramount object was to

invade their territory and exact what vengeance he could.



B.C. 393. The winter was thus fully taken up with preparations; but

with the approach of spring, Pharnabazus and Conon, with a large fleet

fully manned, and a foreign mercenary brigade to boot, threaded their

way through the islands to Melos.[11] This island was to serve as a

base of operations against Lacedaemon. And in the first instance he

sailed down to Pherae[12] and ravaged that district, after which he

made successive descents at various other points on the seaboard, and

did what injury he could. But in apprehension of the harbourless

character of the coast, coupled with the enemy's facility of

reinforcement and his own scarcity of supplies, he very soon turned

back and sailed away, until finally he came to moorings in the harbour

of Phoenicus in Cythera. The occupants of the city of the Cytherians,

in terror of being taken by storm, evacuated the walls. To dismiss

these under a flag of truce across to Laconia was his first step; his

second was to repair the fortress in question and to leave a garrison

in the island under an Athenian governor--Nicophemus. After this he

set sail to the Isthmus of Corinth, where he delivered an exhortation

to the allies begging them to prosecute the war vigorously, and to

show themselves faithful to the Great King; and so, having left them

all the moneys he had with him, set off on his voyage home.



[11] See Lys. xix. "de bon. Arist." 19 foll.; and Hicks, 71, "Honours

    to Dionysios I. and his court"; Grote, "H. G." ix. 453.



[12] Mod. Kalamata.



But Conon had a proposal to make:--If Pharnabazus would allow him to

keep the fleet, he would undertake, in the first place, to support it

free of expense from the islands; besides which, he would sail to his

own country and help his fellow-citizens the Athenians to rebuild

their long walls and the fortifications round Piraeus. No heavier

blow, he insisted, could well be inflicted on Lacedaemon. "In this

way, I can assure you," he added, "you will win the eternal gratitude

of the Athenians and wreak consummate vengeance on the Lacedaemonians,

since at one stroke you will render null and void that on which they

have bestowed their utmost labour." These arguments so far weighed

with Pharnabazus that he despatched Conon to Athens with alacrity, and

further supplied him with funds for the restoration of the walls. Thus

it was that Conon, on his arrival at Athens, was able to rebuild a

large portion of the walls--partly by lending his own crews, and

partly by giving pay to carpenters and stone-masons, and meeting all

the necessary expenses. There were other portions of the walls which

the Athenians and Boeotians and other states raised as a joint

voluntary undertaking.



Nor must it be forgotten that the Corinthians, with the funds left

them by Pharnabazus, manned a fleet--the command of which they

entrusted to their admiral Agathinus--and so were undisputed masters

of the sea within the gulf round Achaia and Lechaeum.



B.C. 393-391. The Lacedaemonians, in opposition, fitted out a fleet

under the command of Podanemus. That officer, in an attack of no great

moment, lost his life, and Pollis,[13] his second in command, was

presently in his turn obliged to retire, being wounded, whereupon

Herippidas took command of the vessels. On the other hand, Proaenus

the Corinthian, who had relieved Agathinus, evacuated Rhium, and the

Lacedaemonians recovered that post. Subsequently Teleutias succeeded

to Herippidas's fleet, and it was then the turn of that admiral to

dominate the gulf.[14]



[13] See "Hell." I. i. 23.



[14] According to Grote ("H. G." ix. 471, note 2), this section

    summarises the Lacedaemonian maritime operations in the Corinthian

    Gulf from the late autumn of 393 B.C. till the appointment of

    Teleutias in the spring or early summer of 391 B.C., the year of

    the expedition of Agesilaus recounted above, "Hell." IV. iv. 19.



B.C. 392. The Lacedaemonians were well informed of the proceedings of

Conon. They knew that he was not only restoring the fortifications of

Athens by help of the king's gold, but maintaining a fleet at his

expense besides, and conciliating the islands and seaboard cities

towards Athens. If, therefore, they could indoctrinate Tiribazus--who

was a general of the king--with their sentiments, they believed they

could not fail either to draw him aside to their own interests, or, at

any rate, to put a stop to his feeding Conon's navy. With this

intention they sent Antalcidas to Tiribazus:[15] his orders were to

carry out this policy and, if possible, to arrange a peace between

Lacedaemon and the king. The Athenians, getting wind of this, sent a

counter-embassy, consisting of Hermogenes, Dion, Callisthenes, and

Callimedon, with Conon himself. They at the same time invited the

attendance of ambassadors from the allies, and there were also present

representatives of the Boeotians, of Corinth, and of Argos. When they

had arrived at their destination, Antalcidas explained to Tiribazus

the object of his visit: he wished, if possible, to cement a peace

between the state he represented and the king--a peace, moreover,

exactly suited to the aspirations of the king himself; in other words,

the Lacedaemonians gave up all claim to the Hellenic cities in Asia as

against the king, while for their own part they were content that all

the islands and other cities should be independent. "Such being our

unbiassed wishes," he continued, "for what earthly reason should [the

Hellenes or] the king go to war with us? or why should he expend his

money? The king is guaranteed against attack on the part of Hellas,

since the Athenians are powerless apart from our hegemony, and we are

powerless so long as the separate states are independent." The

proposals of Antalcidas sounded very pleasantly in the ears of

Tiribazus, but to the opponents of Sparta they were the merest talk.

The Athenians were apprehensive of an agreement which provided for the

independence of the cities in the islands, whereby they might be

deprived of Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros. The Thebans, again, were

afraid of being compelled to let the Boeotian states go free. The

Argives did not see how such treaty contracts and covenants were

compatible with the realisation of their own great object--the

absorption of Corinth by Argos. And so it came to pass that this

peace[16] proved abortive, and the representatives departed each to

his own home.



[15] See Plut. "Ages." xxiii. (Clough, iv. p. 27); and for the date

    B.C. 392 (al. B.C. 393) see Grote, "H. G." ix. 498.



[16] See Andoc. "de Pace"; Jebb, "Attic Or." i. 83, 128 foll. Prof.

    Jebb assigns this speech to B.C. 390 rather than B.C. 391. See

    also Grote, "H. G." ix. 499; Diod. xiv. 110.



Tiribazus, on his side, thought it hardly consistent with his own

safety to adopt the cause of the Lacedaemonians without the

concurrence of the king--a scruple which did not prevent him from

privately presenting Antalcidas with a sum of money, in hopes that

when the Athenians and their allies discovered that the Lacedaemonians

had the wherewithal to furnish a fleet, they might perhaps be more

disposed to desire peace. Further, accepting the statements of the

Lacedaemonians as true, he took on himself to secure the person of

Conon, as guilty of wrongdoing towards the king, and shut him up.[17]

That done, he set off up country to the king to recount the proposals

of Lacedaemon, with his own subsequent capture of Conon as a

mischievous man, and to ask for further guidance on all these matters.



[17] See Diod. xiv. 85; and Corn. Nep. 5.



On the arrival of Tiribazus at the palace, the king sent down Struthas

to take charge of the seaboard district. The latter, however, was a

strong partisan of Athens and her allies, since he found it impossible

to forget the long list of evils which the king's country had suffered

at the hands of Agesilaus; so that the Lacedaemonians, contrasting the

hostile disposition of the new satrap towards themselves with his

friendliness to the Athenians, sent Thibron to deal with him by force

of arms.



B.C. 391.[18] That general crossed over and established his base of

operations in Ephesus and the towns in the plain of the Maeander--

Priene, Leucophrys, and Achilleum--and proceeded to harry the king's

territory, sparing neither live nor dead chattels. But as time went

on, Struthas, who could not but note the disorderly, and indeed

recklessly scornful manner in which the Lacedaemonian brought up his

supports on each occasion, despatched a body of cavalry into the

plain. Their orders were to gallop down and scour the plain, making a

clean sweep[19] of all they could lay their hands on. Thibron, as it

befell, had just finished breakfast, and was returning to the mess

with Thersander the flute-player. The latter was not only a good

flute-player, but, as affecting Lacedaemonian manners, laid claim to

personal prowess. Struthas, then, seeing the disorderly advance of the

supports and the paucity of the vanguard, appeared suddenly at the

head of a large body of cavalry, all in orderly array. Thibron and

Thersander were the first to be cut down, and when these had fallen

the rest of the troops were easily turned. A mere chase ensued, in

which man after man was felled to earth, though a remnant contrived to

escape into the friendly cities; still larger numbers owed their

safety to their late discovery of the business on hand. Nor, indeed,

was this the first time the Spartan commander had rushed to the field,

without even issuing a general order. So ends the history of these

events.



[18] Al. B.C. 392, al. B.C. 390.



[19] See "Hell." VII. i. 40; "Cyrop." I. iv. 17; III. iii. 23; "Anab."

    VI. iii. 3.



B.C. 390.[20] We pass on to the arrival at Lacedaemon of a party of

Rhodian exiles expelled by the popular party. They insisted that it

was not equitable to allow the Athenians to subjugate Rhodes and thus

build up so vast a power. The Lacedaemonians were alive to the fact

that the fate of Rhodes depended on which party in the state

prevailed: if the democracy were to dominate, the whole island must

fall into the hands of Athens; if the wealthier classes,[21] into

their own. Accordingly they fitted out for them a fleet of eight

vessels, and put Ecdicus in command of it as admiral.



[20] Grote, "H. G." ix. 504; al. B.C. 391.



[21] Or, "the Lacedaemonians were not slow to perceive that the whole

    island of Rhodes was destined to fall either into the hands of

    Athens or of themselves, according as the democracy or the

    wealthier classes respectively dominated."



At the same time they despatched another officer on board these

vessels named Diphridas, on a separate mission. His orders were to

cross over into Asia and to secure the states which had received

Thibron. He was also to pick up the survivors of Thibron's army, and

with these troops, aided by a second army which he would collect from

any other quarter open to him, he was to prosecute the war against

Struthas. Diphridas followed out his instructions, and amongst other

achievements was fortunate enough to capture Tigranes,[22] the son-in-

law of Struthas, with his wife, on their road to Sardis. The sum paid

for their ransom was so large that he at once had the wherewithal to

pay his mercenaries. Diphridas was no less attractive than his

predecessor Thibron; but he was of a more orderly temperament,

steadier, and incomparably more enterprising as a general; the secret

of this superiority being that he was a man over whom the pleasures of

the body exercised no sway. He became readily absorbed in the business

before him--whatever he had to do he did it with a will.



[22] See "Anab." VII. viii. 9 for a similar exploit.



Ecdicus having reached Cnidus, there learned that the democracy in

Rhones were entirely masters of the situation. They were dominant by

land and sea; indeed they possessed a fleet twice the size of his own.

He was therefore content to keep quiet in Cnidus until the

Lacedaemonians, perceiving that his force was too small to allow him

to benefit their friends, determined to relieve him. With this view

they ordered Teleutias to take the twelve ships which formed his

squadron (at present in the gulf adjoining Achaia and Lechaeum),[23]

and to feel his way round to Ecdicus: that officer he was to send

home. For himself, he was to undertake personally to protect the

interests of all who cared to be their friends, whilst injuring the

enemy by every possible means.



[23] See above, IV. viii. 11.



So then Teleutias, having reached Samos, where he added some vessels

to his fleet, set sail to Cnidus. At this point Ecdicus returned home,

and Teleutias, continuing his voyage, reached Rhodes, at the head now

of seven-and-twenty vessels. It was during this portion of the voyage

that he fell in with Philocrates, the son of Ephialtes, who was

sailing from Athens to Cyprus with ten triremes, in aid of their ally

Evagoras.[24] The whole flotilla fell into the Spartan's hands--a

curious instance, it may be added, of cross purposes on the part of

both belligerents. Here were the Athenians, supposed to be on friendly

terms with the king, engaged in sending an allied force to support

Evagoras, who was at open war with him; and here again was Teleutias,

the representative of a people at war with Persia, engaged in

crippling a fleet which had been despatched on a mission hostile to

their adversary. Teleutias put back into Cnidus to dispose of his

captives, and so eventually reached Rhodes, where his arrival brought

timely aid to the party in favour of Lacedaemon.



[24] See Diod. xiv. 98; Hicks, 72; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. p. 397;

    Isoc. "Evag." 54-57; Paus. I. iii. 1; Lys. "de bon. Ar." 20; Dem.

    p. 161.



B.C. 389.[25] And now the Athenians, fully impressed with the belief

that their rivals were laying the basis of a new naval supremacy,

despatched Thrasybulus the Steirian to check them, with a fleet of

forty sail. That officer set sail, but abstained from bringing aid to

Rhodes, and for good reasons. In Rhodes the Lacedaemonian party had

hold of the fortress, and would be out of reach of his attack,

especially as Teleutias was close at hand to aid them with his fleet.

On the other hand, his own friends ran no danger of succumbing to the

enemy, as they held the cities and were numerically much stronger, and

they had established their superiority in the field. Consequently he

made for the Hellespont, where, in the absence of any rival power, he

hoped to achieve some stroke of good fortune for his city. Thus, in

the first place, having detected the rivalries existing between

Medocus,[26] the king of the Odrysians, and Seuthes,[27] the rival

ruler of the seaboard, he reconciled them to each other, and made them

friends and allies of Athens; in the belief that if he secured their

friendship the Hellenic cities on the Thracian coast would show

greater proclivity to Athens. Such being the happy state of affairs

not only in Europe but as regards the states in Asia also, thanks to

the friendly attitude of the king to his fellow-citizens, he sailed

into Byzantium and sold the tithe-duty levied on vessels arriving from

the Euxine. By another stroke he converted the oligarchy of Byzantium

into a democracy. The result of this was that the Byzantine demos[28]

were no longer sorry to see as vast a concourse of Athenians in their

city as possible. Having so done, and having further won the

friendship of the men of Calchedon, he set sail south of the

Hellespont. Arrived at Lesbos, he found all the cities devoted to

Lacedaemon with the exception of Mytilene. He was therefore loth to

attack any of the former until he had organised a force within the

latter. This force consisted of four hundred hoplites, furnished from

his own vessels, and a corps of exiles from the different cities who

had sought shelter in Mytilene; to which he added a stout contingent,

the pick of the Mytileneian citizens themselves. He stirred the ardour

of the several contingents by suitable appeals: representing to the

men of Mytilene that by their capture of the cities they would at once

become the chiefs and patrons of Lesbos; to the exiles he made it

appear that if they would but unite to attack each several city in

turn, they might all reckon on their particular restoration; while he

needed only to remind his own warriors that the acquisition of Lesbos

meant not only the attachment of a friendly city, but the discovery of

a mine of wealth. The exhortations ended and the contingents

organised, he advanced against Methymna.



[25] Grote, "H. G." ix. 507.



[26] Al. Amedocus.



[27] For Seuthes, see above, "Hell." III. ii. 2, if the same.



[28] For the varying fortunes of the democrats at Byzantium in 408

    B.C. and 405 B.C., see above, "Hell." I. iii. 18; II. ii. 2); for

    the present moment, 390-389 B.C., see Demosth. "c. Lept." 475; for

    the admission of Byzantium into the new naval confederacy in 378

    B.C., see Hicks, 68; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. 19; and for B.C. 363,

    Isocr. "Phil." 53; Diod. xv. 79; and for its commercial

    prosperity, Polyb. iv. 38-47.



Therimachus, who chanced to be the Lacedaemonian governor at the time,

on hearing of the meditated attack of Thrasybulus, had taken a body of

marines from his vessels, and, aided by the citizens of Methymna

themselves, along with all the Mytileneian exiles to be found in that

place, advanced to meet the enemy on their borders. A battle was

fought and Therimachus was slain, a fate shared by several of the

exiles of his party.



As a result[29] of his victory the Athenian general succeeded in

winning the adhesion of some of the states; or, where adhesion was

refused, he could at least raise supplies for his soldiers by

freebooting expeditions, and so hastened to reach his goal, which was

the island of Rhodes. His chief concern was to support as powerful an

army as possible in those parts, and with this object he proceeded to

levy money aids, visiting various cities, until he finally reached

Aspendus, and came to moorings in the river Eurymedon. The money was

safely collected from the Aspendians, and the work completed, when,

taking occasion of some depredations[30] of the soldiers on the

farmsteads, the people of the place in a fit of irritation burst into

the general's quarters at night and butchered him in his tent.



[29] According to some critics, B.C. 389 is only now reached.



[30] See Diod. xiv. 94.



So perished Thrasybulus,[31] a good and great man by all admission. In

room of him the Athenians chose Agyrrhius,[32] who was despatched to

take command of the fleet. And now the Lacedaemonians--alive to the

fact that the sale of the Euxine tithe-dues had been negotiated in

Byzantium by Athens; aware also that as long as the Athenians kept

hold on Calchedon the loyalty of the other Hellespontine cities was

secured to them (at any rate while Pharnabazus remained their friend)

--felt that the state of affairs demanded their serious attention.

They attached no blame indeed to Dercylidas. Anaxibius, however,

through the friendship of the ephors, contrived to get himself

appointed as governor, on a mission to Abydos. With the requisite

funds and ships, he promised to exert such hostile pressure upon

Athens that at least her prospects in the Hellespont would cease to be

so sunny. His friends the ephors granted him in return for these

promises three ships of war and funds to support a thousand

mercenaries, and so they despatched him on his mission. Reaching

Abydos, he set about improving his naval and military position. First

he collected a foreign brigade, by help of which he drew off some of

the Aeolid cities from Pharnabazus. Next he set on foot a series of

retaliatory expeditions against the states which attacked Abydos,

marching upon them and ravaging their territories; and lastly, manning

three vessels besides those which he already held in the harbour of

Abydos, he intercepted and brought into port all the merchant ships of

Athens or of her allies which he could lay hands on.



[31] "Thus perished the citizen to whom, more than any one else,

    Athens owed not only her renovated democracy, but its wise,

    generous, and harmonious working, after renovation."--Grote, "H.

    G." ix. 509.



[32] For this statesman, see Demosth. "c. Timocr." 742; Andoc. "de

    Myst." 133; Aristot. "Ath. Pol." 41, and Mr. Kenyon's notes ad

    loc.; Aristoph. "Eccles." 102, and the Schol. ad loc.; Diod. xiv.

    99; Curtius, "H. G." Eng tr. iv. 280.



Getting wind of these proceedings, the Athenians, fearing lest the

fair foundation laid for them by Thrasybulus in the Hellespont should

be ruined, sent out Iphicrates with eight vessels and twelve hundred

peltasts. The majority of them[33] consisted of troops which he had

commanded at Corinth. In explanation it may be stated that the

Argives, when once they had appropriated Corinth and incorporated it

with Argos, gave out they had no further need of Iphicrates and his

troops; the real fact being that he had put to death some of the

partisans of Argos.[34] And so it was he turned his back on Corinth

and found himself at home in Athens at the present crisis.



[33] Or, "The mass of them."



[34] See Grote, "H. G." ix. p. 491 note. The "Argolising" or philo-

    Argeian party, as opposed to the philo-Laconian party. See above,

    "Hell." IV. iv. 6.



B.C. 389-388. When Iphicrates first reached the Chersonese he and

Anaxibius carried on war against each other by the despatch of

guerilla or piratic bands across the straits. But as time wore on,

information reached him of the departure of Anaxibius to Antandrus,

accompanied by his mercenaries and his own bodyguard of Laconians and

two hundred Abydenian hoplites. Hearing further that Anaxibius had won

the friendly adhesion of Antandrus, Iphicrates conjectured that after

establishing a garrison in that place he would make the best of his

way back, if only to bring the Abydenians home again. He therefore

crossed in the night, selecting a desert point on the Abydene coast,

from which he scaled the hills above the town and planted himself in

ambuscade within their folds. The triremes which brought him across

had orders at break of day to coast up northwards along the

Chersonese, which would suggest the notion that he was only out on one

of his customary voyages to collect money. The sequel more than

fulfilled his expectations. Anaxibius began his return march, and if

report speaks truly, he did so notwithstanding that the victims were

against his marching that day; contemptuously disregarding the

warning, and satisfied that his march lay all along through a friendly

country and was directed to a friendly city. Besides which, those whom

he met assured him that Iphicrates was off on a voyage to Proconnesus:

hence the unusual absence of precaution on the march. On his side

Iphicrates saw the chance, but, so long as the troops of Anaxibius

lingered on the level bottoms, refused to spring from his lair,

waiting for the moment when the Abydenian division in the van was

safely landed in the plain of Cremaste, at the point where the gold

mines stand; the main column following on the downward slope, and

Anaxibius with his Laconians just beginning the descent. At that

instant Iphicrates set his ambuscade in motion, and dashed against the

Spartan at full speed. The latter quickly discerned that there was no

hope of escape as he scanned the long straggling line of his

attenuated column. The troops in advance, he was persuaded, would

never be able to come back to his aid up the face of that acclivity;

besides which, he observed the utter bewilderment of the whole body at

sight of the ambuscade. He therefore turned to those next him, and

spoke as follows: "Sirs, it is good for me to die on this spot, where

honour bids me; but for you, sirs, yonder your path lies, haste and

save yourselves[35] before the enemy can close with us." As the words

died on his lips he took from the hands of his attendant shield-bearer

his heavy shield, and there, at his post, unflinchingly fought and

fell; not quite alone, for by his side faithfully lingered a favourite

youth, and of the Lacedaemonian governors who had rallied to Abydos

from their several cities yet other twelve fought and fell beside the

pair. The rest fled, dropping down one by one as the army pursued them

to the walls of the city. The death-roll amounted to something like

fifty hoplites of the Abydenians, and of the rest two hundred. After

this exploit Iphicrates returned to the Chersonese.[36]



[35] Or, "sauve qui peut."



[36] See Hicks, 76; and below, "Hell." V. i. 31.



