


           Philosophy of Right

                by Hegel



          Table of Contents




Preface 
p. 16 The philosophic way of advancing from one matter to another is essentially different from
every other. 
p. 17 Free thought cannot be satisfied with what is given to it. 
p. 18 The ethical world or the state, is in fact reason potently and permanently actualised in
self-consciousness. 
p. 19 There are two kinds of laws, laws of nature and laws of right. 
p. 20 The spiritual universe is looked upon as abandoned by God. 
p. 21 Mr. Fries, one of the leaders of this shallow-minded host of philosophers. 
p. 22 It is no surprise that the view just criticised should appear in the form of piety. 
p. 23 The actual world of right and ethical life are apprehended in thought, and this reasoned right
finds expression in law. 
p. 24 Philosophy should therefore be employed only in the service of the state. 
p. 25 Philosophising has reduced all matter of thought to the same level, resembling the despotism
of the Roman Empire. 
p. 26 Philosophy is an inquisition into the rational, and therefore the apprehension of the real and
present. 
p. 27 What is rational is real and what is real is rational. 
p. 28 To apprehend what is is the task of philosophy, because what is is reason. 
p. 29 A half philosophy leads away from God, while a true philosophy leads to God. 
p. 30 The owl of Minerva, takes its flight only when the shades of night are gathering. 

Introduction 
¡ì 1 The philosophic science of right has as its object the idea of right. 
¡ì 2 The science of right is a part of philosophy. 
¡ì 3 Right is positive in general. 
¡ì 4 The territory of right is in general the spiritual, and its origin is the will. 
¡ì 5 [a] The will contains the element of pure indeterminateness. 
¡ì 6 [b] The I is also the transition from blank indefiniteness to the distinct content and object. 
¡ì 7 [c] The will is the unity of these two elements. 
¡ì 8 (a) The formal will as a self-consciousness which finds an outer world before it. 
¡ì 9 (b) This content of the will is an end. 
¡ì 10 Only when the will has itself as an object is it also for itself. 
¡ì 11 The will is at first only implicitly free, the natural will ... impulses, appetites, inclinations. 
¡ì 12 This content exists only as a multiplicity of impulses having many ways of satisfaction.. 
¡ì 13 The will of a definite individual is not yet the content and work of its freedom. 
¡ì 14 The finite will stands above its different impulses and the ways they are satisfied. 
¡ì 15 Freedom of the will is, in this view of it, caprice. 
¡ì 16 What is resolved upon and chosen the will may again give up. 
¡ì 17 Caprice is the dialectic of impulses and inclinations manifested in their mutual antagonism. 
¡ì 18 Man is by nature good. 
¡ì 19 Impulses must be freed from the form of direct subjection to nature. 
¡ì 20 The propulsion by the universality of thought is the absolute worth of civilisation. 
¡ì 21 Since the will has as its object, universality itself, it is the true idea. 
¡ì 22 In the object the will has simply reverted into itself. 
¡ì 23 The pure conception has the perception or intuition of itself as its end and reality. 
¡ì 24 The will is universal, because in it all limitation and individuality are superseded. 
¡ì 25 The subjective side of the will is its self-consciousness and individuality. 
¡ì 26 The will becomes objective only by the execution of its ends. 
¡ì 27 There is thus actualised as idea what the will is implicitly. 
¡ì 28 Transcending the contradiction between subjectivity and objectivity is the content of the
idea. 
¡ì 29 Right, therefore, is, in general, freedom as idea. 
¡ì 30 Right is something holy, because it is the embodiment of self-conscious freedom. 
¡ì 31 The true process is found in the logic, and here is presupposed. 
¡ì 32 The sequence of the conceptions is at the same time a sequence of realisations. 
¡ì 33 The stages in the development of the idea of the absolutely free will. 

SECTION ONE: Abstract Right 
¡ì 34 The absolutely free will, when its concept is abstract, is an actuality contrasted with the real
world. 
¡ì 35 From this point of view the subject is a person. 
¡ì 36 (1) 'Be a person and respect others as persons.' 
¡ì 37 (2) The particularity of the will is present as desire, need, impulse and casual whim. 
¡ì 38 To have a right is therefore to have only a permission. 
¡ì 39 (3) Personality is that which struggles to lift itself above this restriction and to give itself
reality. 
¡ì 40 Property, Contract & Wrong. 

I: Property 
¡ì 41 A person must translate his freedom into an external sphere in order to exist as Idea. 
¡ì 42 What is immediately different from free mind is a thing, something without rights. 
¡ì 43 As the concept in its immediacy, a person is partly within himself and partly related to it as
to an external world. 
¡ì 44 The absolute right of appropriation which man has over all 'things'. 
¡ì 45 As free will I am an object to myself in what I possess and thereby also an actual will. 
¡ì 46 Common property that may be owned by separate persons is an inherently dissoluble
partnership. 
¡ì 47 I possess my life and my body, like other things, only in so far as my will is in them. 
¡ì 48 From the point of view of others, I am in essence a free entity in my body. 
¡ì 49 What and how much I possess is a matter of indifference so far as rights are concerned. 
¡ì 50 A thing belongs to the person who happens to be the first in time to take it into his
possession. 
¡ì 51 My inward idea and will that something is to be mine is not enough to make it my property. 
¡ì 52 Occupancy makes the matter of the thing my property, since matter in itself does not belong
to itself. 
¡ì 53 Taking possession, Use and Alienation. 

___A: Possession 
¡ì 54 Grasping it physically, by forming it, and by merely marking it as ours. 
¡ì 55 [a] Grasping a thing physically. 
¡ì 56 [b] Imposing a form on a thing. 
¡ì 57 It is only through the development of his own body and mind, that man takes possession of
himself. 
¡ì 58 [c] To mark the thing. 

___B: Use 
¡ì 59 The thing, as something negative in itself, exists only for my need. 
¡ì 60 If I make repeated use of a product, then this transforms the grasp of the thing into a mark. 
¡ì 61 If I have the full use of the thing I am its owner. 
¡ì 62 Ownership therefore is in essence free and complete. 
¡ì 63 As full owner of the thing, I am owner of its value as well as of its use. 
¡ì 64 I gain or lose possession of property through prescription. 

___C: Alienation 
¡ì 65 The reason I can alienate my property is that it is mine only in so far as I put my will into it. 
¡ì 66 Those substantive characteristics which constitute my own private personality are
inalienable. 
¡ì 67 I can alienate to someone else and I can give him the use of my abilities only for a restricted
period 
¡ì 68 A product of my mind may turn into something external which may then be produced by
other people. 
¡ì 69 The inventor of a thing remains the owner of the universal ways and means of multiplying
such things. 
¡ì 70 There is no unqualified right to sacrifice one's life. 
¡ì 71 Existence as determinate being is in essence being for another. 

II: Contract 
¡ì 72 Contract is the contradiction that I am the owner only in so far as I cease to be an owner. 
¡ì 73 The concept compels me to alienate property in order that my will may become objective to
me. 
¡ì 74 The two contracting parties are related to each other as immediate self-subsistent persons. 
¡ì 75 Contract of exchange. 
¡ì 76 Gift, Real contract and Exchange. 
¡ì 77 Value is the universal in which the subjects of the contract participate. 
¡ì 78 The distinction between property and possession is the distinction between a common will
and its actualisation. 
¡ì 79 In contract it is the will that the stipulation enshrines. 
¡ì 80 A. Gift, B. Exchange, C Completion of a Contract. 
¡ì 81 If the particular will is explicitly at variance with the universal, this is Wrong. 

III: Wrong 
¡ì 82 In contract the principle of rightness is posited, while its inner universality is in the particular
will of the parties. 
¡ì 83 Non-malicious wrong, Fraud and Crime. 

___A: Non-Malicious Wrong 
¡ì 84 Each may look upon the thing as his property on the particular ground on which he bases his
title. 
¡ì 85 The sphere of civil suits at law. 
¡ì 86 The principle of rightness arises as something kept in view and demanded by the parties. 

___B: Fraud 
¡ì 87 We have Fraud when the universal is set aside by the particular will only showing in the
situation. 
¡ì 88 The contract is right enough so far as it is an exchange, but the aspect of implicit universality
is lacking. 
¡ì 89 The subjective arbitrary will, opposing itself to the right, should be superseded. 

___C: Crime 
¡ì 90 My will may be coerced. 
¡ì 91 The free will cannot be coerced at all. 
¡ì 92 Force or coercion is in its very conception directly self-destructive. 
¡ì 93 In the world of reality coercion is annulled by coercion. 
¡ì 94 Abstract right is a right to coerce. 
¡ì 95 The sphere of criminal law. 
¡ì 96 It makes a difference to the objective aspect of crime whether the will is injured throughout
its entire extent. 
¡ì 97 Right actualised. 
¡ì 98 Compensation. 
¡ì 99 To penalise the criminal is to annul the crime and to restore the right. 
¡ì 100 The criminal's action is the action of a rational being. 
¡ì 101 The annulment of the crime is retribution. 
¡ì 102 The annulling of crime in this sphere where right is immediate is principally revenge. 
¡ì 103 The demand for a justice freed from subjective interest has emerged in the course of this
movement itself. 
¡ì 104 The Transition from Right to Morality. 

SECTION TWO: Morality 
¡ì 105 The standpoint of morality is the standpoint of the will which is infinite not merely in itself
but for itself. 
¡ì 106 Only in the will as subjective can freedom be actual. 
¡ì 107 The moral standpoint therefore takes shape as the right of the subjective Will. 
¡ì 108 The subjective will, directly aware of itself, is therefore abstract, restricted, and formal. 
¡ì 109 The opposition of subjectivity and objectivity, and the activity related to this opposition. 
¡ì 110 (a) My subjectivity is not merely my inner purpose, but has acquired outward existence. 
¡ì 111 (b) The subjective will may not be adequate to the concept. 
¡ì 112 (c) But the external subjectivity which is thus identical with me is the will of others. 
¡ì 113 The externalisation of the subjective or moral will is action. 
¡ì 114 Purpose, Intention & Good. 

I: Purpose 
¡ì 115 The deed sets up an alteration in this state of affairs confronting the will. 
¡ì 116 It is not my own doing if damage is caused to others by things I own. 
¡ì 117 The deed can be imputed to me only if my will is responsible for it. 
¡ì 118 Action has a multitude of consequences. 

II: Intention 
¡ì 119 Purpose comprises that universal side of the action, i.e. the intention. 
¡ì 120 The right of intention is that the universal quality of the action shall be known by the agent. 
¡ì 121 The subject's end is the soul of the action and determines its character. 
¡ì 122 In contrast with this end the direct character of the action is reduced to a means. 
¡ì 123 The satisfaction of needs, inclinations, passions, opinions, fancies, &c. is welfare or
happiness. 
¡ì 124 The view that objective and subjective ends are mutually exclusive, is an empty dogmatism.

¡ì 125 The welfare of many other unspecified particulars is thus also an essential end and right of
subjectivity. 
¡ì 126 An intention to secure my welfare or that of others cannot justify an action which is wrong. 
¡ì 127 In extreme danger and in conflict with the rightful property of someone else, this life may
claim a right of distress. 
¡ì 128 Good & Conscience. 

III: Good & Conscience 
¡ì 129 The good is the Idea as the unity of the concept of the will with the particular will. 
¡ì 130 Welfare without right is not a good. 
¡ì 131 The subjective will has value and dignity only in so far as its insight and intention accord
with the good. 
¡ì 132 An action is right or wrong, good or evil according to its knowledge of the worth the
action in objectivity. 
¡ì 133 Duty. 
¡ì 134 Do the right, and strive after welfare, one's own welfare, and the welfare of others. 
¡ì 135 The sphere of duty. 
¡ì 136 Conscience. 
¡ì 137 The union of subjective knowing with objective principles and duties, is not present until
the ethical life. 
¡ì 138 This subjectivity remains the power to judge what is good in respect of any content. 
¡ì 139 Once self-consciousness has reduced duties to the inwardness of the will, it has become
potentially evil. 
¡ì 140 To impose on others is hypocrisy; while to impose on oneself is a stage beyond hypocrisy. 
¡ì 141 Transition from Morality to Ethical Life. 

SECTION THREE: Ethical Life 
¡ì 142 Thus ethical life is the concept of freedom developed into the existing world and the nature
of self-consciousness. 
¡ì 143 The concept of the will and the particular will each is in its own eyes the totality of the Idea.

¡ì 144 [a] The objective ethical order is absolutely valid laws and institutions. 
¡ì 145 That the ethical order is the system of specific determinations of the Idea constitutes its
rationality. 
¡ì 146 [b] This is an absolute authority and power infinitely more firmly established than the being
of nature. 
¡ì 147 On the other hand, they are not something alien to the subject. 
¡ì 148 The individual is related to these laws and institutions as to the substance of his own being. 
¡ì 149 In duty the individual acquires his substantive freedom. 
¡ì 150 Virtue is the ethical order reflected in the individual character. 
¡ì 151 Ethical life appears as custom, and the substance of mind thus exists now for the first time
as mind. 
¡ì 152 The individual knows that his particular ends are grounded in this same universal. 
¡ì 153 In an ethical order individuals are actually in possession of their own inner universality. 
¡ì 154 The right of individuals to their particular satisfaction is also contained in the ethical
substantial order. 
¡ì 155 In this identity of the universal will with the particular will, right and duty coalesce. 
¡ì 156 The ethical substance is the actual mind of a family and a nation. 
¡ì 157 Family, Civil Society & the State. 

I: The Family 
¡ì 158 The family, as the immediate substantiality of mind, is specifically characterised by love. 
¡ì 159 The right which the individual enjoys takes on the form of right only when the family begins
to dissolve. 
¡ì 160 Marriage, Family Property & Children and the Dissolution of the Family. 

___A: Marriage 
¡ì 161 Marriage is the immediate type of ethical relationship. 
¡ì 162 The objective source of Marriage lies in the free consent of the persons. 
¡ì 163 The ethical aspect of marriage consists in the parties' consciousness of this unity as their
substantive aim. 
¡ì 164 The knot is tied and made ethical only after this ceremony. 
¡ì 165 The difference in the physical characteristics of the two sexes has a rational basis. 
¡ì 166 One sex is mind in its self-diremption; the other is mind in unity as knowledge and volition. 
¡ì 167 Marriage is monogamy because it is personality which enters into this tie. 
¡ì 168 Marriage ought not to be entered by two people identical in stock who are already
acquainted. 
¡ì 169 The family, as person, has its real external existence in property. 

___B: The Family Capital 
¡ì 170 A family requires, not merely property, but possessions specifically determined as
permanent and secure. 
¡ì 171 The family as a legal entity in relation to others must be represented by the husband as its
head. 
¡ì 172 A marriage brings into being a new family, independent of the clans from which it has been
drawn. 

___C: The Education of Children and the Dissolution of the Family 
¡ì 173 It is only in the children that the unity of the family exists externally. 
¡ì 174 Children have the right to maintenance and education at the expense of the family's capital. 
¡ì 175 Children are potentially free and their life embodies nothing save potential freedom. 
¡ì 176 Marriage is but the ethical Idea in its immediacy. 
¡ì 177 Once the children have come of age, they become recognised as persons. 
¡ì 178 The dissolution of the family by the death of the father, has inheritance as its consequence. 
¡ì 179 A man may at will squander his capital altogether. 
¡ì 180 The members of the family grow up to be self-subsistent. 
¡ì 181 Transition of the Family into Civil Society. 

II: Civil Society 
¡ì 182 The concrete person finds satisfaction by means of others, and at the same time by means
of universality. 
¡ì 183 The livelihood, happiness, and rights of one is interwoven with the livelihood, happiness,
and rights of all. 
¡ì 184 The system of the ethical order constitutes the Idea's abstract moment, its moment of
reality. 
¡ì 185 Particularity destroys itself and its substantive concept in this process of gratification. 
¡ì 186 Particularity passes over into universality, and attains its truth not as freedom but as
necessity. 
¡ì 187 Private ends are mediated through the universal which thus appears as a means. 
¡ì 188 The System of Needs, the Administration of Justice and the Public Authority & the
Corporation. 

___A. The System of Needs 
¡ì 189 Need is satisfied in the product of others, and labour, the middle term between subjective
& objective. 

_____(a) The Kind of Need and Satisfaction 
¡ì 190 The multiplication of needs and means of satisfying them. 
¡ì 191 The means to particularised needs and the ways of satisfying these are divided and
multiplied. 
¡ì 192 Universality makes concrete, i.e. social, the isolated and abstract needs and their ways of
satisfaction. 
¡ì 193 The need for equality and for emulation becomes a fruitful source of the multiplication of
needs. 
¡ì 194 The strict natural necessity of need is obscured. 
¡ì 195 Luxury. 

_____(b) The Kind of Labour 
¡ì 196 Labour confers value on means and gives them their utility. 
¡ì 197 Theoretical education develops, and practical education is acquired through working. 
¡ì 198 Division of labour makes men dependent on one another, labour more & more mechanical,
until machines take their place. 

_____(c) Capital and Class Divisions 
¡ì 199 Subjective self-seeking turns into a contribution to the satisfaction of the needs of everyone
else. 
¡ì 200 Differences in wealth are conspicuous and their inevitable consequence is disparities of
resources & ability. 
¡ì 201 The entire complex is built up into particular systems of needs, means, and types of work,
into class-divisions. 
¡ì 202 [a] The substantial or immediate class, [b] the reflecting or formal class; & [c] the
universal class. 
¡ì 203 [a] The Agricultural Class. 
¡ì 204 [b] The Business Class. 
¡ì 205 [c] The Universal Class [the civil service]. 
¡ì 206 The class to which an individual is to belong depends on natural capacity, birth, and other
circumstances. 
¡ì 207 In this class system, the ethical frame of mind therefore is rectitude and esprit de corps. 
¡ì 208 Right has attained its recognised actuality as the protection of property through the
administration of justice. 

___B. The Administration of Justice 
¡ì 209 Education makes abstract right something universally recognised and having an objective
validity. 
¡ì 210 The objective actuality of the right consists in its being known & in its possessing the
power of the actual. 

_____(a) Right as Law 
¡ì 211 The principle of rightness becomes the law when thinking makes it known as what is right
and valid. 
¡ì 212 There may be a discrepancy between the content of the law and the principle of rightness. 
¡ì 213 The endlessly growing complexity and subdivision of social ties and the different species of
property and contract. 
¡ì 214 In the interest of getting something done, there is a place within that limit for contingent and
arbitrary decisions. 

_____(b) Law as Determinately Existing 
¡ì 215 If laws are to have a binding force, then they must be made universally known. 
¡ì 216 Simple laws are required, but the nature of the material leads to the further determining of
laws ad infinitum. 
¡ì 217 My individual right now becomes embodied in the existent will and knowledge of
everyone. 
¡ì 218 The fact that society has become strong and sure of itself leads to a mitigation of its
punishment. 

_____(c) The Court of Justice 
¡ì 219 Law is something on its own account, and something universal, the business of a public
authority. 
¡ì 220 No act of revenge is justified. 
¡ì 221 A member of civil society must acknowledge the jurisdiction of the court and accept its
decision as final. 
¡ì 222 In court the specific character which rightness acquires is that it must be demonstrable. 
¡ì 223 The long course of formalities is a right of the parties at law. 
¡ì 224 The publicity of judicial proceedings. 
¡ì 225 Whether a trespass has been committed and if so by whom, and the restoration of right. 
¡ì 226 The judge. 
¡ì 227 Judgment on the facts lies in the last resort with subjective conviction and conscience. 
¡ì 228 The confidence which the parties feel in the judge is based on the similarity between their
social position. 
¡ì 229 The actualisation of the unity of the implicit universal with the subjective particular. 

___C. The Police & the Public Authority 
¡ì 230 The safety of person and property and every person's livelihood and welfare must be
actualised as a right. 

_____(a) Police or Public Authority 
¡ì 231 The universal authority by which security is ensured is an external organisation. 
¡ì 232 Private actions may escape the agent's control and may injure others and wrong them. 
¡ì 233 The actions of individuals may be wrongful, and this is the ultimate reason for police &
penal justice. 
¡ì 234 There is no inherent line of distinction between what is and what is not injurious. 
¡ì 235 Activities and organisations of general utility call for the oversight of the public authority. 
¡ì 236 The differing interests of producers and consumers may come into collision and requires
control. 
¡ì 237 While the possibility of sharing in the general wealth is open to individuals it is subject to
contingencies. 
¡ì 238 Civil society tears the individual from his family ties. 
¡ì 239 Civil society has the right and duty of superintending and influencing education. 
¡ì 240 Society has the duty of acting as trustee to those whose extravagance destroys their
subsistence or their families'. 
¡ì 241 The public authority takes the place of the family where the poor are concerned. 
¡ì 242 Society struggles to make charity less necessary, by discovering the causes of penury and
means of its relief. 
¡ì 243 The amassing of wealth and the dependence and distress of the class tied to work. 
¡ì 244 When the standard of living falls below a subsistence level, the result is the creation of a
rabble of paupers. 
¡ì 245 Wealth & Poverty. 
¡ì 246 The inner dialectic of civil society drives it to push beyond its own limits and seek markets
in other lands. 
¡ì 247 Trade by sea is the most potent instrument of culture. 
¡ì 248 This far-flung connecting link affords the means for the colonising activity. 
¡ì 249 Ethical principles circle back and. appear in civil society and constitute the specific
character of the Corporation. 

_____(b) The Corporation 
¡ì 250 The business class is concentrated on the particular, and hence the Corporations are
specially appropriate. 
¡ì 251 A member of civil society is in virtue of his own particular skill a member of a
Corporation,. 
¡ì 252 The Corporation comes on to the scene like a second family. 
¡ì 253 The Corporation member commands the respect due to one in his social position. 
¡ì 254 The right of exercising one's skill is made rational in the Corporation.. 
¡ì 255 As the family was the first, so the Corporation is the second ethical root of the state. 
¡ì 256 The Public Authority and the Corporation find their truth in the absolutely universal end and
its absolute actuality. 

III: The State 
¡ì 257 The state is the actuality of the ethical Idea. 
¡ì 258 The state is absolutely rational once the particular has been raised to consciousness of its
universality. 
¡ì 259 Constitutional Law, International Law & World-History. 

___A: Constitutional Law 
¡ì 260 The state is the actuality of concrete freedom. 
¡ì 261 The strength of the state is lies in the unity of its universal end with the particular interest of
individual. 
¡ì 262 The function assigned to any individual is mediated by circumstances, caprice and personal
choice of station in life. 
¡ì 263 In particularity and individuality, mind glimmers in them as the power of reason in necessity.

¡ì 264 Mind is the nature of human beings en masse. 
¡ì 265 Social institutions and the Corporations are the pillars of public freedom. 
¡ì 266 Necessity appears to itself in the shape of freedom. 
¡ì 267 This necessity in ideality is the strictly political state and its constitution. 
¡ì 268 The political sentiment is simply a product of the institutions subsisting in the state. 
¡ì 269 The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically determined content from members of the
organism of the state. 
¡ì 270 (1) Conservation of particular interests (2) The Powers of the State & (3) its universality. 
¡ì 271 The Internal Constitution & Foreign Relations of a State. 

_____Internal constitution 
¡ì 272 The constitution is rational in so far as the state acts in accordance with the nature of the
concept. 
¡ì 273 The Legislature, the Executive & the Crown. 
¡ì 274 The constitution of any given nation depends in general on the character and development
of its self-consciousness. 

_____(a) The Crown 
¡ì 275 (1) The universality of the constitution and laws, counsel, and the moment of ultimate
decision. 
¡ì 276 [a] The particular powers and their activities are dissolved and yet retained. 
¡ì 277 [b] The functions and powers of the state cannot be private property. 
¡ì 278 [c] Sovereignty requires that the powers of the state have their roots in the unity of the
state as their single self. 
¡ì 279 (2) The truth of subjectivity is attained only in a subject, and the truth of personality only in
a person. 
¡ì 280 (3) The monarch is raised to the dignity of monarchy in an immediate, natural, fashion
through his birth. 
¡ì 281 Something against which caprice is powerless, the 'majesty' of the monarch. 
¡ì 282 The right to pardon criminals arises from the sovereignty of the monarch. 
¡ì 283 The choice and dismissal of the supreme council rest with the monarch and his unrestricted
caprice. 
¡ì 284 The monarch is above all answerability for acts of government. 
¡ì 285 Universality subsists subjectively in the conscience of the monarch and objectively in the
constitution and laws. 
¡ì 286 In the rational organism of the state, each member, by maintaining itself in its own position. 

_____(b) The Executive 
¡ì 287 The task of subsuming the particular under the universal lies in the executive power, the
judiciary and the police. 
¡ì 288 Corporations, &c., will be appointed by a mixture of popular election and ratification by
higher authority. 
¡ì 289 (a) the executive civil servants, and (b) the higher advisory officials. 
¡ì 290 Division of labour in the business of the executive. 
¡ì 291 The objective factor in the appointment of officials is knowledge and proof of ability. 
¡ì 292 Since the qualification for the civil service is not genius, there is an indefinite plurality of
eligible candidates. 
¡ì 293 While the actions of the officials are their duty, their office is also a right exempt from
contingency. 
¡ì 294 Once an individual has been appointed by the sovereign's act, his tenure is conditional on
his fulfilling its duties. 
¡ì 295 Security against misuse of power by officials lies in their hierarchical accountability, & the
authority of the Corporations. 
¡ì 296 Officials gain the habit of adopting universal interests, points of view, and activities. 
¡ì 297 The sovereign works on the middle class at the top, and Corporations work on it at the
bottom. 

_____(c) The Legislature 
¡ì 298 The legislature is itself a part of the constitution but the constitution develops with the
further elaboration of laws. 
¡ì 299 [a] provision by the state for their well-being and happiness, and [b] the exaction of
services from them. 
¡ì 300 The last moment in the legislature is the Estates. 
¡ì 301 The Estates have the function of bringing public affairs into existence not only implicitly, but
also actually. 
¡ì 302 The Estates stand between the government on one hand and the nation broken up into
particulars on the other. 
¡ì 303 The class of civil servants must have the universal as the end of its essential activity. 
¡ì 304 The Estates still retain the class distinctions already present in the lower spheres of civil life.

¡ì 305 Members of the agricultural class attain their position by birth, just as the monarch does. 
¡ì 306 The agricultural class is particularly fitted for political position. 
¡ì 307 The right of this section of the agricultural class is based on the natural principle of the
family. 
¡ì 308 The section of the Estates comprises the fluctuating element & can enter politics only
through its deputies. 
¡ì 309 Deputies are elected to deliberate on public affair on the strength of confidence felt in them.

¡ì 310 The deputy acquires and develops a managerial and political sense, tested by his
experience. 
¡ì 311 Since civil society is the electorate, the deputies should be conversant with its particular
interests. 
¡ì 312 Each class in the Estates contributes something peculiarly its own to the work of
deliberation. 
¡ì 313 The upper and lower houses. 
¡ì 314 The distinctive purpose of the Estates is in their pooled political knowledge. 
¡ì 315 Public opinion reaches thoughts that are true and attains insight into the concept of the state
and its affairs. 
¡ì 316 Public opinion is a standing self-contradiction, the essential is just as directly present as the
inessential. 
¡ì 317 Public opinion has common sense, but is infected by accidents of opinion, ignorance and
perversity. 
¡ì 318 To be independent of public opinion is the first formal condition of achieving anything great
or rational. 
¡ì 319 Free speech is assured by the innocuous character which it acquires as a result of the
stability of government. 
¡ì 320 Subjectivity is manifested in the substantial will of the state, the subjectivity of the crown. 

_____Foreign relations 
¡ì 321 The state has individuality, and in the sovereign an actual, immediate individual. 
¡ì 322 Individuality manifests itself in the state as a relation to other states. 
¡ì 323 The relation of one state to another is that moment in the state which is most supremely its
own. 
¡ì 324 The individual's duty is to maintain the sovereignty of the state, at the risk and sacrifice of
property and life. 
¡ì 325 Sacrifice on behalf of the state is the substantial tie between the state and all its members. 
¡ì 326 If the state as such is in jeopardy, all its citizens are in duty bound to answer the summons
to its defence. 
¡ì 327 The courageous man's motive may be some particular reason or other, and even the result
not intended. 
¡ì 328 The work of courage is to actualise this final end, the sovereignty of the state. 
¡ì 329 It directly devolves on the monarch to command the armed forces and to conduct foreign
affairs. 

___B: International Law 
¡ì 330 International law springs from the relations between autonomous states. 
¡ì 331 The nation state is mind in its substantive rationality and immediate actuality ¡ª the absolute
power on earth. 
¡ì 332 The subject-matter of these contracts between states is infinitely less varied than it is in civil
society. 
¡ì 333 The fundamental proposition of international law is that treaties ought to be kept. 
¡ì 334 It follows that if states disagree, the matter can only be settled by war. 
¡ì 335 Danger threatening from another state is a cause of strife. 
¡ì 336 Welfare is the highest law governing the relation of one state to another. 
¡ì 337 Government is a matter of particular wisdom, not of universal Providence. 
¡ì 338 War should be not waged against domestic institutions, against the peace of family and
private life. 
¡ì 339 Relations between states depend principally upon the customs of nations. 
¡ì 340 The mind of the world, exercises its right in the 'history of the world which is the world's
court of judgement'. 

___C: World History 
¡ì 341 World history is a court of judgement. 
¡ì 342 World history is not the verdict of mere might, but actualisation of the universal mind. 
¡ì 343 The history of mind is its own act. 
¡ì 344 States, nations, and individuals are all the time the unconscious tools of the world mind at
work within them. 
¡ì 345 Each stage of world-history is a necessary moment in the Idea of the world mind. 
¡ì 346 History is mind clothing itself with the form of events. 
¡ì 347 The nation ascribed a moment of the Idea is entrusted with giving complete effect to it. 
¡ì 348 World-historical actions, culminate with individuals as subjects ¡ª living instruments of the
world mind. 
¡ì 349 The transition from a family, a horde, &c., to political conditions is the realisation of the
Idea as that nation. 
¡ì 350 The right of heroes to found states. 
¡ì 351 Civilised nations are justified in regarding as barbarians those who lag behind them in
institutions. 
¡ì 352 Four world-historical realms. 
¡ì 353 The substantial mind, ethical individuality as beauty, mind-forsaken & actual laws. 
¡ì 354 (1) The Oriental, (2) Greek, (3) Roman, and (4) Germanic principle. 
¡ì 355 (1) The Oriental realm. 
¡ì 356 (2) The Greek realm. 
¡ì 357 (3) The Roman realm. 
¡ì 358 (4) The Germanic realm. 
¡ì 359 The power of mind over the mundane heart, acts against the latter as a compulsive and
frightful force. 
¡ì 360 The realm of mind lowers itself to an earthly here and now and the mundane realm builds
up into thought. 




Preface

THE immediate occasion for publishing these outlines is the need of placing in the
bands of my hearers a guide to my professional lectures upon the Philosophy of
Right. Hitherto I have used as lectures that portion of the Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophic Sciences (1817) which deals with this subject. The present work
covers the same ground in a more detailed and systematic way. 

But now that these outlines are to be printed and given to the general public, there
is an opportunity of explaining points which in lecturing would be commented on
orally. Thus the notes are enlarged in order to include cognate or conflicting ideas,
further consequences of the theory advocated, and the like. These expanded
notes will, it is hoped, throw light upon the more abstract substance of the text,
and present a more complete view of some of the ideas currant in our own time.
Moreover, there is also subjoined, as far as was compatible with the purpose of a
compendium, a number of notes, ranging over a still greater latitude. A
compendium proper, like a science, has its subject-matter accurately laid out.
With the exception, possibly, of one or two slight additions, its chief task is to
arrange the essential phases of its material. This material is regarded as fixed and
known, just as the form is assumed to be governed by well-ascertained rules. A
treatise in philosophy is usually not expected to be constructed on such a pattern,
perhaps because people suppose that a philosophical product is a Penelope's web
which must be started anew every day. 

This treatise differs from the ordinary compendium mainly in its method of
procedure. It must be understood at the outset that the philosophic way of
advancing from one matter to another, the general speculative method, which is
the only kind of scientific proof available in philosophy, is essentially different
from every other. Only a clear insight into the necessity for this difference can
snatch philosophy out of the ignominious condition into which it has fallen in our
day. True, the logical rules, such as those of definition, classification, and
inference are now generally recognised to be inadequate for speculative science.
Perhaps it is nearer the mark to say that the inadequacy of the rules has been felt
rather than recognised, because they have been counted as mere fetters, and
thrown aside to make room for free speech from the heart, fancy and random
intuition. But when reflection and relations of thought were required, people
unconsciously fell back upon the old-fashioned method of inference and formal
reasoning. In my Science of Logic I have developed the nature of speculative
science in detail. Hence in this treatise an explanation of method will be added
only here and there. In a work which is concrete, and presents such a diversity of
phases, we may safely neglect to display at every turn the logical process, and
may take for granted an acquaintance with the scientific procedure. Besides, it
may readily be observed that the work as a whole, and also the construction of
the parts, rest upon the logical spirit. From this standpoint, especially, is it that I
would like this treatise to be understood and judged. In such a work as this we
are dealing with a science, and in a science the matter must not be separated from
the form. 

Some, who are thought to be taking a profound view, are heard to say that
everything turns upon the subject-matter, and that the form may be ignored. The
business of any writer, and especially of the philosopher, is, as they say, to
discover, utter, and diffuse truth and adequate conceptions. In actual practice this
business usually consists in warming up and distributing on all sides the same old
cabbage. Perhaps the result of this operation may be to fashion and arouse the
feelings; though even this small merit may be regarded as superfluous, for "they
have Moses and the prophets: let them hear them." Indeed, we have great cause
to be amazed at the pretentious tone of those who take this view. They seem to
suppose that up till now the dissemination of truth throughout the world has been
feeble. They think that the warmed-up cabbage contains new truths, especially to
be laid to heart at the present time. And yet we see that what is on one side
announced as true, is driven out and swept away by the same kind of worn-out
truth. Out of this hurly-burly of opinions, that which is neither new nor old, but
permanent, cannot be rescued and preserved except by science. 

Further, as to rights, ethical life, and the state, the truth is as old as that in which
it is openly displayed and recognised, namely, the law, morality, and religion. But
as the thinking spirit is not satisfied with possessing the truth in this simple way, it
must conceive it, and thus acquire a rational form for a content which is already
rational implicitly. In this way the substance is justified before the bar of free
thought. Free thought cannot be satisfied with what is given to it, whether by the
external positive authority of the state or human agreement, or by the authority of
internal feelings, the heart, and the witness of the spirit, which coincides
unquestioningly with the heart. It is the nature of free thought rather to proceed
out of its own self, and hence to demand that it should know itself as thoroughly
one with truth. 

The ingenuous mind adheres with simple conviction to the truth which is publicly
acknowledged. On this foundation it builds its conduct and way of life. In
opposition to this naive view of things rises the supposed difficulty of detecting
amidst the endless differences of opinion anything of universal application. This
trouble may easily be supposed to spring from a spirit of earnest inquiry. But in
point of fact those who pride themselves upon the existence of this obstacle are in
the plight of him who cannot see the woods for the trees. The confusion is all of
their own making. Nay, more: this confusion is an indication. that they are in fact
not seeking for what is universally valid in right and the ethical order. If they were
at pains to find that out, and refused to busy themselves with empty opinion and
minute detail, they would adhere to and act in accordance with substantive right,
namely the commands of the state and the claims of society. But a further
difficulty lies in the fact that man thinks, and seeks freedom and a basis for
conduct in thought. Divine as his right to act in this way is, it becomes a wrong,
when it takes the place of thinking. Thought then regards itself as free only when
it is conscious of being at variance with what is generally recognised, and of
setting itself up as something original. 

The idea that freedom of thought and mind is indicated only by deviation from, or
even hostility to what is everywhere recognised, is most persistent with regard to
the state. The essential task of a philosophy of the state would thus seem to be
the discovery and publication of a new and original theory. 

When we examine this idea and the way it is applied, we are almost led to think
that no state or constitution has ever existed, or now exists. We are tempted to
suppose that we must now begin and keep on beginning afresh for ever. We are
to fancy that the founding of the social order has depended upon present devices
and discoveries. As to nature, philosophy, it is admitted, has to understand it as it
is. The philosophers' stone must be concealed somewhere, we say, in nature
itself, as nature is in itself rational. Knowledge must, therefore, examine,
apprehend and conceive the reason actually present in nature. Not with the
superficial shapes and accidents of nature, but with its eternal harmony, that is to
say, its inherent law and essence, knowledge has to cope. But the ethical world or
the state, which is in fact reason potently and permanently actualised in
self-consciousness, is not permitted to enjoy the happiness of being reason at all. 

Footnote There are two kinds of laws, laws of nature and laws of right. The laws of nature are
simply there, and are valid as they are. They cannot be gainsaid, although in certain cases they may
be transgressed. In order to know laws of nature, we must get to work to ascertain them. for they
are true, and only our ideas of them can be false. Of these laws the measure is outside of us. Our
knowledge adds nothing to them, and does not further their operation. Only our knowledge of
them expands. The knowledge of right is partly of the same nature and partly different. The laws of
right also are simply there, and we have to become acquainted with them. In this way the citizen
has a more or less firm hold of them as they are given to him, and the jurist also abides by the
same standpoint. But there is also a distinction. In connection with the laws of right the spirit of
investigation is stirred up, and our attention is turned to the fact that the laws, because they are
different, are not absolute. Laws of right are established and handed down by men. The inner
voice must necessarily collide or agree with them. Man cannot be limited to what is presented to
him, but maintains that he has the standard of right within himself. He may be subject to the
necessity and force of external authority, but not in the same way as he is to the necessity of
nature; for always his inner being says to him how a thing ought to be, and within himself he finds
the confirmation or lack of confirmation of what is generally accepted. In nature the highest truth is
that a law is. In right a thing is not valid because it is, since every one demands that it shall conform
to his standard. Hence arises a possible conflict between what is and what ought to be, between
absolute unchanging right and the arbitrary decision of what ought to be right. Such division and
strife occur only on the soil of the spirit. Thus the unique privilege of the spirit would appear to
lead to discontent and unhappiness, and frequently we are directed to nature in contrast with the
fluctuations of life. But it is exactly in the opposition arising between absolute right, and that which
the arbitrary will seeks to make right, that the need lies of knowing thoroughly what right is. Men
must openly meet and face their reason, and consider the rationality of right. This is the
subject-matter of our science in contrast with jurisprudence, which often has to do merely with
contradictions. Moreover the world of today has an imperative need to make this investigation In
ancient times, respect and reverence for the law were universal. But now the fashion of the time
has taken another turn, and thought confronts everything which has been approved. Theories now
set themselves in opposition to reality, and make as though they were absolutely true and
necessary. And there is now more pressing need to know and conceive the thoughts upon right.
Since thought has exalted itself -is the essential form, we must now be careful to apprehend right
also as thought. It would look as though the door were thrown open for every casual opinion,
when thought is thus made to supervene upon right. But true thought of a thing is not an opinion,
but the conception of the thing itself. The conception of the thing does not come to us by nature.
Every man has fingers, and may have brush and colours, but he is not by reason of that a painter.
So is it with thought. The thought of right is not a thing which every man has at first hand. True
thinking is thorough acquaintance with the object. Hence our knowledge must be scientific. 

On the contrary, the spiritual universe is looked upon as abandoned by God, and given over as a
prey to accident and chance. As in this way the divine is eliminated from the ethical world, truth
must be sought outside of it. And since at the same time reason should and does belong to the
ethical world, truth, being divorced from reason, is reduced to a mere speculation. Thus seems to
arise the necessity and duty of every thinker to pursue a career of his own. Not that he needs to
seek for the philosophers' stone, since the philosophising of our day has saved him the trouble, and
every would-be thinker is convinced that he possesses the stone already without search. But these
erratic pretensions are, as it indeed happens, ridiculed by all who, whether they are aware of it or
not, are conditioned in their lives by the state, and -find their minds and wills satisfied in it. These,
who include the majority if not all, regard the occupation of philosophers as a game, sometimes
playful, sometimes earnest, sometimes entertaining, sometimes dangerous, but always as a mere
game. Both this restless and frivolous reflection and also this treatment accorded to it might safely
be left to take their own course, were it not that betwixt them philosophy is brought into discredit
and contempt. The most cruel despite is done when every one is convinced of his ability to pass
judgment upon, and discard philosophy without. any special study. No such scorn is heaped upon
any other art or science. 

In point of fact the pretentious utterances of recent philosophy regarding the state have been
enough to justify anyone who cared to meddle with the question, in the conviction that he could
prove himself a philosopher by weaving a philosophy out of his own brain. Notwithstanding this
conviction, that which passes for philosophy has openly announced that truth cannot be known.
The truth with regard to ethical ideals, the state, the government and the constitution ascends, so it
declares, out of each man's heart, feeling and enthusiasm. Such declarations have been poured
especially into the eager ears of the young. The words "God giveth truth to his chosen in sleep"
have been applied to science ; hence every sleeper has numbered himself amongst the chosen. But
what he deals with in sleep is only the wares of sleep. Mr. Fries, one of the leaders of this
shallow-minded host of philosophers, on a public festive occasion, now become celebrated, has
not hesitated to give utterance to the following, notion of the state and constitution: "When a nation
is ruled by a common spirit, then from below, out of the people, will come life sufficient for the
discharge of all public business. Living associations, united indissolubly by the holy bond of
friendship, will devote themselves to every side of national service, and every means for educating
the people." This is the last degree of shallowness, because in it science is looked upon as
developing, not out of thou-ht or conception, but out of direct perception and random fancy. Now
the organic connection of the manifold branches of the social system is the architectonic of the
state's rationality, and in this supreme science of state architecture the strength of the whole, is
made to depend upon the harmony of all the clearly marked phases of public life, and the stability
of every pillar, arch, and buttress of the social edifice. And yet the shallow doctrine, of which we
have spoken permits this elaborate structure to melt and lose itself in the brew and stew of the
"heart, friendship, and inspiration." Epicurus, it is said, believed that the world generally should be
given over to each individual's opinions and whims and according to the view we are criticising, the
ethical fabric should be treated in the same way. By this old wives' decoction, which consists in
founding upon the feelings what has been for many centuries the labour of reason and
understanding, we no longer need the guidance of any ruling conception of thought. On this point
Goethe's Mephistopheles, and the poet is a good authority, has a remark, which I have already
used elsewhere: 

     "Verachte nur Verstand und Wissenschaft,
     des Menschen allerh?chste Gaben -
     So hast dem Teufel dich ergben
     und musst zu Grunde gehn." 

It is no surprise that the view just criticised should appear in the form of piety. Where, indeed, has
this whirlwind of impulse not sought to justify itself? In godliness and the Bible it has imagined itself
able to find authority for despising order and law. And, in fact, it is piety of the sort which has
reduced the whole organised system of truth to elementary intuition and feeling. But piety of the
right kind leaves this obscure region, and comes out into the daylight, where the idea unfolds and
reveals itself. Out of its sanctuary it brings a reverence for the law and truth which are absolute and
exalted above all subjective feeling. 

The particular kind of evil consciousness developed by the wishy-washy eloquence already
alluded to, may be detected in the following way. It is most unspiritual, when it speaks most of the
spirit. It is the most dead and leathern, when it talks of the scope of life. When it is exhibiting the
greatest self-seeking and vanity it has most on its tongue the words "people" and "nation." But its
peculiar mark, found on its very forehead, is its hatred of law. Right and ethical principle, the
actual world of right and ethical life are apprehended in thought, and by thought are given definite,
general, and rational form, and this reasoned right finds expression in law. But feeling, which seeks
its own pleasure, and conscience, which finds right in private conviction, regard the law as their
most bitter foe. The right, which takes the shape of law and duty, is by feeling looked upon as a
shackle or dead cold letter. In this law it does not recognise itself and does not find itself free. Yet
the law is the reason of the object, and refuses to feeling the privilege of warming itself at its
private hearth. Hence the law, as we shall occasionally observer is the Shibboleth, by me us of
which are detected the false brethren and friends of the so-called people. 

Inasmuch as the purest charlatanism has won the name of philosophy, and has succeeded in
convincing the public that its practices are philosophy, it has now become almost a disgrace to
speak in a philosophic way about the state. Nor can it be taken ill, if honest men become
impatient, when the subject is broached. Still less is it a surprise that the government has at last
turned its attention to this false philosophising. With us philosophy is not practised as a private art,
as it was by the Greeks, but has a public place, and should therefore be employed only in the
service of the state. The government has, up till now, shown such confidence in the scholars in this
department as to leave the subject matter of philosophy wholly in their hands. Here and there,
perhaps, has been shown to this science not confidence - so much as indifference, and
professorships have been retained as a matter of tradition. In France, as far as I am aware, the
professional teaching of metaphysics at least has fallen into desuetude. In any case the confidence
of the state has been ill requited by the teachers of this subject. Or, if we prefer to see in the state
not confidence, but indifference, the decay of fundamental knowledge must be looked upon as a
severe penance. Indeed, shallowness is to all appearance most endurable and most in harmony
with the maintenance of order and peace, when it does not touch or hint at any real issue. 

Hence it would not be necessary to bring it under public control, if the state did not require deeper
teaching and insight, and expect science to satisfy the need. Yet this shallowness, notwithstanding
its seeming innocence, does bear upon social life, right and duty generally, advancing principles
which are the very essence of superficiality. These, as we have learned so decidedly from Plato,
are the principles of the Sophists, according to which the basis of right is subjective aims and
opinions, subjective feeling and private conviction. The result of such principles is quite as much
the destruction of the ethical system, of the upright conscience, of love and right, in private
persons, as of public order and the institutions of the state. The significance of these facts for the
authorities will not be obscured by the claim that the bolder of these perilous doctrines should be
trusted, or by the immunity of office. 

The authorities will not be deterred by the demand that they should protect and give free play to a
theory which strikes at the substantial basis of conduct, namely, universal principles, and that they
should disregard insolence on the ground of its being the exercise of the teacher's function. To
him, to whom God gives office, He gives also understanding is a well-worn jest, which no one
in our time -would like to take seriously. 

In the methods of teaching philosophy, which have under the circumstances been reanimated by
the government, the important element of protection and support cannot be ignored. The study of
philosophy is in many ways in need of such assistance. Frequently in scientific, religious, and other
works may be read a contempt for philosophy. Some, who have no conspicuous education and
are total strangers to philosophy, treat it as a cast-off garment. They even rail against it, and regard
as foolishness and sinful presumption its efforts to conceive of God and physical and spiritual
nature. They scout its endeavour to know the truth. Reason, and again reason, and reason in
endless iteration is by them accused, despised, condemned. Free expression, also, is given by a
large number of those, who are supposed to be cultivating scientific research, to their annoyance at
the unassailable claims of the conception. When we, I say, are confronted with such phenomena
as these, we are tempted to harbour the thought that old traditions of tolerance have fallen out of
use, and no longer assure to philosophy a, place and public recognition.' 

Footnote: The same finds expression in a letter of Joh. v. M¨¹ller (Works, Part VIII., p. 56),
who, speaking of the condition of Rome in the year 1803, when the city was under French rule,
writes, "A professor, asked how the public academies were doing, answered, 'On les tol¨¨re
comme les bordels!' Similarly the so-called theory of reason or logic we may still hear
commended, perhaps under the belief that it is too dry and unfruitful a science to claim any one's
attention, or, if it be pursued here and there, that its formulae are without content, and, though not
of much good, can be of no great harm. Hence the recommendation, so it is thought, if useless,
can do no injury. 

These presumptuous utterances, which are in vogue in our time, are, strange to
say, in a measure justified by the shallowness of the current philosophy. Yet, on
the other hand, they have sprung from the same root as that against which they
so thanklessly direct their attacks. Since that self-named philosophising has
declared that to know the truth is vain, it has reduced all matter of thought to the
same level, resembling in this way the despotism of the Roman Empire, which
equalised noble and slave, virtue and vice, honour and dishonour, knowledge and
ignorance. In such a view the conceptions of truth and the laws of ethical life are
simply opinions and subjective convictions, and the most criminal principles,
provided only that they are convictions, are put on a level with these laws. Thus,
too, any paltry special object, be it never so flimsy, is given the same value as au
interest common to all thinking men and the bonds of the established social world.

Hence it is for science a piece of good fortune that that kind of philosophising,
which might, like scholasticism, have continued to spin its notions within itself,
has been brought into contact with reality. Indeed, such contact was, as we have
said, inevitable. The real world is in earnest with the principles of right and duty,
and in the full light of a consciousness of these principles it lives. With this world
of reality philosophic cob-web spinning has come into open rupture. Now, as to
genuine philosophy it is precisely its attitude to reality which has been
misapprehended. Philosophy is, as I have already observed, an inquisition into the
rational, and therefore the apprehension of the real and present. Hence it cannot
be the exposition of a world beyond, which is merely a castle in the air, having no
existence except in the terror of a one-sided and empty formalism of thought. In
the following treatise I have remarked that even Plato's Republic, now regarded
as the bye-word for an empty ideal, has grasped the essential nature of the ethical
life of the Greeks. He knew that there was breaking in upon Greek life a deeper
principle, which could directly manifest itself only as an unsatisfied longing and
therefore as ruin. Moved by the same longing Plato had to seek help against it,
but had to conceive of the help as coming down from above, and hoped at last to
have found it in an external special form of Greek ethical life. He exhausted
himself in contriving, how by means of this new society to stem the tide of ruin,
but succeeded only in injuring more fatally its deeper motive, the free infinite
personality. Yet he has proved himself to be a great mind because the very
principle and central distinguishing feature of his idea is the pivot upon which the
world-wide revolution then in process turned: 

     What is rational is real;
     And what is real is rational. 

Upon this conviction stand not philosophy only but even every unsophisticated
consciousness. From it also proceeds the view now under contemplation that the
spiritual universe is the natural. When reflection, feeling or whatever other form
the subjective consciousness may assume, regards the present as vanity, and
thinks itself to be beyond it and wiser, it finds itself in emptiness, and, as it has
actuality only in the present, it is vanity throughout. Against the doctrine that the
idea is a mere idea, figment or opinion, philosophy preserves the more profound
view that nothing is real except the idea. Hence arises the effort to recognise in
the temporal and transient the substance, which is immanent, and the eternal,
which is present. The rational is synonymous with the idea, because in realising
itself it passes into external existence. It thus appears in an endless wealth of
forms, figures and phenomena. It wraps its kernel round with a robe of many
colours, in which consciousness finds itself at home. 

Through this varied husk the conception first of all penetrates, in order to touch
the pulse, and then feel it throbbing in its external manifestations. To bring to
order the endlessly varied relations, which constitute the outer appearance of the
rational essence is not the task of philosophy. Such material is not suitable for it,
and it can well abstain from giving good advice about these things. Plato could
refrain from recommending to the nurses not to stand still with children, but
always to dandle them in their arms. So could Fichte forbear to construe, as they
say, the supervision of passports to such a point as to demand of all suspects that
not only a description of them but also their photograph, should be inserted in the
pass. Philosophy now exhibits no trace of such details. These superfine concerns
it may neglect all the more safely, since it shows itself of the most liberal spirit in
its attitude towards the endless mass of objects and circumstances. By such a
course science will escape the hate which is visited upon a multitude of
circumstances and institutions by the vanity of a better knowledge. In this hate
bitterness of mind finds the greatest pleasure, as it can in no other way attain to a
feeling of self-esteem. 

This treatise, in so far as it contains a political science, is nothing more than an
attempt to conceive of and present the state as in itself rational. As a philosophic
writing, it must be on its guard against constructing a state as it ought to be.
Philosophy cannot teach the state what it should be, but only how it, the ethical
universe, is to be known. 

     Idou Podos, idou kai to pidima
     Hic Rhodus, hic saltus. 

To apprehend what is is the task of philosophy, because what is is reason. As for
the individual, every one is a son of his time; so philosophy also is its time
apprehended in thoughts. It is just as foolish to fancy that any philosophy can
transcend its present world, as that an individual could leap out of his time or
jump over Rhodes. If a theory transgresses its time, and builds up a world as it
ought to be, it has an existence merely in the unstable element of opinion, which
gives room to every wandering fancy. 

With little change the above, saying would read: 

     Here is the rose, here dance 

The, barrier which stands between reason, as self-conscious Spirit, and reason as
present reality, and does not permit spirit to find satisfaction in reality, is some
abstraction, which is not free to be conceived. To recognise reason as the rose in
the cross of the present, and to find delight in it, is a rational insight which implies
reconciliation with reality. This reconciliation philosophy grants to those who have
felt the inward demand to conceive clearly, to preserve subjective freedom while
present in substantive reality, and yet thought possessing this freedom to stand
not upon the particular and contingent, but upon what is and self-completed 

This also is the more concrete meaning of what was a moment ago more
abstractly called the unity of form and content. Form in its most concrete
significance is reason, as an intellectual apprehension which conceives its object.
Content, again, is reason as the substantive essence of social order and nature.
The conscious identity of form and content is the philosophical idea. 

It is a self-assertion, which does honour to man, to recognise nothing in sentiment
which is not justified by thought. This self-will is a feature of modern times, being
indeed the peculiar principle of Protestantism. What was initiated by Luther as
faith in feeling and the witness of the spirit, the more mature mind strives to
apprehend in conception. In that way it seeks to free itself in the present, and so
find there itself. It is a celebrated saying that a half philosophy leads away from
God, while a true philosophy leads to God. (It is the same halfness, I may say in
passing which regards knowledge as an approximation to truth.) This saying is
applicable to the science of the state. Reason cannot content itself with a mere
approximation, something which is neither cold not hot, and must be spewed out
of the mouth. As little can it be contented with the cold scepticism that in this
world of time things go badly, or at best only moderately well, and that we must
keep the peace with reality, merely because there is nothing better to be had.
Knowledge creates a much more vital peace. 

Only one word more concerning the desire to teach the world what it ought to be.
For such a purpose philosophy at least always comes too late. Philosophy, as the
thought of the world, does not appear until reality has completed its formative
process, and made itself ready. History thus corroborates the teaching of the
conception that only in the maturity of reality does the ideal appear as counterpart
to the real, apprehends the real world in its substance, and shapes it into an
intellectual kingdom. When philosophy paints its grey in grey, one form of life has
become old, and by means of grey it cannot be rejuvenated, but only known. The
owl of Minerva, takes its flight only when the shades of night are gathering. 

But it is time to close this preface. As a preface it is its place to speak only
externally and subjectively of the standpoint of the work which it introduces. A
philosophical account of the essential content needs a scientific and objective
treatment. So, too, criticisms, other than those which proceed from such a
treatment, must be viewed by the author as unreflective convictions. Such
subjective criticisms must be for him a matter of indifference. 

     BERLIN, June 25th, 1820.
     Translated by S W Dyde, 1896 




Introduction

                                   ¡ì 1.

THE philosophic science of right has as its object the idea of right, i.e., the
conception of right and the realisation of the conception. 

Remark: Philosophy has to do with ideas or realised thoughts, and hence not with what we have
been accustomed to call mere conceptions. It has indeed to exhibit the one-sidedness and untruth
of these mere conceptions, and to show that, while that which commonly bears the name
"conception," is only an abstract product of the understanding, the true conception alone has
reality and gives this reality to itself. Everything, other than the reality which is established by the
conception, is transient surface existence, external attribute, opinion, appearance void of essence,
untruth, delusion, and so forth. Through the actual shape, which it takes upon itself in actuality, is
the conception itself understood. This shape is the other essential element of the idea, and is to be
distinguished from the form, which exists only as conception. 

Addition. The conception and its existence are two sides, distinct yet united, like soul and
body. The body is the same life as the soul, and yet the two can be named independently. A soul
without a body would not be a living thing, and vice versa. Thus the visible existence of the
conception is its body, just as the body obeys the soul which produced it. Seeds contain the tree
and its whole power, though they are not the tree itself ; the tree corresponds accurately to the
simple structure of the seed. If the body does not correspond to the soul, it is defective. The unity
of visible existence and conception, of body and soul, is the idea. It is not a mere harmony of the
two, but their complete interpenetration. There lives nothing, which is not in some way idea. The
idea of right is freedom, which, if it is to be apprehended truly, must be known both in its
conception and in the embodiment of the conception. 

                                   ¡ì 2.

The science of right is a part of philosophy. Hence it must develop the idea,
which is the reason of an object, out of the conception. It is the same thing to say
that it must regard the peculiar internal development of the thing itself. Since it is
a part, it has a definite beginning, which is the result and truth of what goes
before, and this, that goes before, constitutes its so-called proof. Hence the origin
of the conception of right falls outside of the science of right. The deduction of
the conception is presupposed in this treatise, and is to be considered as already
given. 

Addition. Philosophy forms a circle. It has, since it must somehow make a beginning, a primary,
directly given matter, which is not proved and is not a result. But this starting-point is simply
relative, since, from another point of view it appears as a result. Philosophy is a consequence,
which does not hang in the air or form a directly new beginning, but is self-enclosed. 

According to the formal unphilosophic method of the sciences, definition is the first desideratum,
as regards, at least, the external scientific form. The positive science of right, however, is little
concerned with definition, since its special aim is to give what it is that is right, and also the
particular phases of the laws. For this reason it has been said as a warning, Omnis definitio in
jure civili periculosa; and in fact the more disconnected and contradictory the phases of a right
are, the less possible is a definition of it. 

A definition should contain only universal features; but these forthwith bring to light contradictions,
which in the case of law are injustice, in all their nakedness. Thus in Roman law, for instance, no
definition of man was possible, because it excluded the slave. The conception of man was
destroyed by the fact of slavery. In the same way to have defined property and owner would have
appeared to be perilous to many relations. But definitions may perhaps be derived from
etymology, for the reason, principally, that in this way special cases are avoided, and a, basis is
found in the feeling and imaginative thought of men. 

The correctness of a definition would thus consist in its agreement with existing ideas. By such a
method everything essentially scientific is cast aside. As regards the content there is cast aside the
necessity of the self-contained and self-developed object, and as regards the form there is
discarded the nature of the conception. In philosophic knowledge the necessity of a, conception is
the main thing, and the process, by which it, as a result, has come into being is the proof and
deduction. After the content is seen to be necessary independently, the second point is to look
about for that which corresponds to it in existing ideas and modes of speech. But the way in which
a conception exists in its truth, and the way it presents itself in random ideas not only are but must
be different both in form and structure. If a notion is not in its content false, the conception can be
shown to be contained in it and to be already there in its essential traits. 

A notion may thus be raised to the form of a conception. But so little is any notion the measure
and criterion of an independently necessary and true conception, that it must accept truth from the
conception, be justified by it, and know itself through it. If the method of knowing, which proceeds
by formal definition, inference and proof, has more or less disappeared, a worse one has come to
take its place. This new method maintains that ideas, as, e.g., the idea of right in all its aspects, are
to be directly apprehended as mere facts of consciousness, and that natural feeling or that
heightened form of it which is known as the inspiration of one's own breast, is the source of right.
This method may be the most convenient of all, but it is also the most unphilosophic. Other
features of this view, referring not merely to knowledge but directly to action, need not detain us
here. While the first or formal method went so far as to require in definition the form of the
conception, and in proof the form of a necessity of knowledge, the method of the intuitive
consciousness and feeling takes for its principle the arbitrary contingent consciousness of the
subject. In this treatise we take for granted the scientific procedure of philosophy, which has been
set forth in the philosophic logic. 

                                  ¡ì 3. 

Right is positive in general (a) in its form, since it has validity in a state; and this
established authority is the principle for the knowledge of right. Hence we have
the positive science of right. (b) On the side of content this right receives a
positive element [a] through the particular character of a nation, the stage of its
historical development, and the interconnection of all the relations which are
necessitated by nature: [b] through the necessity that a system of legalised right
must contain the application of the universal conception to objects and cases
whose qualities are given externally. Such an application is not the speculative
thought or the development of the conception, but a subsumption made by the
understanding: [c] through the ultimate nature of a decision which has become a
reality. 

Remark: Philosophy at least cannot recognise the authority of feeling, inclination and caprice,
when they are set in opposition to positive right and the laws. It is an accident, external to the
nature of positive right, when force or tyranny becomes an element of it. It will be shown later (¡ì¡ì
211 - 214), at what point right must become positive. The general phases which are there
deduced, are here only mentioned, in order to indicate the limit of philosophic right, and also to
forestall the idea or indeed the demand that by a systematic development of right should be
produced a law-book, such as would be needed by in actual state. To convert the differences
between right of nature and positive right, or those between philosophic right and positive right,
into open antagonism would be a complete misunderstanding. 

Natural right or philosophic right stands to positive right as institutions to pandects. With regard to
the historical element in positive right, referred to in the paragraph, it may be said that the true
historical view and genuine philosophic standpoint have been presented by Montesquieu. He
regards legislation and its specific traits not in an isolated and abstract way, but rather as a
dependent element of one totality, connecting it with all the other elements which form the
character of a nation and an epoch. In this interrelation the various elements receive their meaning
and justification. The purely historical treatment of the phases of right, as they develop in time, and
a comparison of their results with existing relations of right have their own value; but they are out
of place in a philosophic treatise, except in so far as the development out of historic grounds
coincides with the development out of the conception, and the historical exposition and justification
can be made to cover a justification which is valid in itself and independently. 

This distinction is as manifest as it is weighty. A phase of right may be shown to rest upon and
follow from the circumstances and existing institutions of right, and yet may be absolutely
unreasonable and void of right. This is the case in Roman law with many aspects of private right,
which were the logical results of its interpretation of paternal power and of marriage. Further, if the
aspects of right are really right and reasonable, it is one thing to point out what with regard to them
can truly take place through the conception, and quite another thing to portray the manner of their
appearance in history, along with the circumstances, cases, wants and events, which they have
called forth. Such a demonstration and deduction from nearer or more remote historic causes,
which is the occupation of pragmatic history, is frequently called exposition, or preferably
conception, under the opinion that in such an indication of the historic elements is found all that is
essential to a conception of law and institutions of right. In point of fact that which is truly essential,
the conception of the matter, has not been so much as mentioned. So also we are accustomed to
hear of Roman or German conceptions of right, and of conceptions of right as they are laid down
in this or that statute-book, when indeed nothing about conceptions can be found in them, but only
general phases of right, propositions derived from the understanding, general maxims, and laws. 

By neglect of the distinction, just alluded to, the true standpoint is obscured and the question of a
valid justification is shifted into a justification based upon circumstances; results are founded on
presuppositions, which in themselves are of little value; and in general the relative is put in place of
the absolute, and external appearance in place of the nature of the thing. When the historical
vindication substitutes the external origin for the origin from the conception, it unconsciously does
the opposite of what it intends. Suppose that an institution, originating under definite
circumstances, is shown to be necessary and to answer its purpose, and that it accomplishes all
that is required of it by the historical standpoint. When such a proof is made to stand for a
justification of the thing itself, it follows that, when the circumstances are removed, the institution
has lost its meaning and its right. When, e.g., it is sought to support and defend cloisters on the
grounds that they have served to clear and people the wilderness and by teaching and transcribing
to preserve scholarship, it follows that just in so far as the circumstances are changed, cloisters
have become aimless and superfluous. 

In so far as the historic significance, or the historical exposition and interpretation of the origin of
anything is in different spheres at home with the philosophic view of the origin and conception of
the thing one might tolerate the other. But, in illustration of the fact that they neither here nor in
science, preserve this peaceful attitude, I quote from Mr. Hugo's Textbook of the History of
Roman Law. In this work Mr. Hugo says (5th edition ¡ì 53) that "Cicero praises the twelve tables
with a side glance at philosophy, ... but the philosopher Phavorinus treats them exactly as many a
great philosopher since has treated positive right." Mr. Hugo makes the ultimate reply to such a
method as that of Phavorinus, when he says of him that he "understood the twelve tables just as
little as the philosophers understood positive right." The correction of the philosopher Phavorinus
by the jurist Sextus Caecilius (Gellius. "Noct. Attic." xx. 1) expresses the lasting and true principle
of the justification of that which is in its content merely positive. "Non ignoras," as Caecilius
felicitously remarks to Phavorinus, "legum opportunitates et medelas pro temporum moribus,
et pro rerum publicarum generibus, ac pro utilitatum praesentium rationibus, proque
vitiorum, quibus medendum est, fervoribus mutari ae flecti, neque uno statu consistere,
quin, ut facies coeli et maris, ita rerum atque fortunae tempestatibus varientur. Quid
salubrius visuin est rogatione illa Stolonis, etc., quid utilius plebiscite Voconio, etc., quid
tam necessarium existimatum est, quam lex Licinia, etc.? Omnia tamen haec obliterate et
operta sunt civitatis opulentia," etc. These laws are Positive so far as they have meaning and
appropriateness under the circumstances, and thus have only an historic value. For this reason they
are in their nature transient. Whether the legislator or government was wise or not in what it did for
its own immediate time and circumstances is a matter quite by itself and is for history to say. 

History will the more profoundly recognise the action of the legislator in proportion as its estimate
receives support from the philosophic standpoint. From the vindications of the twelve tables
against the judgment of Phavorinus I shall give further examples, because in them Caecilius
furnishes an illustration of the fraud which is indissolubly bound up with the methods of the
understanding and its reasoning. He adduces a good reason for a bad thing, and supposes that lie
has in that way justified the thing. Take the horrible law which permitted a creditor, after the lapse
of a fixed term of respite, to kill a debtor or sell him into slavery. Nay, further, if there were several
creditors, they were permitted to cut pieces off the debtor, and thus divide him amongst them, with
the proviso that if any one of them should cut off too or too little, no action should be taken against
him. 

It was this malaise, it may be noticed, which stood Shakespeare's Shylock in The Merchant of
Venice in such good stead, and was by him most thankfully accepted. Well, for this law Caecilius
adduces the good argument that by it trust and credit were more firmly secured, and also that, by
reason of the very horror of the law, it never had to be enforced. Not only does he in his want of
thought fail to observe that by the severity of the law that very intention of securing trust and credit
was defeated, but lie forthwith himself gives an illustration of the way in which the,
disproportionate punishment caused the law to be inoperative, namely through the habit of giving
false witness. But the remark of Mr. Hugo that, Phavorinus bad not understood the law is not to
be passed over. Now any schoolboy can understand the law just quoted, and better than anyone
else would Shylock have understood what was to him of such advantage. Hence, by "understand"
Mr. Hugo must mean that form of understanding which consists in brining to the support of a law a
good reason. Another failure to understand, asserted by Caecilius of Phavorinus, a philosopher at
any rate may without blushing acknowledge: jumentum, which without any arcera was the only
legal way to bring a sick man into court as a witness, was held to mean not only t horse but also a
carriage or wagon. Further on in this raw Caecilius found more evidence of the excellence and
accuracy of the old statutes, which for the purpose of non-suiting a sick man at court distinguished
not only between a horse and a wagon, but also, as Caecilius explains, between a wagon covered
and cushioned and one not so comfortably equipped. Thus one would have the choice between
utter severity on one side, and on the other senseless details. But to exhibit fully the absurdity of
these laws and the pedantic defence offered in their behalf would give rise to an invincible
repugnance to all scholarship of that kind. 

But in his manual Mr. Hugo speaks also of rationality in (connection with Roman law, and I have
been struck with the following remarks. He first of all treats of the epoch extending from the origin
of the Republic to the twelve tables (¡ì¡ì 38, 39), noticing that in Rome people had many wants,
and were compelled in their labour to use draught animals and beasts of burden, as we ourselves
do, and that the ground was an alternation of hill and valley that the city was set upon a hill, etc.
These statements might, perhaps, have answered to the sense of Montesquieu's thought, though in
them it would be well-nigh impossible to find his genius. But after these preliminary paragraphs, he
goes on to say in ¡ì 40, that the condition of the law was still very far from satisfying the highest
demands of reason. This remark is wholly in place, as the Roman family-right, slavery, etc., give
no satisfaction to the smallest demands of reason. Yet when discussing the succeeding epochs,
Mr. Hugo forgets to tell us in what particulars, if any, the Roman law has satisfactorily met the
highest demands of reason. Still of the classic jurists. who flourished in the era of the greatest
expansion of Roman law as a, science, it is said (¡ì 289) that "it has been long since been
observed that the Roman jurists were educated in philosophy," but "few know" (more will know
now through the numerous editions of Mr. Hugo's manual) "that there is no class of writers, who,
as regards deduction from principles, deserved to be placed beside the mathematicians, and also,
as regards the quite remarkable way in which they develop their conceptions, beside the modern
founder of metaphysic ; as voucher for this assertion is the notable fact that nowhere do so many
trichotomies occur as in the classic jurists and in Kant." 

This form of logical reasoning, extolled by Leibnitz, is certainly an essential feature of the science
of right, as it is of mathematics and every other intelligible science; but the logical procedure of the
mere understanding, spoken of by Mr. Hugo, has nothing to do with the satisfaction of the claims
of reason and with philosophic science. Moreover, the very lack of logical procedure, which is
characteristic of the Roman jurists and proctors, is to be esteemed as one of their chief virtues,
since by means of it they obviated the consequences of unrighteous and horrible institutions.
Through their want of logic they were compelled callide to put sense into mere verbal distinctions,
as they did when they identified Bonorum possessio with inheritance, and also into silly evasions,
for silliness is a defect of logic, in order to save the letter of the tables, as was done in the fictio or
hypokrisis that a filia patroni was a filius (Heineec. Antiq. Rom., lib. i. tit. ii. ¡ì 24). But it is
absurd to place the classic jurists, with their use of trichotomy, along with Kant, and in that way to
discern in them the promise of the development of conceptions. 

                                   ¡ì 4.

The territory of right is in general the spiritual, and its more definite place and
origin is the will, which is free. Thus freedom constitutes the substance and
essential character of the will, and the system of right is the kingdom of actualised
freedom. It is the world of spirit, which is produced out of itself, and is a second
nature. 

Addition. Freedom of will is best explained by reference to physical nature. Freedom is a,
fundamental phase of will, as weight is of bodies. When it is said that matter is heavy, it might be
meant that the predicate is an attribute; but such is not the case, for in matter there is nothing which
has not weight; in fact, matter is weight. That which is heavy constitutes the body, and is the body.
Just so is it with freedom and the will; that which is free is the will. Will without freedom is an
empty word, and freedom becomes actual only as will, as subject. A remark may also be made as
to the connection of willing and thinking. Spirit, in general, is thought, and by thought man is
distinguished from the animal. But we must not imagine that man is on one side thinking and on
another side willing, as though he had will in one pocket and thought in another. Such an idea is
vain. The distinction between thought and will is only that between a theoretical and a practical
relation. They are not two separate faculties. The will is a special way of thinking; it is thought
translating itself into reality; it is the impulse of thought to give itself reality. The distinction between
thought and will may be expressed in this way. When I think an object, I make of it a thought, and
take from it the sensible. Thus I make of it something which is essentially and directly mine. Only in
thought am I self-contained. Conception is the penetration of the object, which is then no longer
opposed to me. From it I have taken its own peculiar nature, which it had as an independent
object in opposition to me. As Adam said to Eve, "thou art flesh of my flesh and bone of my
bone," so says the spirit, "This object is spirit of my spirit, and all alienation has disappeared." Any
idea is a universalising, and this process belongs to thinking. To make something universal is to
think. The "I" is thought and the universal. When I say "I," I let fall all particularity of character,
natural endowment, knowledge, age. The I is empty, a point and simple, but in its simplicity active.
The gaily coloured world is before me ; I stand opposed to it, and in this relation I cancel and
transcend the opposition, and make the content my own. The I is at home in the world, when it
knows it, and still more when it has conceived it. 

So much for the theoretical relation. The practical, on the other hand, begins with thinking, with the
I itself. It thus appears first of all as placed in opposition, because it exhibits, as it were, a
separation. As I am practical, I am ,active; I act and determine myself; and to determine myself
means to set up a distinction. But these distinctions are again mine, my own determinations come
to me; and the ends are mine, to which I am impelled. Even when I let these distinctions and
determinations go, setting them in the so-called external world, they remain mine. They are that
which I have done and made, and bear the trace of my spirit. That is the distinction to be drawn
between the theoretical and the practical relations. 

And now the connection of the two must be also stated. The theoretical is essentially contained in
the practical. Against the idea that the two are separate runs the fact that man has no will without
intelligence. The will holds within itself the theoretical, the will determines itself, and this
determination is in the first instance internal. That which I will I place before my mind, and it is an
object for me. The animal acts according to instinct, is impelled by something internal, and so is
also practical. But it has no will, because it cannot place before its mind what it desires. Similarly
man cannot use his theoretic faculty or think without will, for in thinking we are active. The content
of what is thought receives, indeed, the form of something existing, but this existence is occasioned
by our activity and by it, established. These distinctions of theoretical and practical are inseparable
; they are one and the same; and in every activity, whether of thought or will, both these elements
are found. 

It is worth while to recall the older way of proceeding with regard to the freedom of the will. First
of all, the idea of the will was assumed, and then an effort was made to deduce from it and
establish a definition of the will. Next, the method of the older empirical psychology was adopted,
and different perceptions and general phenomena of the ordinary consciousness were collected,
such as remorse, guilt, and the like, on the ground that these could be explained only as
proceeding out of a will that is free. Then from these phenomena was deduced the so-called proof
that the will is free. But it is more convenient to take a short cut and hold that freedom is given as a
fact of consciousness, and must be believed in. 

The nature of the will and of freedom, and the proof that the will is free, can be shown, as has
already been observed (¡ì 2), only in connection with the whole. The ground principles of the
premises that spirit is in the first instance intelligence, and that the phases, through which it passes
in its development, namely from feeling, through imaginative thinking to thought, are the way by
which it produces itself as will, which, in turn, as the practical spirit in general, is the most direct
truth of intelligence - I have presented in my Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences
(1817), and hope some day to be able to give of them a more complete exposition. There is, to
my mind, so much the more need for me to give my contribution to, as I hope, the more thorough
knowledge of the nature of spirit, Since, as I have there said, it would be difficult to find a
philosophic science in a more neglected and evil plight than is that theory of spirit, which is
commonly called psychology. Some elements of the conception of will, resulting from the premises
enumerated above are mentioned in this and the following paragraphs. As to these, appeal may
moreover be made to every individual to see them in his own self-consciousness. Everyone will, in
the first place, find in himself the ability to abstract himself from all that he is, and in this way prove
himself able of himself to set every content within himself, and thus have in his own consciousness
an illustration of all the subsequent phases. 

                                   ¡ì 5.

The will contains [a] the element of pure indeterminateness, i.e., the pure
doubling of the I back in thought upon itself. In this process every limit or
content, present though it be directly by way of nature, as in want, appetite or
impulse, or given in any specific way, is dissolved. Thus we have the limitless
infinitude of absolute abstraction, or universality, the pure thought of itself. 

Remark: Those who treat thinking and willing as two special peculiar and separate faculties,
and, further, look upon thought is detrimental to the will, especially the good will, show from the
very start that they know nothing of the nature of willing a remark which we shall be called upon to
a number of times upon the same attitude of mind. The will on one side is the possibility of
abstraction from every aspect in which the I finds itself or has set itself up. It reckons any content
as a limit, and flees from it. This is one of the forms of the self-direction of the will, and is by
imaginative thinking insisted upon as of itself freedom. It is the negative side of the will, or freedom
as apprehended by the understanding. This freedom is that of the void, which his taken actual
shape, and is stirred to passion. It, while remaining purely theoretical, appears in Hindu religion as
the fanaticism of pure contemplation; but becoming actual it assumes both in politics and religion
the form of a fanaticism, which would destroy the established social order, remove all individuals
suspected of desiring any kind of order, and demolish any organisation which then sought to rise
out of the ruins only in devastation does the negative will feel that it has reality. It intends, indeed,
to bring to pass some positive social condition, such as universal equality or universal religious life.
But in fact it does not will the positive reality of any such condition, since that would carry in its
train a system, and introduce a separation by way of institutions and between individuals. But
classification and objective system attain self consciousness only by destroying negative freedom.
Negative freedom is actuated by a mere solitary idea, whose realisation is nothing but the fury of
desolation. 

Addition. This phase of will implies that I break loose from everything, give up all ends, and
bury myself in abstraction. It is man alone who can let go everything, even life. He can commit
suicide, an act impossible for the animal, which always remains only negative, abiding in a state
foreign to itself, to which it must merely get accustomed is pure thought of himself, and only in
thinking has he the power to give himself universality and distinguish in himself all that is particular
and definite. 

Negative freedom, or freedom of the understanding, is one-sided, yet as this one-sidedness
contains an essential feature, it is not to be discarded. But the defect of the understanding is that it
exalts its one-sidedness to the sole highest place. This form of freedom frequently occurs in
history. By the Hindus, e.g., the highest freedom is declared to be persistence in the consciousness
of one's simple identity with himself, to abide in the empty space of one's own inner being, like the
colourless light of pure intuition, and to renounce every, activity of life, every purpose and every
idea. In this way man becomes Brahma; there is no longer any distinction between finite man and
Brahma, every difference having been swallowed up in this universality. A more concrete
manifestation of this freedom is fanaticism of political and religious life. Of this nature was the
terrible epoch of the French Revolution, by which all distinctions in talent and authority were to
have been superseded. In this time of upheaval and commotion any specific thing was intolerable.
Fanaticism wills an abstraction and not an articulate association. It finds all distinctions antagonistic
to its indefiniteness, and supersedes them. Hence in the French Revolution the people abolished
the institutions which they themselves had set up, since every institution is inimical to the abstract
self-consciousness of equality. 

                                   ¡ì 6.

[b] The I is also the transition from blank indefiniteness to the distinct and
definite establishment of a definite content and object, whether this content be
given by nature or produced out of the conception of spirit. Through this
establishment of itself as a definite thing the I becomes a reality. This is the
absolute element of the finitude or specialisation of the I. 

Remark: This second element in the characterisation of the I is just as negative as the first, since
it annuls and replaces the first abstract negativity. As the particular is contained in the universal, so
this second phase is contained already in the first, and is only an establishing of what the first is
implicitly. The first phase, if taken independents, is not the true infinitude, i.e., the concrete
universal, or the conception, but limited and one-sided. In that it is the abstraction from all definite
character, it has a definite character. Its abstract and one-sided nature constitutes its definite
character, its defect and finitude. 

The distinct characterisation of these two phases of the I is found in the philosophy of Fichte as
also in that of Kant. Only, in the exposition of Fichte the I, when taken as unlimited, as it is in the
first proposition of his Wissenschaftslehre, is merely positive. It is the universality and identity
made by the understanding. Hence this abstract I is in its independence to be taken as the truth, to
which by way of mere addition comes in the second proposition, the limitation, or the negative in
general, whether it be in the form of a given external limit or of an activity of the I. To apprehend
the negative as immanent in the universal or self-identical, and also as in the I, was the next step,
which speculative philosophy had to make. Of this want they have no presentiment, who like
Fichte never apprehend that the infinite and finite are, if separated, abstract, and must be seen as
immanent one in the other. 

Addition. This second element makes its appearance as the opposite of the first ; it is to be
understood in its general form: it belongs to freedom but does not constitute the whole of it. Here
the I passes over from blank indeterminateness to the distinct establishment of a specific character
as a content or object. I do not will merely, but I will something. Such a will, as is analysed in the
preceding paragraph, wills only the abstract universal, and therefore wills nothing. Hence it is not a
will. The particular thing, which the will wills is a limitation, since the will, in order to be a will, must
in general limit itself. Limit or negation consists in the will willing something Particularising is thus as
a rule named finitude. Ordinary reflection holds the first element, that of the indefinite, for the
absolute and higher. and the limited for a mere negation of this indefiniteness. But this indefiniteness
is itself only a negation, in contrast with the definite and finite. The I is solitude and absolute
negation. The indefinite will is thus quite as much one-sided as the will, which continues merely in
the definite. 

                                   ¡ì 7.

[c] The will is the unity of these two elements. It is particularity turned back
within itself and thus led back to universality; it is individuality; it is the
self-direction of the I. Thus at one and the same time it establishes itself as its
own negation, that is to say, as definite and limited, and it also abides by itself, in
its self-identity and universality, and in this position remains purely self-enclosed.
The I determines itself in so far as it is the reference of negativity to itself ; and
yet in this self-reference it is indifferent to its own definite character. This it
knows as its own, that is, as an ideal or a mere possibility, by which it is not
bound, but rather exists in it merely because it establishes itself there. This is the
freedom of the will, constituting its conception or substantive reality. It is its
gravity, as it were, just as gravity is the substantive reality of a body. 

Remark: Every self-consciousness knows itself as at once universal, or the possibility of
abstracting itself from everything definite, and as particular, with a fixed object, content or aim.
These two elements, however, are only abstractions. The concrete and true, and all that is true is
concrete, is the universality, to which the particular is at first opposed, but, when it has been turned
back into itself, is in the end made equal. This unity is individuality, but it is not a simple unit as is
the individuality of imaginative thought, but a unit in terms of the conception (Encyclopaedia of
the Philosophical Sciences, ¡ì¡ì 112-114). In other words, this individuality is properly nothing
else than the conception. The first two elements of the will, that it can abstract itself from
everything, and that it is definite through either its own activity or something else, are easily
admitted and comprehended, because in their separation they are untrue, and characteristic of the
mere understanding. But into the third, the true and speculative - and all truth, as far as it is
conceived, must be thought speculatively - the understanding declines to venture, always calling
the conception the inconceivable. The proof and more detailed explanation of this inmost reserve
of speculation, of infinitude as the negativity which refers itself to itself, and of this ultimate source
of all activity, life and consciousness, belong to logic, as the purely speculative philosophy. Here it
can be noticed only in passing that, in the sentences, "The will is universal. ... The will directs
itself," the will is already regarded as presupposed subject or substratum; but it is not something
finished and universal before it determines itself, nor yet before this determination is superseded
and idealised. It is will only when its activity is self-occasioned, and it has returned into itself. 

Addition. What we properly call will contains the two above-mentioned elements. The I is, first
of all, as such, pure activity, the universal which is by itself. Next this universal determines itself,
and so far is no longer by itself, but establishes itself as another, and ceases to be the universal.
The third step is that the will, while in this limitation, i.e., in this other, is by itself. While it limits
itself, it yet remains with itself, and does not lose its hold of the universal. This is, then, the concrete
conception of freedom, while the other two elements have been thoroughly abstract and
one-sided. But this concrete freedom we already have in the form of perception, as in friendship
and love, Here a man is not one-sided, but limits himself willingly in reference to another, and yet
in this limitation knows himself as himself. In this determination he does not feel himself determined,
but in the contemplation of the other as another has the feeling of himself. Freedom also lies neither
in indeterminateness nor in determinateness, but in both. . The wilful man has a will which limits
itself wholly to a particular object, and if he has not this will, be supposes himself not to be free.
But the will is not bound to a particular object, but must go further, for the nature of the will is not
to be one-sided and confined. Free will consists in willing a definite object, but in so doing to be
by itself and to return again into the universal. 

                                   ¡ì 8.

If we define this particularising ([b] ¡ì 6) further, we reach a distinction in the
forms of the will. (a) In so far as the definite character of the will consists in the
formal opposition of the subjective to the objective or external direct existence,
we have the formal will as a self consciousness which finds an outer world before
it. The process by which individuality turns back in its definiteness into itself, is
the translation of the subjective end, through the intervention of an activity and a
means, into objectivity. In the absolute spirit, in which all definite character is
thoroughly its own and true (Encyclopaedia. ¡ì 363), consciousness is only one
side, namely, the manifestation or appearance of the will, a phase which does not
require detailed consideration here. 

Addition. The consideration of the definite nature of the will belongs to the understanding, and
is not in the first instance speculative. The will as a whole, not only in the sense of its content, but
also in the sense of its form, is determined. Determinate character on the side of form is the end,
and the execution of the end. The end is at first merely something internal to me and subjective, but
it is to be also objective and to cast away the defect of mere subjectivity. It may be asked, why it
has this defect. When that which is deficient does not at the same time transcend its defect, the
defect is for it not a defect at all. The animal is to us defective, but not for itself. The end, in so far
as it is at first merely ours, is for us a defect, since freedom and will are for us the unity of
subjective and objective. The end must also be established as objective; but does not in that way
attain a new one-sided character, but rather its realisation. 

                                   ¡ì 9

(b). In so far as the definite phases of will are its own peculiar property or its
particularisation turned back into itself, they are content. This content, as content
of the will, is for it, by virtue of the form given in (a), an end, which exists on its
inner or subjective side as the imaginative will, but by the operation of the
activity, which converts the subjective into the objective, it is realised, completed
end. 

                                  ¡ì 10.

The content or determinate phase of will is in the first instance direct or
immediate. Then the will is free only in itself or for us, i.e., it is the will in its
conception. Only when it has itself as an object is it also for itself, and its implicit
freedom becomes realised. 

Remark: At this standpoint the finite implies that whatever is in itself, or according to its
conception, has an existence or manifestation different from what it is for itself. For example the
abstract separateness of nature is in itself space, but for itself time. Here, two things are to be
observed, 

   1.that because the truth is the idea, when any object or phase is apprehended only as it is in
     itself or in conception, it is not as yet apprehended in its truth, and yet 
   2.that, whatever exists as conception or in itself, at the same time exists, and this existence is a
     peculiar form of the object, as e.g. space. 

The separation of existence in-itself or implicit existence from existence-for-itself or explicit
existence is a characteristic of the finite, and constitutes its appearance or merely external reality.
An example of this is to hand in the separation of the natural will from formal right. The
understanding adheres to mere implicit existence, and in accordance with this position calls
freedom a capacity, since it is at this point only a possibility. But the understanding, regards this
phase as absolute and perennial, and considers the relation of the will to what it wills or reality as
an application to a given material, which does not belong to the essence of freedom. In this way
the understanding occupies itself with mere abstractions, and not with the idea and truth. 

Addition. The will, which is will only according to the conception, is free implicitly, but is at the
same time not free. To be truly free. it must have a truly fixed content; then it is explicitly free, has
freedom for its object, and is freedom. What is at first merely in conception, i.e., implicit, is only
direct and natural, We are familiar with this in pictorial thought also. The child is implicitly a man, at
first has reason implicitly, and is at first the possibility of reason and freedom. He is thus free
merely according to the conception. That which is only implicit does not yet exist in actuality. A
man, who is implicitly rational, must create himself by working through and out of himself and by
reconstructing himself within himself, before he can become also explicitly rational. 

                                  ¡ì 11.

The will, which is at first only implicitly free, is the direct or natural will. The
distinctive phases, which the self-determining conception sets up in the will,
appear in the direct will, as a directly present content. They are impulses,
appetites, inclinations, by which the will finds itself determined by nature. Now
this content, with all its attendant phases, proceeds from the rationality of the will,
and is therefore implicitly rational; but let loose in its immediate directness it has
not as yet the form of rationality. The content is indeed for me and my own, but
the form and the content are yet different. The will is thus in itself finite. 

Note. Empirical psychology enumerates and describes these impulses and inclinations, and the
wants which are based upon them. It takes, or imagines that it takes this material from experience,
and then seeks to classify it in the usual way. It will be stated below, what the objective side of
impulse is, and what impulse is in its truth, apart from the form of irrationality which it has as an
impulse, and also what shape it assumes when it reaches existence. 

Addition. Impulse, appetite, inclination are possessed by the animal also, but it has not will; it
must obey impulse, if there is no external obstacle. Man, however, is the completely undetermined,
and stands above impulse, and may fix and set it up as his. Impulse is in nature, but it depends on
my will whether I establish it in the I. Nor can the will be unconditionally called to this action by the
fact that the impulse lies in nature. 

                                  ¡ì 12.

The system of this content, as it occurs directly in the will, exists only as a
multitude or multiplicity of impulses, every one of which is mine in a general way
along with others, but is at the same time universal and undetermined, having
many objects and ways of satisfaction. The will, by giving itself in this two-fold
indefiniteness the form of individuality (¡ì 7), resolves, and only as resolving is it
actual. 

Remark: Instead of to " resolve," i.e. to supersede the indefinite condition in which a content is
merely possible, our language has the expression "decide " (" unfold itself "). The indeterminate
condition of the will, as neutral but infinitely fruitful germ of all existence, contains within itself its
definite character and ends, and brings them forth solely out of itself. 

                                  ¡ì 13.

By resolution, will fixes itself as the will of a definite individual, and as thereby
distinguishing itself from another. However apart from this finite character which
it has as consciousness (¡ì 8), the immediate will is in virtue of the distinction
between its form and its content formal. Hence its resolution as such is abstract,
and its content is not yet the content and work of its freedom. 

Remark: To the intelligence, as thinking, the object or content remains universal ; the intelligence
retains the form merely of a universal activity. Now the universal signifies in will that which is mine,
i.e. it is individuality. And yet, also, the direct and formal will is abstract ; its individuality is not yet
filled with its free universality. Hence at the beginning the peculiar finitude of the intelligence is in
will, and only by exalting itself again to thought and giving itself intrinsic universality does the will
transcend the distinction of form and content and make itself objective infinite will. It is therefore a
misunderstanding of the nature of thought and will to suppose that in the will man is infinite, while in
thought and even in reason he is limited. In so far as thought and will are still distinct, the reverse is
rather the case, and thinking reason, when it becomes will, assigns itself to finitude. 

Addition. A will which resolves nothing, is not an actual will; that which is devoid of definite
character never reaches a volition. The reason for hesitation may lie in a sensitiveness, which is
aware that in determining itself it is engaged with what is finite, is assigning itself a limit, and
abandoning its infinity ; it may thus hold to its decision not to renounce the totality which it intends.
Such a feeling is dead, even when it aims to be something beautiful. "Who will be great," says
Goethe, "must be able to limit himself." By volition alone man enters actuality, however distasteful
it may be to him; for indolence will not desert its own self-brooding, in which it clings to a universal
possibility. But possibility is not yet actuality. Hence the will, which is secure simply of itself, does
not as yet lose itself in any definite reality. 

                                  ¡ì 14.

The finite will, which has merely from the standpoint of form doubled itself back
upon itself, and has become the infinite and self-secluded I (¡ì 5), stands above
its content of different impulses and also above the several ways by which they
are realised and satisfied. At the same time, as it is only formally infinite, it is
confined to this very content as the decisive feature of its nature and external
actuality, although it is undetermined and not confined to one content rather than
another (¡ì¡ì 6, 11). As to the return of the I into itself such a will is only a
possible will, which may or may not be mine, and the I is only the possibility of
deputing itself to this or that object. Hence amongst these definite phases, which
in this light are for the I external, the will chooses. 

                                  ¡ì 15.

Freedom of the will is, in this view of it, caprice, in which are contained both a
reflection, which is free and abstracted from everything and a dependence upon a
content or matter either internally or externally provided. Since the content is in
itself or implicitly necessary as all end, and in opposition to this reflection is a
definite possibility, caprice, when it is will, is in its nature contingent. 

Remark: The, usual idea of freedom is that of caprice. It is a midway stage of reflection
between the will as merely natural impulse and the will as free absolutely. When it is said that
freedom as a, general thing consists in doing what one likes, such an idea must be taken to imply
an utter lack of developed thought, containing as yet not even the suspicion of what is meant by
the absolutely free will, right, the ethical system, etc. Reflection, being the formal universality and I
unity of self-consciousness, is the will's abstract certitude of its freedom, but it is not yet the truth
of it, because it has not as yet itself for content and end; the subjective side is still different from the
objective. Thus the content in such a case remains purely and completely finite. Caprice, instead of
being will in its truth, is rather will in its contradiction. 

In the controversy carried on, especially at the time of the metaphysic of Wolf, as to whether the
will is really free or our consciousness of its freedom is a delusion, it was this caprice, which was in
the minds of both parties. Against the certitude of abstract self-direction, determinism rightly
opposed a content, which was externally presented, and not being contained in this certitude came
from without. It did not matter whether this "without" were impulse, imagination, or in general a
consciousness so filled that the content was not the peculiar possession of the self-activity as such.
Since only the formal element of free self-direction is immanent in caprice, while the other element
is something given to it from without, to take caprice as freedom may fairly be named a delusion.
Freedom in every philosophy of reflection, whether it be the Kantian or the Friesian, which is the
Kantian superficialised, is nothing more than this formal self-activity. 

Addition. Since I have the possibility of determining himself in this or that way, since I have the
power of choice, possess caprice, or what is commonly called freedom. This choice is due to the
universality of the will, enabling me to make my own this thing or another. This possession is a
particular content, which is therefore not adequate to me, but separated from me, and is mine only
in possibility; just as I am the possibility of bringing myself into coincidence with it. Hence choice is
due to the indeterminateness of the I, and to the determinateness of a content. But as to this
content the will is not free, although it has in itself formally the side of infinitude. No such content
corresponds to will ; in no content can it truly find itself. In caprice it is involved that the content is
not formed by the nature of my will, but by contingency. I am dependent upon this content. This is
the contradiction contained in caprice. Ordinary man believes that he is free, when lie is allowed to
act capriciously, but precisely in caprice is it inherent that he is not free. When I will the rational, I
do not act as a particular individual but according to the conception of ethical life in general. In an
ethical act I establish not myself but the thing. A man, who acts perversely, exhibits particularity.
The rational is the highway on which every one travels, and no one is specially marked. When a
great artist finishes a work we say: "It must be so." The particularity of the, artist has wholly
disappeared and the work shows no mannerism. Phidias has no mannerism; the statue itself lives
and moves. But the poorer is the artist, the more easily we discern himself, his particularity all
caprice. If we adhere to the consideration that in caprice a man can will what he pleases, we have
certainly freedom of a kind; but again, if we hold to the view that the content is given, then man
must be determined by it, and in this light is no longer free. 

                                  ¡ì 16.

What is resolved upon and chosen (¡ì 14) the will may again give up (¡ì 5). Yet,
even with the possibility of transcending any other content which it may
substitute, and of proceeding in this way ad infinitum, the will does not advance
beyond finitude, because every content in turn is different from the form and is
finite. The opposite aspect, namely indeterminateness, irresolution or abstraction,
is also one-sided. 

                                  ¡ì 17.

Since the contradiction involved in caprice (¡ì 15) is the dialectic of the impulses
and inclinations, it is manifested in their mutual antagonism. The satisfaction of
one demands the subjection and sacrifice of the satisfaction of another. Since an
impulse is merely the simple tendency of its own essential nature, and has no
measure in itself, to subject or sacrifice the satisfaction of any impulse is a
contingent decision of caprice. In such a case caprice may act upon the
calculation as to which impulse will bring the greater satisfaction, or may have
some other similar purpose. 

Addition. Impulses and inclinations are in the first instance the content of will, and only
reflection transcends them. But these impulses are self-directing, crowding upon and jostling one
another, and all seeking to be satisfied. To set all but one in the background, and put myself into
this one, is to limit and distort myself, since I, in so doing, renounce my universality, which is a
system of the impulses. Just as little help is found in a mere subordination of them, a course usually
followed by the understanding. There is available no criterion by which to make such an
arrangement, and hence the demand for a subordination is usually sustained by tedious and
irrelevant allusions to general savings. 

                                  ¡ì 18.

With regard to the moral estimate of impulses, dialectic appears in this form. The
phases of the direct or natural will are immanent and positive, and thus good.
Hence man is by nature good. But natural characteristics, since they are opposed
to freedom and the conception of the spirit, and are, hence, negative, must be
eradicated. Thus man is by nature evil. To decide for either view is a matter of
subjective caprice. 

Addition. The Christian doctrine that man is by nature evil is loftier than the opposite that he is
naturally good, and is to be interpreted philosophically in this way. Man as spirit is a free being,
who need not give way to impulse. Hence in his direct and unformed condition, man is in a
situation in which he ought not to be, and he must free himself. This is the meaning of the doctrine
of original sin, without which Christianity would not be the religion of freedom. 

                                  ¡ì 19.

In the demand that impulses must be purified is found the general idea that they
must be freed from the form of direct subjection to nature, and from a content
that is subjective and contingent, and must be restored to their substantive
essence. The truth contained in this indefinite demand is that impulses should be
phases of will in a rational system. To apprehend them in this way as proceeding
from the conception is the content of the science of right. 

Remark: The content of this science may, in all its several elements, right, property, morality,
family, state, be represented in this way, that man has by nature the impulse to right, the impulse to
property, to morality, to sexual love, and to social life. If instead of this form, which belongs to
empirical psychology, a philosophic form be preferred, it may be obtained cheap from what, in
modern times was reputed and still is reputed to be philosophy. He will then say that man finds in
himself as a fact of consciousness that he wills right, property, the state, etc. Later will be given still
another form of the content which appears here in the shape of impulses, that, namely, of duties. 

                                  ¡ì 20.

The reflection which is brought to bear upon impulses, placing them before itself,
estimating them, comparing them with one another, and contrasting them with
their means and consequences, and also with a whole of satisfaction, namely
happiness, brings the formal universal to this material, and in an external way
purifies it of its crudity and barbarism. This propulsion by the universality of
thought is the absolute worth of civilisation (¡ì 187). 

Addition. In happiness thought has already the upper hand with the force of natural impulse,
since it is not satisfied with what is momentary, but requires happiness as a whole. This happiness
is dependent upon civilisation to the extent to which civilisation confirms the universal. But in the
ideal of happiness there are two elements. There is 

   1.a universal that is higher than all particulars; vet, as the content of this universal is in turn only
     universal pleasure, there arises once more the individual, particular and finite, and retreat
     must be made to impulse; 
   2.Since the content of happiness lies in the subjective perception of each individual, this
     universal end is again particular; nor is there present in it any true unity of content and form. 

                                  ¡ì 21.

But the truth of this formal universality, which taken by itself is undetermined and
finds definite character in externally given material, is the self-directing
universality which is will or freedom. Since the will has as its object, content and
end, universality itself, and thus assumes the form of the infinite, it is free not
only in itself or implicitly, but for itself or explicitly. It is the true idea. 

Remark: The self-consciousness of the will in the form of appetite or impulse is sensible, the
sensible in general indicating the externality of self-consciousness, or that condition in which
self-consciousness is outside of itself. Now this sensible side is one of the two elements of the
reflecting will, and the other is the abstract universality of thought. But the absolute will has as its
object the will itself as such in its pure universality. In this universality the directness of the natural
will is superseded, and so also is the private individuality which is produced by reflection and
infects the natural condition. But to supersede these and lift them into the universal, constitutes the
activity of thought. Thus the self-consciousness, which purifies its object, content or end, and
exalts it to universality, is thought carrying itself through into will. It is at this point that it becomes
clear that the will is true and free only as thinking intelligence. The slave knows not his essence, his
infinitude, his freedom; he does not know himself in his essence, and not to know himself is not to
think himself. The self-consciousness, which by thought apprehends that itself is essence, and thus
puts away from itself the accidental and untrue, constitutes the principle of right, morality, and all
forms of ethical life. They who, in speaking philosophically of right, morality, and ethical life, would
exclude thought and turn to feeling, the heart, the breast, and inspiration, express the deepest
contempt for thought and science. And science itself, overwhelmed with despair and utter
insipidity, makes barbarism and absence of thought a principle, and so far as in it lay robbed men
of all truth, dignity, and worth. 

Addition. In philosophy truth is had when the conception corresponds to reality. A body is the
reality, and soul is the conception. Soul and body should be adequate to each other. A dead man
is still an existence, but no longer a true existence; it is a reality void of conception. For that reason
the dead body decays. So with the true will; that which it wills, namely, its content, is identical with
it, and so freedom wills freedom. 

                                  ¡ì 22.

The will which exists absolutely is truly infinite, because its object being the will
itself, is for it not another or a limitation. In the object the will has simply reverted
into itself. Moreover, it is not mere possibility, capacity, potentiality (potential, but
infinitely actual (infinitum actu), because the reality of the conception or its
visible externality is internal to itself. 

Remark: Hence when the free will is spoken of without the qualification of absolute freedom,
only the capacity of freedom is meant, or the natural and finite will (¡ì 11), and, notwithstanding all
words and opinions to the contrary, not the free will. Since the understanding comprehends the
infinite only in its negative aspect, and hence as a beyond, it thinks to do the infinite all the more
honour the farther it removes it into the vague distance, and the more it takes it as a foreign thing.
In free will the true infinite is present and real; it is itself the actually present self-contained idea. 

Addition. The infinite has rightly been represented as a circle. The straight line goes out farther
and farther, and symbolises the merely negative and bad infinite, which, unlike the true, does not
return into itself. The free will is truly infinite, for it is not a mere possibility or disposition. Its
external reality is its own inner nature, itself. 

                                  ¡ì 23.

Only in this freedom is the will wholly by itself, because it refers to nothing but
itself, and all dependence upon any other thing falls away. The will is true, or
rather truth itself, because its character consists in its being in its manifested
reality, or correlative opposite, what it is in its conception. In other words, the
pure conception has the perception or intuition of itself as its end and reality. 

                                  ¡ì 24.

The will is universal, because in it all limitation and particular individuality are
superseded. These one-sided phases are found only in the difference between the
conception and its object or content, or, from another standpoint, in the
difference between the conscious independent existence of the subject, and the
will's implicit, or self-involved existence, or between its excluding and concluding
individuality, and its universality. 

Remark: The different phases of universality are tabulated In the logic (Encyclopaedia. of the
Phil. Sciences, ¡ì¡ì 118-126). Imaginative thinking always takes universality in an abstract and
external way. But absolute universality is not to be thought of either as the universality of reflection,
which is a kind of consensus or generality, or, as the abstract universality and self-identity, which is
fashioned by the understanding (¡ì 6, note), and keeps aloof from the individual. It is rather the
concrete, self-contained, and self-referring universality, which is the substance, intrinsic genus, or
immanent idea of self-consciousness. It is a conception of free will as the universal, transcending its
object, passing through and beyond its own specific character, and then becoming identical with
itself. This absolute universal is what is in general called the rational, and is to be apprehended only
in this speculative way. 

                                  ¡ì 25.

The subjective side of the will is the side of its self-consciousness and
individuality (¡ì 7), as distinguished from its implicit conception. This subjectivity
is 

[a] pure form or absolute unity of self-consciousness with itself. This unity is the
equation " I = I," consciousness being characterised by a thoroughly inward and
abstract self-dependence. It is pure certitude of itself in contrast with the truth; 

[b] particularity of will, as caprice with its accidental content of pleasurable ends; 

[c] in general a one-sided form (¡ì 8), in so far as that which is willed is at first an
unfulfilled end, or a content which simply belongs to self-consciousness. 

                                  ¡ì 26.

[a] In so far as free will is determined by itself, and is in accord with its
conception and true, it is wholly objective will. [b] But objective
self-consciousness, which has not the form of the infinite, is a will sunk in its
object or condition, whatever the content of that may be. It is the will of the
child, or the will present in slavery or superstition. [c] Objectivity is finally a
one-sided form in opposition to the subjective phase of will ; it is direct reality, or
external existence. In this sense the will becomes objective only by the execution
of its ends. 

Remark: These logical phases of subjectivity and objectivity, since they are often made use of in
the sequel, are here exposed, with the express purpose of noting that it happens with them as with
other distinctions and opposed aspects of reflection; they by virtue of their finite and dialectic
character pass over into their opposites. For imagination and understanding the meanings of
antithetic phases are not convertible, because their identity is still internal. But in will, on the
contrary, these phases, which ought to be at once abstract and yet also sides of that which can be
known only as concrete, lead of themselves to identity, and to an exchange of meaning. To the
understanding this is unintelligible. Thus, e.g., the will, as a freedom which exists in itself, is
subjectivity itself; thus subjectivity is the conception of the will, and therefore its objectivity. But
subjectivity is finite in opposition to objectivity, yet in this opposition the will is ]lot isolated, but in
intricate union with the object ; and thus its finitude consists quite as much in its not being
subjective, etc. What in the sequel is to be meant by the subjective or the objective side of the will,
has each time to be made clear from the context, which will supply their positions in relation to the
totality. 

Addition. It is ordinarily supposed that subjective and objective are blank opposites ; but this is
not the case. Rather do they pass into one another, for they are not abstract aspects like positive
and negative, but have already a concrete significance. To consider in the first instance the
expression "subjective;" this may mean an end which is merely the end of a certain subject. In this
sense a poor work of art, that is not adequate to the thing is merely subjective. But, further, this
expression may point to the content of the will, and is then of about the same meaning as
capricious; the subjective content then is that which belongs merely to the subject. In this sense
bad acts are merely subjective. Further, the pure, empty I may be called subjective, as it has only
itself as an object, and possesses the power of abstraction from all further content. Subjectivity
has, moreover, a wholly particular and correct meaning in accordance with which anything, in
order to win recognition from me, has to become mine and seek validity in me. This is the infinite
avarice of subjectivity, eager to comprehend and consume everything within the simple and pure I.

Similarly we may take the objective in different ways. By it we may understand anything to which
we give existence in contrast to ourselves, whether it be an actual thing or a mere thought, which
we place over against ourselves. By it also we understand the direct reality, in which the end is to
be realised. Although the end itself is quite particular and subjective, we yet name it objective after
it has made its appearance. Further, the objective will is also that in which truth is; thus, God's will,
the ethical will also, are objective. Lastly, we may call the will objective, when it is wholly
submerged in its object, as, e.g., the child's will, which is confiding and without subjective
freedom, and the slave's will, which does not know itself as free, and is thus a will-less will. In this
sense any will is objective, if it is guided in its action by a foreign authority, and has not yet
completed the infinite return into itself. 

                                  ¡ì 27.

The absolute character or, if you like, the absolute impulse of the free spirit (¡ì
21) is, as has been observed, that its freedom shall be for it an object. It is to be
objective in a two-fold sense: it is the rational system of itself, and this system is
to be directly real (¡ì 26). There is thus actualised as idea what the will is
implicitly. Hence, the abstract conception of the idea of the will is in general the
free will which wills the free will. 

                                  ¡ì 28.

The activity of the will, directed to the task of transcending the contradiction
between subjectivity and objectivity, of transferring its end from subjectivity into
objectivity, and yet while in objectivity of remaining with itself, is beyond the
formal method of consciousness (¡ì 8), in which objectivity is only direct
actuality. This activity is the essential development of the substantive content of
the idea (¡ì 21). In this development the conception moulds the idea, which is in
the first instance abstract, into the totality of a system. This totality as substantive
is independent of the opposition between mere subjective end and its realisation,
and in both of these forms is the same. 

                                  ¡ì 29.

That a reality is the realisation of the free will, this is what is meant by a right.
Right, therefore, is, in general, freedom as idea. 

Remark: In the Kantian doctrine (Introduction to Kant's Theory of Right), now generally
accepted, "the, highest factor is a limitation of my freedom or caprice, in order that it may be able
to subsist alongside of every other individual's caprice in accordance with a universal law." This
doctrine contains only a negative phase, that of limitation. And besides, the positive phase, the
universal law or so-called law of reason, consisting in the agreement of the caprice of one with that
of another, goes beyond the well-known formal identity and the proposition of contradiction. The
definition of right, just quoted, contains the view which has especially since Rousseau spread
widely. According to this view neither the absolute and rational will, nor the true spirit, but the will
and spirit of the particular individual in their peculiar caprice, are the substantive and primary basis.
When once this principle is accepted, the rational can announce itself only as limiting this freedom.
Hence it is not an inherent rationality, but only a mere external and formal universal. This view is
accordingly devoid of speculative thought, and is rejected by the philosophic conception. In the
minds of men and in the actual world it has assumed a shape, whose horror is without a parallel,
except in the shallowness of the thoughts upon which it was founded. 

                                  ¡ì 30.

Right in general is something holy, because it is the embodiment of the absolute
conception and self-conscious freedom. But the formalism of right, and after a
while of duty also, is due to distinctions arising out of the development of the
conception of freedom. In contrast with the more formal, abstract and limited
right, there is that sphere or stage of the spirit, in which spirit has brought to
definite actuality the further elements contained in the idea. This stage is the
richer and more concrete; it is truly universal and has therefore a higher right. 

Remark: Every step in the development of the idea of freedom has its peculiar right, because it
is the embodiment of a phase of freedom. When morality and ethical life are spoken of in
opposition to right, only the first or formal right of the abstract personality is meant. Morality,
ethical life, a state-interest, are every one a special right, because each of these is a definite
realisation of freedom. They can come into collision only in so far as they occupy the same plane.
If the moral standpoint of spirit were not also a right and one of the forms of freedom, it could not
collide with the right of personality or any other right. A right contains the conception of freedom
which is the highest phase of spirit, and in opposition to it any other kind of thing is lacking in real
substance. Yet collision also implies a limit and a subordination of one phase to another. Only the
right of the world-spirit is the unlimited absolute. 

                                  ¡ì 31.

The scientific method by which the conception is self-evolved, and its phases
self-developed and self-produced, is not first of all an assurance that certain
relations are given from somewhere or other, and then the application to this
foreign material of the universal. The true process is found in the logic, and here
is presupposed. 

Remark: The efficient or motive principle, which is not merely the analysis but the production of
the several elements of the universal, I call dialectic. Dialectic is not that process in which an object
or proposition, presented, to feeling or the direct consciousness, is analysed, entangled, taken
hither and thither, until at last its contrary is derived. Such a merely negative method appears
frequently in Plato. It may fix the opposite of any notion, or reveal the contradiction contained in it,
as did the ancient scepticism, or it may in a feeble way consider an approximation to truth, or
modern half-and-half attainment of it, as its goal. But the higher dialectic of the conception does
not merely apprehend any phase as a limit and opposite, but produces out of this negative a
positive content and result. Only by such a course is there development and inherent progress.
Hence this dialectic is not the external agency of subjective thinking, but the private soul of the
content, which unfolds its branches and fruit organically. Thought regards this development of the
idea and of the peculiar activity of the reason of the idea as only subjective, but is on its side
unable to make any addition. To consider anything rationally is not to bring reason to it from the
outside, and work it up in this way, but to count it as itself reasonable. Here it is spirit in its
freedom, the summit of self-conscious reason, which gives itself actuality, and produces itself as
the existing world. The business of science is simply to bring the specific work of the reason,
which is in the thing, to consciousness. 

                                  ¡ì 32.

The phases of the development of the conception are themselves conceptions.
And yet, because the conception is essentially the idea, they have the form of
manifestations. Hence the sequence of the conceptions, which arise in this way, is
at the same time a sequence of realisations, and are to be by science so
considered. 

Remark: In a speculative sense the way, in which a conception is manifested in reality, is
identical with a definite phase of the conception. But it is noteworthy that, in the scientific
development of the idea, the elements, which result in a further definite form, although preceding
this result as phases of the conception, do not in the temporal development go before it as
concrete realisations. Thus, as will be seen later, that stage of the idea which is the family
presupposes phases of the conception, whose result it is. But that these internal presuppositions
should be present in such visible realisations as right of property, contract, morality, etc., this is the
other side of the process, which only in a highly developed civilisation has attained to a specific
realisation of its elements. 

Addition. The idea must always go on determining itself within itself, since at the beginning it is
only abstract conception. However, this initial abstract conception is never given up, but only
becomes inwardly richer, the last phase being the richest. The earlier and merely implicit phases
reach in this way free self-dependence, but in such a manner that the conception remains the soul
which holds everything together, and only through a procedure immanent within itself arrives at its
own distinctions. Hence the last phase falls again into a unity with the first, and it cannot be said
that the conception ever comes to something new. Although the elements of the conception appear
to have fallen apart when they enter reality, this is only a mere appearance. Its superficial character
is revealed in the process, since all the particulars finally turn back again into the conception of the
universal. The empirical sciences usually analyse what they find in pictorial ideas, and if the
individual is successfully brought back to the general, the general property is then called the
conception. But this is not our procedure. We desire only to observe how the conception
determines itself, and compels us to keep at a distance everything of our own spinning and
thinking. But what we get in this way is one series of thoughts and another series of realised forms.
As to these two series, it may happen that the order of time of the actual manifestations is partly
different from the order of the conception. Thus it cannot, e.g., be said that property existed
before the family, and yet, in spite of that it is discussed before the family is discussed. The
question might also be raised here, Why do we not begin with the highest, i.e., with concrete truth
? The answer is, because we desire to see truth in the form of a result, and it is an essential part of
the process to conceive the conception first of all as abstract. The actual series of realisations of
the conception is thus for us in due course as follows, even although in actuality the order should
be the same. Our process is this, that the abstract forms reveal themselves not as self - subsistent
but as untrue. 

                         Division of the Work.
                                  ¡ì 33.

According to the stages in the development of the idea of the absolutely free will, 

A. The will is direct or immediate; its conception is therefore, abstract, i.e.,
personality, and its embodied reality is a direct external thing. This is the sphere
of abstract or formal right. 

B. The will, passing out of external reality, turns back into itself. Its phase is
subjective individuality, and it is contrasted with the universal. This universal is
on its internal side the good, and on its external side a presented world, and these
two sides are occasioned only by means of each other. In this sphere the idea is
divided, and exists in separate elements. The right of the subjective will is in a
relation of contrast to the right of the world, or the right of the idea. Here,
however, the idea exists only implicitly. This is the sphere of morality. 

C. The unity and truth of these two abstract elements. The thought idea of the
good is realised both in the will turned back into itself, and also in the external
world. Thus freedom exists as real substance, which is quite as much actuality
and necessity as it is subjective will. The idea here is its absolutely universal
existence, viz., ethical life. This ethical substance is again, 

     a. Natural spirit; the family,
     b. The civil society, or spirit in its dual existence and mere appearance,
     c. The state, or freedom, which, while established in the free
     self-dependence of the particular will is also universal and objective. This
     actual and organic spirit [a] is the spirit of a nation, [b] is found in the
     relation to one another of national spirits, and [c] passing through and
     beyond this relation is actualised and revealed in world history as the
     universal world-spirit, whose right is the highest. 

Note. It is to be found in the speculative logic, and here is presupposed, that a thing or content,
which is established first of all according to its conception, or implicitly, has the form of direct
existence. The conception, however, when it has the form of the conception is explicit, and no
longer is a direct existence. So, too, the principle, upon which the division of this work proceeds,
is presupposed. The divisions might be regarded as already settled by history, since the different
stages must be viewed as elements in the development of the idea, and therefore as springing from
the nature of the content itself. A philosophic division is not an external classification of any given
material, such a classification as would be made according to one or several schemes picked up at
random, but the inherent distinctions of the conception itself. Morality and ethical life, which are
usually supposed to mean the same thing, are here taken in essentially different meanings.
Meanwhile even imaginative thought seems to make a distinction between them. In the usage of
Kant the preference is given to the term morality, and the practical principles of his philosophy limit
themselves wholly to this standpoint, making impossible the standpoint of ethical life, and indeed
expressly destroying and abolishing it. Although morality and ethics have the same meaning
according to their etymology, yet these different words may be used for different conceptions. 

Addition. When we speak of right, we mean not only civil right, which is the usual significance
of the word, but also morality, ethical life and world-history. These belong to this realm, because
the conception taking them in their truth, brings them all together. Free will, in order not to remain
abstract, must in the first instance give itself reality; the sensible materials of this reality are objects,
i.e., external things. This first phase of freedom we shall know as property. This is the sphere of
formal and abstract right, to which belong property in the more developed form of contract and
also the injury of right, i.e., crime and punishment. The freedom, we have here, we name person,
or, in other words, the subject who is free, and indeed free independently, and gives himself a
reality in things. But this direct reality is not adequate to freedom, and the negation of this phase is
morality. In morality I am beyond the freedom found directly in this thing, and have a freedom in
which this directness is superseded. I am free in myself, i.e., in the subjective. In this sphere we
come upon my insight, intention, and end, and externality is established as indifferent. The good is
now the universal end, which is not to remain merely internal to me, but to realise itself. The
subjective will demands that its inward character, or purpose, shall receive external reality, and
also that the good shall be brought to completion in external existence. Morality, like formal right,
is also an abstraction, whose truth is reached only in ethical life. Hence ethical life is the unity of the
will in its conception with the will of the individual or subject. The primary reality of ethical life is in
its turn natural, taking the form of love and feeling. This is the family. In it the individual has
transcended his prudish personality, and finds himself with his consciousness in a totality. In the
next stage is seen the loss of this peculiar ethical existence and substantive unity. Here the family
falls asunder, and the members become independent one of another, being now held together
merely by the bond of mutual need. This is the stage of the civil society, which has frequently been
taken for the state. But the state does not arise until we reach the third stage, that stage of ethical
life or spirit, in which both individual independence and universal substantivity are found in gigantic
union. The right of the state is, therefore, higher than that of the other stages. It is freedom in its
most concrete embodiment, which yields to nothing but the highest absolute truth of the
world-spirit. 




First Part: Abstract Right

                                  ¡ì 34.

The absolutely free will, at the stage when its concept is abstract, has the
determinate character of immediacy. Accordingly this stage is its negative
actuality, an actuality contrasted with the real world, only an abstractly
self-related actuality ¡ª the inherently single will of a subject. Pursuant to the
moment of the particularity of the will, it has in addition a content consisting of
determinate aims and, as exclusive individuality, it has this content at the same
time as an external world directly confronting it. 

Addition: When I say that 'the absolutely free will at the stage when its concept is abstract has
the determinate character of immediacy', what I mean is this: when the concept had fully realised
itself and when the embodiment of the concept had become nothing but the unfolding of its own
self, then that state of affairs would be the fully developed Idea of the will. But at the start the
concept is abstract, which means that all its determinations are contained within it, but still only
contained within it; they are only implicit and not yet developed to be a totality in themselves. If I
say 'I am free', the ego is still this inwardness, not confronted by an opposite. In morality, on the
other hand, there is opposition from the start, since I stand in the moral sphere as a single will
while the good is the universal even though it is within myself. Thus at that level, the will has in
itself the different factors of singularity and universality, and this gives it its specific character. But,
to begin with, no such difference is present, since at the first stage, that of abstract unity, there is
no advance and no mediation and so the will has the form of immediacy, of mere being. The
essential point of view to be taken here then is that this original indeterminacy is itself a
determinacy. The indeterminacy lies in the fact that there is as yet no difference between the will
and its content; but indeterminacy, opposed to the determinate, acquires the character of being
something determinate. It is abstract identity which here constitutes determinacy; the will therefore
becomes a single will, a person. 

                                  ¡ì 35.

The universality of this consciously free will is abstract universality, the
self-conscious but otherwise contentless and simple relation of itself to itself in its
individuality, and from this point of view the subject is a person. Personality
implies that as this person: (i) I am completely determined on every side (in my
inner caprice, impulse, and desire, as well as by immediate external facts) and so
finite, yet (ii) none the less I am simply and solely self-relation, and therefore in
finitude I know myself as something infinite, ¡ª universal, and free. 

Remark: Personality begins not with the subject's mere general consciousness of himself as an
ego concretely determined in some way or other, but rather with his consciousness of himself as a
completely abstract ego in which every concrete restriction and value is negated and without
validity. In personality, therefore, knowledge is knowledge of oneself as an object, but an object
raised by thinking to the level of simple infinity and so an object purely self-identical. Individuals
and nations have no personality until they have achieved this pure thought and knowledge of
themselves. Mind fully explicit differs from the phenomenal mind in this, that at the same level at
which the latter is only self-consciousness ¡ª a consciousness of self but only one pursuant to the
natural will and its still external oppositions ¡ª the former has itself, as the abstract and free ego, for
its object and aim, and so is personality. 

Addition: The abstract will, consciously self-contained, is personality. Man's chief glory is to be
a person, and yet in spite of that the bare abstraction, 'person', is somewhat contemptuous in its
very expression. 'Person' is essentially different from 'subject', since 'subject' is only the possibility
of personality; every living thing of any sort is a subject. A person, then, is a subject aware of this
subjectivity, since in personality it is of myself alone that I am aware. A person is a unit of freedom
aware of its sheer independence. As this person, I know myself to be free in myself I can abstract
from everything, since nothing confronts me save pure personality, and yet as this person I am
something wholly determinate, e.g. I am of a certain age, a certain stature, I occupy this space,
and so on through whatever other details you like. Thus personality is at once the sublime and the
trivial., It implies this unity of the infinite with the purely finite, of the wholly limitless with
determinate limitation. It is the sublimity of personality that is able to sustain this contradiction, a
contradiction which nothing merely natural contains or could endure. 

                                  ¡ì 36.

(1) Personality essentially involves the capacity for rights and constitutes the
concept and the basis (itself abstract) of the system of abstract and therefore
formal right. Hence the imperative of right is: 'Be a person and respect others as
persons.' 

                                  ¡ì 37.

(2) The particularity of the will is a moment in the consciousness of the will as a
whole (see ¡ì 34), but it is not yet contained in abstract personality as such.
Therefore, it is present at this point, but as still sundered from personality, from
the character of freedom, present as desire, need, impulse, casual whim, and so
forth. In formal right, therefore, there is no question of particular interests, of my
advantage or my welfare, any more than there is of the particular motive behind
my volition, of insight and intention. 

Addition: Since, in personality, particularity is not present as freedom, everything which
depends on particularity is here a matter of indifference. To have no interest except in one's formal
right may be pure obstinacy, often a fitting accompaniment of a cold heart and restricted
sympathies. It is uncultured people who insist most on their rights, while noble minds look on other
aspects of the thing. Thus abstract right is nothing but a bare possibility and, at least in contrast
with the whole range of the situation, something formal. On that account, to have a right gives one
a warrant, but it is not absolutely necessary that one should insist on one's rights, because that is
only one aspect of the whole situation. That is to say, possibility is being which has the significance
of also not being. 

                                  ¡ì 38.

In relation to action in the concrete and to moral and ethical ties, abstract right is,
in contrast with the further content which these involve, only a possibility, and to
have a right is therefore to have only a permission or a warrant. The
unconditional commands of abstract right are restricted, once again because of its
abstractness, to the negative: 'Do not infringe personality and what personality
entails.' The result is that there are only prohibitions in the sphere of right, and the
positive form of any command in this sphere is based in the last resort, if we
examine its ultimate content, on prohibition. 

                                  ¡ì 39.

(3) As immediate individuality, a person in making decisions is related to a world
of nature directly confronting him, and thus the personality of the will stands over
against this world as something subjective. For personality, however, as
inherently infinite and universal, the restriction of being only subjective is a
contradiction and a nullity. Personality is that which struggles to lift itself above
this restriction and to give itself reality, or in other words to claim that external
world as its own. 

                                  ¡ì 40.

Right is in the first place the immediate embodiment which freedom gives itself in
an immediate way, i.e. (a) possession, which is property ¡ª ownership. Freedom
is here the freedom of the abstract will in general or, eo ipso, the freedom of a
single person related only to himself. (b) A person by distinguishing himself from
himself relates himself to another person, and it is only as owners that these two
persons really exist for each other. Their implicit identity is realised through the
transference of property from one to the other in conformity with a common will
and without detriment to the rights of either. This is contract. (c) The will which
is differentiated not in the sense of (b) as being contrasted with another person,
but in the sense of (a) as related to itself, is as a particular will at variance with
and opposed to itself as an absolute will. This opposition is wrongdoing and
crime. 

Remark: The classification of the system of rights into jus ad personam and jus ad rem on the
one hand, and jus ad actiones on the other, like the many other similar classifications, has as its
primary aim the imposition of an external order on the mass of unorganised material confronting
the classifier. The striking thing about this classification is the confusion in it due to the disorderly
intermixture of rights which presuppose substantial ties, e.g. those of family and political life, and
rights which only an abstract personality as such. This confusion is exemplified in the classification
of rights (adopted by Kant and since favoured by others) into jus reale, jus personals, and jus
realiter personals. 

To develop the perversity and lack of speculative thought in the classification of rights into jus ad
personant and jus ad rem, which lies at 'the root of Roman law (jus ad actiones concerns the
administration of and is of a different order altogether), would take us too far afield, a re this much
at least is clear: it is personality alone which can confer a right to things and therefore jus ad
personam in its essence is jus ad rem, rem being taken here in its general sense as anything
external to my freedom, including even my body and my life. In this sense, jus ad rem is the right
of personality as such. But from the point of view of what is called jus ad personam in Roman
law, a man is reckoned a person only when he is treated as possessing a certain status. Hence in
Roman law, even personality itself is only a certain standing or status contrasted, with slavery. The
so-called Roman law of 'personal' rights, then, is concerned with family relationships, though it
excludes the right over slaves (and 'slaves' almost includes children too) as well as the status
(called capitis diminutio) of having lost one's rights. (In Kant, by the way, family relationships are
the jura realiter personalia.) The Roman jus ad personam is therefore not the right of the
person as person but at most the right of a person in his particular capacity. (Later on in this book,
it will be shown that the substantial basis of family relationships is rather the sacrifice of
personality.) Now it must be obvious that it is perverse treat the right of a specific person in his
particular capacity before the universal right of personality as such. 

Kant's jura personalia are the rights issuing from a contract whereby I undertake to give
something or to perform something ¡ª the jus ad rem conferred by an obligatio in Roman law. To
be sure, it is only a person who is required to execute the covenants of a contract, just as it is also
only a person who acquires the right to their execution. But a right of this sort cannot for this
reason be called a 'personal' right; rights of whatever sort belong to a person alone. Objectively
considered, a right arising from a contract is never a right over a person, but only a right over
something external to a person or something which he can alienate, always a right over a thing. 



                A: Property - B: Contract - C: Wrong




                    Transition from Right to Morality

                                 ¡ì 104.

That is to say, crime, and justice in the form of revenge, display (i) the shape
which the will's development takes when it has passed over into the distinction
between the universal implicit will and the single will explicitly in opposition to the
universal; and (ii) the fact that the universal will, returning into itself through
superseding this opposition, has now itself become actual and explicit. In this
way, the right, upheld in face of the explicitly independent single will, is and is
recognised as actual on the score of its necessity. At the same time, however, this
external formation which the will has here is eo ipso a step forward in the inner
determination of the will by the concept. The will's immanent actualisation in
accordance with its concept is the process whereby it supersedes its implicit state
and the form of immediacy in which it begins and which is the shape it assumes
in abstract right (see Remark to ¡ì 21); this means that it first puts itself in the
opposition between the implicit universal will and the single explicitly independent
will; and then, through the supersession of this opposition (through the negation
of the negation), it determines itself in its existence as a will, so that it is a free will
not only in itself but for itself also, i.e. it determines itself as self-related
negativity. Its personality ¡ª and in abstract right the will is personality and no
more ¡ª it now has for its object; the infinite subjectivity of freedom, a
subjectivity become explicit in this way, is the principle of the moral standpoint . 

Remark: Let us look back more closely over the moments through which the concept of
freedom develops itself from the will's determinate character as originally abstract to its character
as self-related, and so at this point to its self-determination as subjectivity. In property this
determinate character is the abstract one, 'mine', and is therefore found in an external thing. In
contract, 'mine' is mediated by the wills of the parties and means only something common. In
wrong the will of the sphere of right has its abstract character of implicit being or immediacy
posited as contingency through the act of a single will, itself a contingent will. At the moral
standpoint, the abstract determinacy of the will in the sphere of right has been so far overcome that
this contingency itself is, as reflected in upon itself and self-identical, the inward infinite contingency
of the will, i.e. its subjectivity. 

Addition: Truth entails that the concept shall be, and that this existence shall correspond with
the concept. In the sphere of right, the will is existent in something external, but the next
requirement is that the will should be existent in something inward, in itself. It must in its own eyes
be subjectivity, and have itself as its own object. This relation to itself is the moment of affirmation,
but it can attain it only by superseding its immediacy. The immediacy superseded in crime leads,
then, through punishment, i.e. through the nullity of this nullity, to affirmation, i.e. to morality. 



Second Part: Morality

                               ¡ì 105.

The standpoint of morality is the standpoint of the will which is infinite not
merely in itself but for itself (see ¡ì 104). In contrast with the will's implicit being,
with its immediacy and the determinate characteristics developed within it at that
level, this reflection of the will into itself and its explicit awareness of its identity
makes the person into the subject. 

                                 ¡ì 106.

It is as subjectivity that the concept has now been determined, and since
subjectivity is distinct from the concept as such, i.e. from the implicit principle of
the will, and since furthermore it is at the same time the will of the subject as a
single individual aware of himself (i.e. still has immediacy in him), it constitutes
the determinate existence of the concept. In this way a higher ground has been
assigned to freedom; the Idea's existential aspect, or its moment of reality, is now
the subjectivity of the will. Only in the Will as subjective can freedom or the
implicit principle of the will be actual. 

Remark: The second sphere, ¡ª Morality, therefore throughout portrays the real aspect of the
concept of freedom, and the movement of this sphere is as follows: the will, which at the start is
aware only of its independence and which before it is mediated is only implicitly identical with the
universal will or the principle of the will, is raised beyond its [explicit] difference from the universal
will, beyond this situation in which it sinks deeper and deeper into itself, and is established as
explicitly identical with the principle of the will., ¡ª This process is accordingly the cultivation of the
ground in which freedom is now set, i.e. subjectivity. What happens is that subjectivity, which is
abstract at the start, i.e. distinct from the concept, becomes likened to it, and thereby the Idea
acquires its genuine realisation, The result is that the subjective-will determines itself as objective
too and so as truly concrete. 

Addition: So far as right in the strict sense was concerned, it was of no importance what my
intention or my principle was. This question about the self-determination and motive of the will,
like the question about its purpose, now enters at this point in connection with morality. Since man
wishes to be judged in accordance with his own self-determined choices, he is free in this relation
to himself whatever the external situation may impose upon him. No one can break in upon this
inner conviction of mankind, no violence can be done to it, and the moral will, therefore, is
inaccessible. Man's worth is estimated by reference to his inward action and hence the standpoint
of morality is that of freedom aware of itself. 

                                 ¡ì 107.

The self-determination of the will is at the same time a moment in the concept of
the will, and subjectivity is not merely its existential aspect but its own
determinate character (see ¡ì 104). The will aware of its freedom and determined
as subjective is at the start concept alone, but itself has determinate existence in
order to exist as Idea. The moral standpoint therefore takes shape as the right of
the subjective Will. In accordance with this right, the will recognises something
and is something, only in so far as the thing is its own and as the will is present to
itself there as something subjective. 

The same process through which the moral attitude develops (see the Remark to
the preceding Paragraph) has from this point of view the form of being the
development of the right of the subjective will, or of the mode of its existence. In
this process the subjective will further determines what it recognises as its own in
its object (Gegenstand), so that this object becomes the will's own true concept,
becomes objective (objektiv) as the expression of the will's own universality. 

Addition: This entire category of the subjectivity of the will is once again a whole which, as
subjectivity, must also have objectivity. It is in a subject that freedom can first be realised, since
the subjective is the true material for this realisation. But this embodiment of the will which we have
called subjectivity is different from the will which has developed all its potentialities to actuality.
That is to say, the will must free itself from this second one-sidedness of pure subjectivity in order
to become the fully actualised will. In morality, it is man's private interest that comes into question,
and the high worth of this interest consists precisely in the fact that man knows himself as absolute
and is self-determined. The uneducated man allows himself to be constrained in everything by
brute force and natural factors; children have no moral will but leave their parents to decide things
for them. The educated man, however, develops an inner life and wills that he himself shall be in
everything he does. 

                                 ¡ì 108. 

The subjective will, directly aware of itself, and distinguished from the principle
of the will (see Remark to ¡ì 106), is therefore abstract, restricted, and formal.
But not merely is subjectivity itself formal; in addition, as the infinite
self-determination of the will, it constitutes the form of all willing. In this, its first
appearance in the single will, this form has not yet been established as identical
with the concept of the will, and therefore the moral point of view is that of
relation, of ought-to-be, or demand. And since the self-difference of subjectivity
involves at the same time the character of being opposed to objectivity as external
fact, it follows that the point of view of consciousness comes on the scene here
too (see ¡ì 8). The general point of view here is that of the will's self-difference,
finitude, and appearance. 

Remark: The moral is not characterised primarily by its having already been opposed to the
immoral, nor is right directly characterised by its opposition to wrong. The point is rather that the
general characteristics of morality and immorality alike rest on the subjectivity of the will. 

Addition: In morality, self-determination is to be thought of as the pure restlessness and activity
which can never arrive at anything that is. It is in the sphere of ethical life that the will is for the first
time identical with the concept of the will and has this concept alone as its content. In the moral
sphere the will still relates itself to its implicit principle and consequently its position is that of
difference. The process through which this position develops is that whereby the subjective will
becomes identified with its concept. Therefore the 'ought-to-be' which is never absent from the
moral sphere becomes an 'is' only in ethical life. Further, this 'other' in relation to which the
subjective will stands is two-sided: first, it is what is substantive, the concept; secondly, it is
external fact. Even if the good were posited in the subjective will, that still would not give it
complete realisation. 

                                 ¡ì 109. 

This form of all willing primarily involves in accordance with its general character
(a) the opposition of subjectivity and objectivity, and (b) the activity (see ¡ì 8)
related to this opposition. Now existence and specific determinacy are identical in
the concept of the will (see ¡ì 104), and the will as subjective is itself this concept
. Hence the moments of this activity consist more precisely in (a) distinguishing
between objectivity and subjectivity and even ascribing independence to. them
both, and (b) establishing them as identical. In the will which is self-determining, 

     [a] its specific determinacy is in the first place established in the will itself by
     itself as its inner particularisation, as a content which it gives to itself. This is
     the first negation, and the formal limitation (Grenze) of this negation is that
     of being only something posited, something subjective. 
     [b] As infinitely reflected into itself, this limitation exists for the will, and the
     will is the struggle to transcend this barrier (Schranke), i.e. it is the activity
     of translating this content in some way or other from subjectivity into
     objectivity, into an immediate existence. 
     [c] The simple identity of the will with itself in this opposition is the content
     which remains self-identical in both these opposites and indifferent to this
     formal distinction of opposition. In short, it is my aim [the purpose willed]. 

                                 ¡ì 110. 

But, at the standpoint of morality, where the will is aware of its freedom, of this
identity of the will with itself (see ¡ì 105), this identity of content acquires the
more particularised character appropriate to itself. 

(a) The content as 'mine' has for me this character: by virtue of its identity in
subject and object it enshrines for me my subjectivity, not merely as my inner
purpose, but also inasmuch as it has acquired outward existence. 

Addition: The content of the subjective or moral will has a specific character of its own, i.e.
even if it has acquired the form of objectivity, it must still continue to enshrine my subjectivity, and
my act is to count as mine only if on its inward side it has been determined by me, if it was my
purpose, my intention. Beyond what lay in my subjective will I recognise nothing in its expression
as mine. What I wish to see in my deed is my subjective consciousness over again. 

                                 ¡ì 111. 

(b) Though the content does have in it something particular, whencesoever it may
be derived, still it is the content of the will reflected into itself in its determinacy
and thus of the self-identical and universal will; and therefore: 

     [a] the content is inwardly characterised as adequate to the principle of the
     will or as possessing the objectivity of the concept; 
     [b] since the subjective will, as aware of itself, is at the same time still
     formal (see ¡ì 108), the content's adequacy to the concept is still only
     something demanded, and hence this entails the possibility that the content
     may not be adequate to the concept. 

                                 ¡ì 112. 

(c) Since in carrying out my aims I retain my subjectivity (see ¡ì 110), during this
process of objectifying them I simultaneously supersede the immediacy of this
subjectivity as well as its character as this my individual subjectivity. But the
external subjectivity which is thus identical with me is the will of others (see ¡ì
73). The will's ground of existence is now subjectivity (see ¡ì 106) and the will of
others is that existence which I give to my aim and which is at the same time to
me an other. The achievement of my aim, therefore, implies this identity of my
will with the will of others, it has a positive bearing on the will of others. 

Remark: The objectivity of the aim achieved thus involves three meanings, or rather it has three
moments present within it at once; it is: 

     [a] something existing externally and immediately (see ¡ì 106); 
     [b] adequate to the concept (see ¡ì 111); 
     [c] universal subjectivity. 

The subjectivity which maintains itself in this objectivity consists: 

     [a] in the fact that the objective aim is mine, so that in it I maintain myself as this individual
     (see ¡ì 110); 
     [b] and [c], in moments which coincide with the moments [b] and [c] above. 

At the standpoint of morality, subjectivity and objectivity are distinct from one another, or united
only by their mutual contradiction; it is this fact more particularly which constitutes the finitude of
this sphere or its character as mere appearance (see ¡ì 108), and the development of this
standpoint is the development of these contradictions and their resolutions, resolutions, however,
which within this field can be no more than relative. 

Addition: In dealing with formal right, I said [see ¡ì 38] that it contained prohibitions only, that
hence a right action, strictly so called, was purely negative in character in respect of the will of
others. In morality, on the other hand, my will has a positive character in relation to the Will of
others, i.e. the universal will is implicitly present within what the subjective will effects. To effect
something is to produce something or to alter what already exists, and such changes have a
bearing on the will of others. The concept of morality is the inner relation of the will to itself. But
here it is not only one will; on the contrary its objectification implies at the same time the
cancellation of the single will, and therefore, in addition, just because the character of
one-sidedness vanishes, the positing of two wills and a positive bearing of each on the other. So
far as rights are concerned, it makes no difference whether someone else's will may do something
in relation to mine, when I give my will an embodiment in property. In morality, however, the
welfare of others too is in question, and this positive bearing cannot come on the scene before this
point. 

                                 ¡ì 113. 

The externalisation of the subjective or moral will is action. Action implies the
determinate characteristics here indicated: [a] in its externality it must be known
to me as my action; [b] it must bear essentially on the concept as an 'ought' [see ¡ì
131]; [c] it must have an essential bearing on the will of others. 

Remark: It is not until we come to the externalisation of the moral will that we come to action.
The existence which the will gives to itself in the sphere of formal rights is existence in an
immediate thing and is itself immediate; to start with, it neither has in itself any express bearing on
the concept, which is at that point not yet contrasted with the subjective will and so is not
distinguished from it, nor has it a positive bearing on the will of others; in the sphere of right,
command in its fundamental character is only prohibition (see ¡ì 38). In contract and wrong, there
is the beginning of a bearing on the will of others; but the correspondence established in contract
between one will and another is grounded in arbitrariness, and the essential bearing which the will
has there on the will of the other is, as a matter of rights, something negative, i.e. one party retains
his property (the value of it) and allows the other to retain his. On the other hand, crime in its
aspect as issuing from the subjective will, and the question of the mode of its existence in that will,
come before us now for consideration for the first time. 

The content of an action at law (actio), as something determined by legal enactment, is not
imputable to me. Consequently, such an action contains only some of the moments of a moral
action proper, and contains them only Incidentally. The aspect of an action in virtue of which it is
properly moral is therefore distinct from its aspect as legal. 

                                 ¡ì 114. 

The right of the moral will involves three aspects: 

     (a) The abstract or formal right of action, the right that the content of the
     action as carried out in immediate existence, shall be in principle mine, that
     thus the action shall be the Purpose of the subjective will. 
     (b) The particular aspect of the action is its inner content [a] as I am aware
     of it in its general character; my awareness of this general character
     constitutes the worth of the action and the reason I think good to do it - in
     short my Intention. [b] Its content is my special aim, the aim of my
     particular, merely individual, existence, i.e. Welfare. 
     (c) This content (as something which is inward and which yet at the same
     time is raised to its universality as to absolute objectivity) is the absolute end
     of the will, the Good ¡ª with the opposition in the sphere of reflection, of
     subjective universality, which is now wickedness and now conscience. 

Addition: If an action is to be moral, it must in the first place correspond with my purpose,
since the moral will has the right to refuse to recognise in the resulting state of affairs what was not
present inwardly as purpose. Purpose concerns only the formal principle that the external will shall
be within me as something inward. On the other hand, in the second moment of the moral sphere,
questions may be asked about the intention behind the action, i.e. about the relative worth of the
action in relation to me. The third and last moment is not the relative worth of the action but its
universal worth, the good. 

In a moral action, then, there may be a breach first between what is purposed and what is really
effected and achieved; secondly, between what is there externally as a universal will and the
particular inner determination which I give to it. The third and last point is that the intention should
be in addition the universal content of the action. The good is the intention raised to be the concept
of the will. 

       i Purpose & Responsibility
                               ¡ì 115. 

The finitude of the subjective will in the immediacy of acting consists directly in
this, that its action presupposes an external object with a complex environment.
The deed sets up an alteration in this state of affairs confronting the will, and my
will has responsibility in general for its deed in so far as the abstract predicate
'mine' belongs to the state of affairs so altered. 

Remark: An event, a situation which has been produced, is a concrete external actuality which
because of its concreteness has in it an indeterminable multiplicity of factors. Any and every single
element which appears as the condition, ground, or cause of one such factor, and so has
contributed its share to the event in question, may be looked upon as responsible for the event, or
at least as sharing the responsibility for it. Hence, in the case of a complex event (e.g. the French
Revolution) it is open to the abstract Understanding to choose which of an endless number of
factors it will maintain to be responsible for it. 

Addition: I am chargeable with what lay in my purpose and this is the most important point in
connection with crime. But responsibility contains only the quite external judgement whether I have
or have not done some thing. It does not follow that, because I am responsible, the thing done
may be imputed to me. 

                                 ¡ì 116. 

It is, of course, not my own doing if damage is caused to others by things whose
owner I am and which as external objects stand and are effective in manifold
connections with other things (as may also be the case with my self as a bodily
mechanism or as a living thing). This damage, however, is to some extent
chargeable to me because the things that cause it are in principle mine, although it
is true that they are subject to my control, vigilance, &c., only to an extent
varying with their special character. 

                                 ¡ì 117. 

The freely acting will, in directing its aim on the state of affairs confronting it, has
an idea of the attendant circumstances. But because the will is finite, since this
state of affairs is presupposed, the objective phenomenon is contingent so far as
the will is concerned, and may contain something other than what the will's idea
of it contains. The will's right, however, is to recognise as its action, and to accept
responsibility for, only those presuppositions of the deed of which it was
conscious in its aim and those aspects of the deed which were contained in its
purpose. The deed can be imputed to me only if my will is responsible for it - this
is the right to know. 

Addition: The will has confronting it a state of affairs upon which it acts. But in order to know
what this state of affairs is I must have an idea of it, and the responsibility is truly mine only in so
far as I had knowledge of the situation confronting me. Such a situation is a presupposition of my
volition and my will is therefore finite, or rather, since my will is finite, it has a presupposition of this
kind. As soon as my thinking and willing is rational, I am no longer at this level of finitude, since the
object on which I act is no longer an 'other' to me. Finitude, however, implies fixed limits and
restrictions. I have confronting me an 'other' which is only contingent, something necessary in a
purely external way; its path and mine may meet or diverge. Nevertheless, I am nothing except in
relation to my freedom, and my will is responsible for the deed only in so far as I know what I am
doing. Oedipus, who killed his father without knowing it, cannot be accused of parricide. The
ancient penal codes, however, attached less weight to the subjective side of action, to imputability,
than we do nowadays. That is why sanctuaries were instituted in ancient times for harbouring and
protecting the fugitive from vengeance. 

                                 ¡ì 118. 

Further, action is translated into external fact, and external fact has connections in
the field of external necessity through which it develops itself in all directions.
Hence action has a multitude of consequences. These consequences are the
outward form whose inner soul is the aim of the action, and thus they are the
consequences of the action, they belong to the action. At the same time,
however, the action, as the aim posited in the external world, has become the
prey of external forces which attach to it something totally different from what it
is explicitly and drive it on into alien and distant consequences. Thus the will has
the right to repudiate the imputation of all consequences except the first, since it
alone was purposed. 

Remark: To determine which results are accidental and which necessary is impossible, because
the necessity implicit in the finite comes into determinate existence as an external necessity, as a
relation of single things to one another, things which as self-subsistent are conjoined in indifference
to one another and externally. The maxim: 'Ignore the consequences of actions' and the other:
'Judge actions by their consequences and make these the criterion of right and good' are both alike
maxims of the abstract Understanding. The consequences, as the shape proper to the action and
immanent within it, exhibit nothing but its nature and are simply the action itself; therefore the action
can neither disavow nor ignore them. On the other hand, however, among the consequences there
is also comprised something interposed from without and introduced by chance, and this is quite
unrelated to the nature of the action itself. 

The development in the external world of the contradiction involved in the necessity of the finite is
just the conversion of necessity into contingency and vice versa. From this point of view, therefore,
acting means surrendering oneself to this law. It is because of this that it is to the advantage of the
criminal if his action has comparatively few bad consequences (while a good action must be
content to have had no consequences or very few), and that the full developed consequences of a
crime are counted as part of the crime. 

The self-consciousness of heroes (like that of Oedipus and others in Greek tragedy) had not
advanced out of its primitive simplicity either to reflection on the distinction between act and
action, between the external event and the purpose and knowledge of the circumstances, or to the
subdivision of consequences. On the contrary, they accepted responsibility for the whole compass
of the deed. 

Addition: The transition to intention depends on the fact that I accept responsibility only for
what my idea of the situation was. That is to say, there can be imputed to me only what I knew of
the circumstances. On the other hand, there are inevitable consequences linked with every action,
even if I am only bringing about some single, immediate, state of affairs. The consequences in such
a case represent the universal implicit within that state of affairs. Of course I cannot foresee the
consequences - they might be preventable - but I must be aware of the universal character of any
isolated act. The important point here is not the isolated thing but the whole, and that depends not
on the differentia of the particular action, but on its universal nature. Now the transition from
purpose to intention lies in the fact that I ought to be aware not simply of my single action but also
of the universal which is conjoined with it. The universal which comes on the scene here in this way
is what I have willed, my intention. 

             ii Intention & Welfare
                               ¡ì 119. 

An action as an external event. is a complex of connected parts which may be
regarded as divided into units ad infinitum, and the action may be treated as
having touched in the first instance only one of these units. The truth of the
single, however, is the universal; and what explicitly gives action its specific
character is not an isolated content limited to an external unit, but a universal
content, comprising in itself the complex of connected parts. Purpose, as issuing
from a thinker, comprises more than the mere unit; essentially it comprises that
universal side of the action, i.e. the intention. 

Remark: Etymologically, Absicht (intention) implies abstraction, either the form of universality
or the extraction of a particular aspect of the concrete thing. The endeavour to justify an action by
the intention behind it involves the isolation of one or other of its single aspects which is alleged to
be the essence of the action on its subjective side. 

To judge an action as an external deed without yet determining its rightness or wrongness is simply
to bestow on it a universal predicate, i.e. to describe it as burning, killing, &c. 

The discrete character of the external world shows what the nature of that world is, namely a chain
of external relations. Actuality is touched in the first instance only at a single point (arson, for
instance, directly concerns only a tiny section of the firewood, i.e. is describable in a proposition,
not a judgment), but the universal nature of this point entails its expansion. In a living thing, the
single part is there in its immediacy not as a mere part, but as an organ in which the universal is
really present as the universal; hence in murder, it is not a piece of flesh, as something isolated,
which is injured, but life itself which is injured in that piece of flesh. It is subjective reflection,
ignorant of the logical nature of the single and the universal, which indulges ad libitum in the
subdivision of single parts and consequences; and yet it is the nature of the finite deed itself to
contain such separable contingencies. The device of dolus indirectus has its basis in these
considerations. 

Addition: It happens of course that circumstances may make an action miscarry to a greater or
lesser degree. In a case of arson, for instance, the fire may not catch or alternatively it may take
hold further than the incendiary intended. In spite of this, however, we must not make this a
distinction between good and bad luck, since in acting a man must lay his account with externality.
The old Proverb is correct: 'A flung stone is the devil's.' To act is to expose oneself to bad luck.
Thus bad luck has a right over me and is an embodiment of my own willing. 

                                 ¡ì 120. 

The right of intention is that the universal quality of the action shall not merely be
implicit but shall be known by the agent, and so shall have lain from the start in
his subjective will. Vice versa, what may be called the right of the objectivity of
action is the right of the action to evince itself as known and willed by the subject
as a thinker. 

Remark: This right to insight of this kind entails the complete, or almost complete,
irresponsibility of children, imbeciles, lunatics, &c., for their actions. But just as actions on their
external side as events include accidental consequences, so there is involved in the subjective
agent an indeterminacy whose degree depends on the strength and force of his self-consciousness
and circumspection. This indeterminacy, however, may not be taken into account except in
connection with childhood or imbecility, lunacy, &c., since it is only such well marked states of
mind that nullify the trait of thought and freedom of will, and permit us to treat the agent as devoid
of the dignity of being a thinker and a will. 

                                 ¡ì 121. 

The universal quality of the action is the manifold content of the action as such,
reduced to the simple form of universality. But the subject, an entity reflected
into himself and so particular in correlation with the particularity of his object, has
in his end his own particular content, and this content is the soul of the action and
determines its character. The fact that this moment of the particularity of the
agent is contained and realised in the action constitutes subjective freedom in its
more concrete sense, the right of the subject to find his satisfaction in the action. 

Addition: In my own eyes, reflected into myself, I am a particular in correlation with the
externality of my action. My end constitutes the content of the action, the content determinant of
the action. Murder and arson, for example, are universals and so are not the positive content of
my action qua the action of a subject. If one of these crimes has been committed, its perpetrator
may be asked why he committed it. The murder was not done for the sake of murdering; the
murderer had in View some particular positive end. But if we were to say that he murdered for the
mere pleasure of murdering, then the purely positive content of the subject would surely be
pleasure, and if that is the case then the deed is the satisfaction of the subject's will. Thus the
motive of an act is, more particularly, what is called the 'moral' factor, and this has in that case the
double meaning of the universal implicit in the purpose and the particular aspect of the intention.
It is a striking modem innovation to inquire continually about the motives of men's actions.
Formerly, the question was simply: 'Is he an honest man? Does he do his duty?' Nowadays we
insist on looking into men's hearts and so we presuppose a gulf between the objectivity of actions
and their inner side, the subjective motives. To be sure, the subject's volition must be considered;
he wills something and the reason for what he wills lies within himself; he wills the satisfaction of his
desire, the gratification of his passion. None the less, the good and the right are also a content of
action, a content not purely natural but put there by my rationality. To make my freedom the
content of what I will is a plain goal of my freedom itself. Therefore it is to take higher moral
ground to find satisfaction in the action and to advance beyond the gulf between the
self-consciousness of a man and the objectivity of his deed, even though to treat action as if it
involved such a gulf is a way of looking at the matter characteristic of certain epochs in world
history and in individual biography. 

                                 ¡ì 122. 

It is on the strength of this particular aspect that the action has subjective worth
or interest for me. In contrast with this end - the content of the intention - the
direct character of the action in its further content is reduced to a means. In so
far as such an end is something finite, it may in its turn be reduced to a means to
some further intention and so on ad infinitum. 

                                 ¡ì 123. 

For the content of these ends nothing is available at this point except [a] pure
activity itself, i.e. the activity present owing to the fact that the subject puts
himself into whatever he is to look upon and promote as his end. Men are willing
to be active in pursuit of what interests them, or should interest them, as
something which is their own. [b] A more determinate content, however, the still
abstract and formal freedom of subjectivity possesses only in its. natural.
subjective embodiment, i.e. in needs, inclinations, passions, opinions, fancies, &c.
The satisfaction of these is welfare or happiness, both in general and in its
particular species - the ends of the whole sphere of finitude. 

Remark: Here - the standpoint of relation (see ¡ì 108), when the subject is characterised by his
self-difference and so counts as a particular - is the place where the content of the natural will (see
¡ì 11). comes on the scene. But the will here is not as it is in its immediacy; on the contrary, this
content now belongs to a will reflected into itself and so is elevated to become a universal end, the
end of welfare or happiness; this happens at the level of the thinking which does not yet apprehend
the will in its freedom but reflects on its content as on one natural and given - the level, for
example, of the time of Croesus and Solon. 

Addition: Since the specifications of happiness are given, they are not true specifications of
freedom, because freedom is not genuinely free in its own eyes except in the good, i.e. except
when it is its own end. Consequently we may raise the question whether a man has the right to set
before himself ends not freely chosen but resting solely on the fact that the subject is a living being.
The fact that man is a living being, however, is not fortuitous, but in conformity with reason, and to
that extent he has a right to make his needs his end. There is nothing degrading in being alive, and
there is no mode of intelligent being higher than life in which existence would be possible. It is only
the raising of the given to something self-created which yields the higher orbit of the good, although
this distinction implies no incompatibility between the two levels. 

                                 ¡ì 124. 

Since the subjective satisfaction of the individual himself (including the
recognition which he receives by way of honour and fame) is also part and parcel
of the achievement of ends of absolute worth, it follows that the demand that
such an end alone shall appear as willed and attained, like the view that, in willing,
objective and subjective ends are mutually exclusive, is an empty dogmatism of
the abstract Understanding. And this dogmatism is more than empty, it is
pernicious if it passes into the assertion that because subjective satisfaction is
present, as it always is when any task is brought to completion, it is what the
agent intended in essence to secure and that the objective end was in his eyes
only a means to that. ¡ª What the subject is, is the series of his actions. If ,these
are a series of worthless productions, then the subjectivity of his willing is just as
worthless. But if the series of his deeds is of a substantive nature, then the same
is true also of the individual's inner will. 

Remark: The right of the subject's particularity, his right to be satisfied, or in other words the
right of subjective freedom, is the pivot and centre of the difference between antiquity and modern
times. This right in its infinity is given expression in Christianity and it has become the universal
effective principle of a new form of civilisation. Amongst the primary shapes which this right
assumes are love, romanticism, the quest for the eternal salvation of the individual, &c.; next come
moral convictions and conscience; and, finally, the other forms, some of which come into
prominence in what follows as the principle of civil society and as moments in the constitution of
the state, while others appear in the course of history, particularly the history of art, science, and
philosophy. 

Now this principle of particularity is, to be sure, one moment of the antithesis, and in the first place
at least it is just as much identical with the universal as distinct from it. Abstract reflection,
however, fixes this moment in its distinction from and opposition to the universal and so produces
a view of morality as nothing but a bitter, unending, struggle against self-satisfaction, as the
command: 'Do with abhorrence what duty enjoins.' 

It is just this type of ratiocination which adduces that familiar psychological view of history which
understands how to belittle and disparage all great deeds and great men by transforming into the
main intention and operative motive of actions the inclinations and passions which likewise found
their satisfaction from the achievement of something substantive, the fame and honour, &c.,
consequential on such actions, in a word their particular aspect, the aspect which it has decreed in
advance to be something in itself pernicious. Such ratiocination assures us that, while great actions
and the efficiency which has subsisted through a series of them have produced greatness in the
world and have had as their consequences for the individual agent power, honour, and fame, still
what belongs to the individual is not the greatness itself but what has accrued to him from it, this
purely particular and external result; because this result is a consequence, it is therefore supposed
to have been the agent's end and even his sole end. Reflection of this sort stops short at the
subjective side of great men, since it itself stands on purely subjective ground, and consequently it
overlooks what is substantive in this emptiness of its own making. This is the view of those valet
psychologists 'for whom there are no heroes, not because there are no heroes, but because these
psychologists are only valets'. 

Addition: In magnis ... voluisse sat est [In great things to have willed is enough] is right in the
sense that we ought to will something great. But we must also be able to achieve it, otherwise the
willing is nugatory. The laurels of mere willing are dry leaves that never were green. 

                                 ¡ì 125. 

The subjective element of the will, with its particular content - welfare, is
reflected into itself and infinite and so stands related to the universal element, to
the principle of the will. This moment of universality, posited first of all within
this particular content itself, is the welfare of others also, or, specified completely,
though quite emptily, the welfare of all. The welfare of many other unspecified
particulars is thus also an essential end and right of subjectivity. But since the
absolutely universal, in distinction from such a particular content, has not so far
been further determined than as 'the right', it follows that these ends of
particularity, differing as they do from the universal, may be in conformity with it,
but they also may not. 

                                 ¡ì 126. 

My particularity, however, like that of others, is only a right at all in so far as I
am a free entity. Therefore it may not make claims for itself in contradiction to
this its substantive basis, and an intention to secure my welfare or that of others
(and it is particularly in this latter case that such an intention is called moral')
cannot justify an action which is wrong. 

Remark: It is one of the most prominent of the corrupt maxims of our time to enter a plea for
the so-called 'moral' intention behind wrong actions and to imagine bad men with well-meaning
hearts, i.e. hearts willing their own welfare and perhaps that of others also. This doctrine is rooted
in the 'benevolence' (guten Herzens) of the pre-Kantian philosophers and constitutes, e.g., the
quintessence of well-known touching dramatic productions; but today it has been resuscitated in a
more extravagant form, and inner enthusiasm and the heart, i.e. the form of particularity as such,
have been made the criterion of right, rationality, and excellence. The result is that crime and the
thoughts that lead to it, be they fancies however trite and empty, or opinions however wild, are to
be regarded as right, rational, and excellent, simply because they issue from men's hearts and
enthusiasms. (See the Remark to ¡ì 140, where more details are given.) , Incidentally, however,
attention must be paid to the point of view from which right and welfare are being treated here.
We are considering right as abstract right and welfare as the particular welfare of the single agent.
The so-called 'general good', the welfare of the state, i.e. the right of mind actual and concrete, is
quite a different sphere, a sphere in which abstract right is a subordinate moment like particular
welfare and the happiness of the individual. As was remarked above, it is one of the commonest
blunders of abstract thinking to make private rights and private welfare count as absolute in
opposition to the universality of the state. 

Addition: The famous answer: Je n'en vois pas la n¨¦cessit¨¦, given [by Richelieu] to the
lampooner who excused himself with the words: Il faut donc que je vive, is apposite at this point.
Life ceases to be necessary in face of the higher realm of freedom. When St. Crispin stole leather
to make shoes for the poor, his action was moral but wrong and so inadmissible. 

                                 ¡ì 127. 

The particularity of the interests of the natural will, taken in their entirety as a
single whole, is personal existence or life. In extreme danger and in conflict with
the rightful property of someone else, this life may claim (as a right, not a mercy)
a right of distress, because in such a situation there is on the one hand an infinite
injury to a man's existence and the consequent loss of rights altogether, and on
the other hand only an injury to a single restricted embodiment of freedom, and
this implies a recognition both of right as such and also of the injured man's
capacity for rights, because the injury affects only this property of his. 

Remark: The right of distress is the basis of beneficium competentiae whereby a debtor is
allowed to retain of his tools, farming implements, clothes, or, in short, of his resources, i.e. of his
creditor's property, so much as is regarded as indispensable if he is to continue to support life - to
support it, of course, on his own social level. 

Addition: Life as the sum of ends has a right against abstract right. If for example it is only by
stealing bread that the wolf can be kept from the door, the action is of course an encroachment on
someone's property, but it would be wrong to treat this action as an ordinary theft. To refuse to
allow a man in jeopardy of his life to take such steps for self-preservation would be to stigmatise
him as without rights, and since he would be deprived of his life, his freedom would be annulled
altogether. Many diverse details have a bearing on the preservation of life, and when we have our
eyes on the future we have to engage ourselves in these details. But the only thing that is necessary
is to live now, the future is not absolute but ever exposed to accident. Hence it is only the
necessity of the immediate present which can justify a wrong action, because not to do the action
would in turn be to commit an offence, indeed the most wrong of all offences, namely the complete
destruction of the embodiment of freedom. Beneficium competentiae is relevant here, because
kinship and other close relationships imply the right to demand that no one shall be sacrificed
altogether on the altar of right. 

                                 ¡ì 128. 

This distress reveals the finitude and therefore the contingency of both right and
welfare of right as the abstract embodiment of freedom without embodying the
particular person, and of welfare as the sphere of the particular will without the
universality of right. In this way they are established as one-sided and ideal, the
character which in conception they already possessed. Right has already (see ¡ì
106) determined its embodiment as the particular will; and subjectivity, in its
particularity as a comprehensive whole, is itself the embodiment of freedom (see
¡ì 127), while as the infinite relation of the will to itself, it is implicitly the
universal element in freedom. The two moments present in right and subjectivity,
thus integrated and attaining their truth, their identity, though in the first instance
still remaining relative to one another, are (a) the good (as the concrete,
absolutely determinate, universal), and (b) conscience (as infinite subjectivity
inwardly conscious and inwardly determining its content). 

            iii Good & Conscience
                               ¡ì 129. 

The good is the Idea as the unity of the concept of the will with the particular
will. In this unity, abstract right, welfare, the subjectivity of knowing and the
contingency of external fact, have their independent self-subsistence superseded,
though at the same time they are still contained and retained within it in their
essence. The good is thus freedom realised, the absolute end and aim of the
world. 

Addition: Every stage is really the Idea, but the earlier stages contain it only in rather an
abstract form. Thus for example, even the ego, as personality, is already the Idea, though in its
most abstract shape. The good, therefore, is the Idea further determined, the unity of the concept
of the will with the particular will. It is not something abstractly right, but something concrete
whose contents are made up of both right and welfare alike. 

                                 ¡ì 130. 

In this Idea, welfare has no independent validity as the embodiment of a single
particular will but only as universal welfare and essentially as universal in
principle, i.e. as according with freedom. Welfare without right is not a good.
Similarly, right without welfare is not the good; fiat justitia should not be
followed by pereat mundus. Consequently, since the good must of necessity be
actualised through the particular will and is at the same time its substance, it has
absolute right in contrast with the abstract right of property and the particular
aims of welfare. If either of these moments becomes distinguished from the good,
it has validity only in so far as it accords with the good and is subordinated to it. 

                                 ¡ì 131. 

For the subjective will, the good and the good alone is the essential, and the
subjective will has value and dignity only in so far as its insight and intention
accord with the good. Inasmuch as the good is at this point still only this abstract
Idea of good, the subjective will has not yet been caught up into it and established
as according with it. Consequently, it stands in a relation to the good, and the
relation is that the good ought to be substantive for it, i.e. it ought to make the
good its aim and realise it completely, while the good on its side has in the
subjective will its only means of stepping into actuality. 

Addition: The good is the truth of the particular will, but the will is only that into which it puts
itself; it is not good by nature but can become what it is only by its own labour. On the other hand,
the good itself, apart from the subjective will, is only an abstraction without that real existence
which it is to acquire for the first time through the efforts of that will. Accordingly, the development
of the good has three stages: (i) The good should present itself to my volition as a particular will
and I should know it. (ii) I should myself say what is good and should develop its particular
specifications. (iii) Finally, the specification of the good on its own account, the particularisation of
the good as infinite subjectivity aware of itself. This inward specifying of what good is, is
conscience. 

                                 ¡ì 132. 

The right of the subjective will is that whatever it is to recognise as valid shall be
seen by it as good, and that an action, as its aim entering upon external
objectivity, shall be imputed to it as right or wrong, good or evil, legal or illegal, in
accordance with its knowledge of the worth which the action has in this
objectivity. 

Remark: The good is in principle the essence of the will in its substantiality and universality, i.e.
of the will in its truth, and therefore it exists simply and solely in thinking and by means of thinking.
Hence assertions such as 'man cannot know the truth but has to do only with phenomena', or
'thinking injures the good will' are dogmas depriving mind not only of intellectual but also of all
ethical worth and dignity. 

The right of giving recognition only to what my insight sees as rational is the highest right of the
subject, although owing to its subjective character it remains a formal right; against it the right
which reason qua the objective possesses over the subject remains firmly established. 

On account of its formal character, insight is capable equally of being true and of being mere
opinion and error. The individual's acquisition of this right of insight is, on the principles of the
sphere which is still moral only, part and parcel of his particular subjective education. I may
demand from myself, and regard it as one of my subjective rights, that my insight into an obligation
shall be based on good reasons, that I shall be convinced of the obligation and even that I shall
apprehend it from its concept and fundamental nature. But whatever I may claim for the
satisfaction of my conviction about the character of an action as good, permitted, or forbidden,
and so about its imputability in respect of this character, this in no way detracts from the right of
objectivity. 

This right of insight into the good is distinct from the right of insight in respect of action as such (see
¡ì 117) ; the form of the right of objectivity which corresponds to the latter is this, that since action
is an alteration which is to take place in an actual world and so will have recognition in it, it must in
general accord with what has validity there. Whoever wills to act in this world of actuality has eo
ipso submitted himself to its laws and recognised the right of objectivity. 

Similarly, in the state as the objectivity of the concept of reason, legal responsibility cannot be tied
down to what an individual may hold to be or not to be in accordance with his reason, or to his
subjective insight into what is right or wrong, good or evil, or to the demands which he makes for
the satisfaction of his conviction. In this objective field, the right of insight is valid as insight into the
legal or illegal, qua into what is recognised as right, and it is restricted to its elementary meaning,
i.e. to knowledge in the sense of acquaintance with what is legal and to that extent obligatory. By
means of the publicity of the laws and the universality of manners, the state removes from the right
of insight its formal aspect and the contingency which it still retains for the subject at the level of
morality. The subject's right to know action in its specific character as good or evil, legal or illegal,
has the result of diminishing or cancelling in this respect too the responsibility of children, imbeciles,
and lunatics, although it is impossible to delimit precisely either childhood, imbecility, &c., or their
degree of irresponsibility. But to turn momentary blindness, the goad of passion, intoxication, or, in
a word, what is called the strength of sensual impulse (excluding impulses which are the basis of
the right of distress - see ¡ì 127) into reasons when the imputation, specific character, and
culpability of a crime are in question, and to look . upon such circumstances as if they took away
the criminal's guilt, again means (compare ¡ì 100 and the Remark to ¡ì 120) failing to treat the
criminal. in accordance with the right and honour due to him as a man; for the nature of man
consists precisely in the fact that he is essentially something universal, not a being whose
knowledge is an abstractly momentary and piecemeal affair. 

Just as what the incendiary really sets on fire is not the isolated square inch of wooden surface to
which he applies his torch, but the universal in that square inch, e.g. the house as a whole, so, as
subject, he is neither the single existent of this moment of time nor this isolated hot feeling of
revenge. If he were, he would be an animal which would have to be knocked on the head as
dangerous and unsafe because of its liability to fits of madness. 

The claim is made that the criminal in the moment of his action must have had a 'clear idea' of the
wrong and its culpability before it can be imputed to him as a crime. At first sight, this claim seems
to preserve the right of his subjectivity, but the truth is that it deprives him of his indwelling nature
as intelligent, a nature whose effective presence is not confined to the 'clear ideas' of Wolff's
psychology, and only in cases of lunacy is it so deranged as to be divorced from the knowing and
doing of isolated things. 

The sphere in which these extenuating circumstances come into consideration as grounds for the
mitigation of punishment is a sphere other than that of rights, the sphere of pardon. 

                                 ¡ì 133. 

The particular subject is related to the good as to the essence of his will, and
hence his will's obligation arises directly in this relation. Since particularity is
distinct from the good and falls within the subjective will, the good is
characterised to begin with only as the universal abstract essentiality of the will,
i.e. as duty. Since duty is thus abstract and universal in character, it should be
done for duty's sake. 

Addition: From my point of view the essence of the will is duty. Now if my knowledge stops at
the fact that the good is my duty, I am still going no further than the abstract character of duty. I
should do my duty for duty's sake, and when I do my duty it is in a true sense my own objectivity
which I am bringing to realisation. In doing my duty, I am by myself and free. To have emphasised
this meaning of duty has constituted the merit of Kant's moral philosophy and its loftiness of
outlook. 

                                 ¡ì 134. 

Because every action explicitly calls for a particular content and a specific end,
while duty as an abstraction entails nothing of the kind, the question arises: what
is my duty? As an answer nothing is so far available except: (a) to do the right,
and (b) to strive after welfare, one's own welfare, and welfare in universal terms,
the welfare of others (see ¡ì 119). 

Addition: This is the same question as was put to Jesus when someone wished to learn from
him what he should do to inherit eternal life. Good as a universal is abstract and cannot be
accomplished so long as it remains abstract. To be accomplished it must acquire in addition the
character of particularity. 

                                 ¡ì 135. 

These specific duties, however, are not contained in the definition of duty itself;
but since both of them are conditioned and restricted, they eo ipso bring about
the transition to the higher sphere of the unconditioned, the sphere of duty. Duty
itself in the moral self-consciousness is the essence or the universality of that
consciousness, the way in which it is inwardly related to itself alone; all that is left
to it, therefore, is abstract universality, and for its determinate character it has
identity without content, or the abstractly positive, the indeterminate. 

Remark: However essential it is to give prominence to the pure unconditioned
self-determination of the will as the root of duty, and to the way in which knowledge of the will,
thanks to Kant's philosophy, has won its firm foundation and starting-point for the first time owing
to the thought of its infinite autonomy, still to adhere to the exclusively moral position, without
making the transition to the conception of ethics, is to reduce this gain to an empty formalism, and
the science of morals to the preaching of duty for duty's sake. From this point of view, no
immanent doctrine of duties is possible; of course, material may be brought in from outside and
particular duties may be arrived at accordingly, but ff the definition of duty is taken to be the
absence of contradiction, formal correspondence with itself - which is nothing but abstract
indeterminacy stabilised - then no transition is possible to the specification of particular duties nor,
if some such particular content for acting comes under consideration, is there any criterion in that
principle for deciding whether it is or is not a duty. On the contrary, by this means any wrong or
immoral line of conduct may be justified. 

Kant's further formulations the possibility of visualising an action as a universal maxim, does lead
to the more concrete visualisation of a situation, but in itself it contains no principle beyond
abstract identity and the 'absence of contradiction' already mentioned. 

The absence of property contains in itself just as little contradiction as the non-existence of this or
that nation, family, &c., or the death of the whole human race. But if it is already established on
other grounds and presupposed that property and human life are to exist and be respected, then
indeed it is a contradiction to commit theft or murder; a contradiction must be a contradiction of
something, i.e. of some content presupposed from the start as a fixed principle. It is to a principle
of that kind alone, therefore, that an action can be related either by correspondence or
contradiction. But if duty is to be willed simply for duty's sake and not for the sake of some
content, it is only a formal identity whose nature it is to exclude all content and specification. 

The further antinomies and configurations of this never-ending ought-to-be, in which the
exclusively moral way of thinking - thinking in terms of relation - just wanders to and fro without
being able to resolve them and get beyond the ought-to-be, I have developed in my
Phenomenology of Mind. 

Addition: While we laid emphasis above on the fact that the outlook of Kant's philosophy is a
high one in that it propounds a correspondence between duty and rationality, still we must notice
here that this point of view is defective in lacking all articulation. The proposition: 'Act as if the
maxim of thine action could be laid down as a universal principle', would be admirable if we
already had determinate principles of conduct. That is to say, to demand of a principle that it shall
be able to serve in addition as a determinant of universal legislation is to presuppose that it already
possesses a content. Given the content, then of course the application of the principle would be a
simple matter. In Kant's case, however, the principle itself is still not available and his criterion of
non-contradiction is productive of nothing, since where there is nothing, there can be no
contradiction either. 

                                 ¡ì 136. 

Because of the abstract characterisation of the good, the other moment of the
Idea - particularity in general - falls within subjectivity. Subjectivity in its
universality reflected into itself is the subject's absolute inward certainty
(Gewissheit) of himself, that which establishes the particular and is the
determining and decisive element in him, his conscience (Gewissen). 

Addition: We may speak in a very lofty strain about duty, and talk of the kind is uplifting and
broadens human sympathies, but if it never comes to anything specific it ends in being wearisome.
Mind demands particularity and is entitled to it. But conscience is this deepest inward solitude with
oneself where everything external and every restriction has disappeared - this complete withdrawal
into oneself. As conscience, man is no longer shackled by the aims of particularity, and
consequently in attaining that position he has risen to higher ground, the ground of the modern
world, which for the first time has reached this consciousness, reached this sinking into oneself.
The more sensuous consciousness [For the distinction between sense-consciousness and 'more
highly developed types of consciousness', see Remarks to ¡ì¡ì 21 and 35.] of earlier epochs had
something external and given confronting it, either religion or law. But conscience knows itself as
thinking and knows that what alone has obligatory force for me is this that I think. 

                                 ¡ì 137. 

True conscience is the disposition to will what is absolutely good. It therefore has
fixed principles and it is aware of these as its explicitly objective determinants and
duties. In distinction from this its content (i.e. truth), conscience is only the
formal side of the activity of the will, which as this will has no special content of
its own. But the objective system of these principles and duties, and the union of
subjective knowing with this system, is not present until we come to the
standpoint of ethical life. Here at the abstract standpoint of morality, conscience
lacks this objective content and so its explicit character is that of infinite abstract
self-certainty, which at the same time is for this very reason the self-certainty of
this subject. 

Remark: Conscience is the expression of the absolute title of subjective self-consciousness to
know in itself and from within itself what is right and obligatory, to give recognition only to what it
thus knows as good, and at the same time to maintain that whatever in this way it knows and wills
is in truth right and obligatory. Conscience as this unity of subjective knowing with what is absolute
is a sanctuary which it would be sacrilege to violate. But whether the conscience of a specific
individual corresponds with this Idea of conscience, or whether what it takes or declares to be
good is actually so, is ascertainable only from the content of the good it seeks to realise. What is
right and obligatory is the absolutely rational element in the will's volitions and therefore it is not in
essence the particular property of an individual, and its form is not that of feeling or any other
private (i.e. sensuous) type of knowing, but essentially that of universals determined by thought,
i.e. the form of laws and principles. Conscience is therefore subject to the judgement of its truth or
falsity, and when it appeals only to itself for a decision, it is directly at variance with what it wishes
to be, namely the rule for a mode of conduct which is rational, absolutely valid, and universal. For
this reason, the state cannot give recognition to conscience in its private form as subjective
knowing, any more than science can grant validity to subjective opinion, dogmatism, and the
appeal to a subjective opinion. In true conscience, its elements are not different, but they may
become so, and it is the determining element, the subjectivity of willing and knowing, which can
sever itself from the true content of conscience, establish its own independence, and reduce that
content to a form and a show. The ambiguity in connection with conscience lies therefore in this: it
is presupposed to mean the identity of subjective knowing and willing with the true good, and so
is claimed and recognised to be something sacrosanct; and yet at the same time, as the mere
subjective reflection of self-consciousness into itself, it still claims for itself the title due, solely on
the strength of its absolutely valid rational content, to that identity alone. 

At the level of morality, distinguished as it is in this book from the level of ethics, it is only formal
conscience that is to be found. True conscience has been mentioned only to indicate its distinction
from the other and to obviate the possible misunderstanding that here, where it is only formal
conscience that is under consideration, the argument is about true conscience. The latter is part of
the ethical disposition which comes before us for the first time in the following section. The
religious conscience, however, does not belong to this sphere at all. 

Addition: When we speak of conscience, it may easily be thought that, in virtue of its form,
which is abstract inwardness, conscience is at ties point without more ado true conscience. But
true conscience determines itself to will what is absolutely good and obligatory and is this
self-determination. So far, however, it is only with good in the abstract that we have to do and
conscience is still without this objective content and is but the infinite certainty of oneself. 

                                 ¡ì 138. 

This subjectivity, qua abstract self-determination and pure certainty of oneself
alone, as readily evaporates into itself the whole determinate character of right,
duty, and existence, as it remains both the power to judge, to determine from
within itself alone, what is good in respect of any content, and also the power to
which the good, at first only an ideal and an ought-to-be, owes its actuality. 

Remark: The self-consciousness which has attained this absolute reflection into itself knows
itself in this reflection to be the kind of consciousness which is and should be beyond the reach of
every existent and given specific determination. As one of the commoner features of history (e.g. in
Socrates,40 the Stoics, and others), the tendency to look deeper into oneself and to know and
determine from within oneself what is right and good appears in ages when what is recognised as
right and good in contemporary manners cannot satisfy the will of better men. When the existing
world of freedom has become faithless to the will of better men, that will fails to find itself in the
duties there recognised and must try to find in the ideal world of the inner life alone the harmony
which actuality has lost. Once self-consciousness has grasped and secured its formal right in this
way, everything depends on the character of the content which it gives to itself. 

Addition: If we look more closely at this process of evaporation and see how all specific
determinations disappear into this simple concept and then have to be condensed out of it again,
what we find is that it is primarily due to the fact that everything recognised as right and duty may
be proved by discursive thinking to be nugatory, restricted, and in all respects not absolute. On the
other hand, just as subjectivity evaporates every content into itself, so it may develop it out of itself
once more. Everything which arises in the ethical sphere is produced by this activity of mind. The
moral point of view, however, is defective because it is purely abstract. When I am aware of my
freedom as the substance of my being, I am inactive and do nothing. But if I proceed to act and
look for principles on which to act, I grope for something determinate and then demand its
deduction from the concept of the free will. While, therefore, it is right enough to evaporate right
and duty into subjectivity, it is wrong if this abstract groundwork is not then condensed out again.
It is only in times when the world of actuality is hollow, spiritless, and unstable, that an individual
may be allowed to take refuge from actuality in his inner life. Socrates lived at the time of the ruin
of the Athenian democracy. His thought vaporised the world around him and he withdrew into
himself to search there for the right and the good. Even in our day there are cases when reverence
for the established order is more or less lacking; man insists on having the authoritative as his will,
as that to which he has granted recognition. 

                                 ¡ì 139. 

Once self-consciousness has reduced all otherwise valid duties to emptiness and
itself to the sheer inwardness of the will, it has become the potentiality of either
making the absolutely universal its principle, or equally well of elevating above the
universal the self-will of private particularity, taking that as its principle and
realising it through its actions, i.e. it has become potentially evil. 

Remark: To have a conscience, if conscience is only formal subjectivity, is simply to be on the
verge of slipping into evil; in independent self-certainty, with its independence of knowledge and
decision, both morality and evil have their common root. 

The origin of evil in general is to be found in the mystery of freedom (i.e. in the speculative aspect
of freedom), the mystery whereby freedom of necessity arises out of the natural level of the will
and is something inward in comparison with that level. It is this natural level of the will which
comes into existence as a self-contradiction, as incompatible with itself in this opposition, and so it
is just this particularity of the will which later makes itself evil. That is to say, particularity is always
duality; here it is the opposition of the natural level and the inwardness of the will. In this
opposition, the latter is only a relative and abstract subjectivity which can draw its content only
from the determinate content of the natural will, from desire, impulse, inclination, &c. Now it is
said of these desires, impulses, &c., that they may be either good or evil. But since the will here
makes into a determinant of its content both these impulses in this contingent character which they
possess as natural, and also, therefore, the form which it has at this point, the form of particularity
itself, it follows that it is set in opposition to the universal as inner objectivity, to the good, which
comes on the scene as the opposite extreme to immediate objectivity, the natural pure and simple,
as soon as the will is reflected into itself and consciousness is a knowing consciousness. It is in this
opposition that this inwardness of the will is evil. Man is therefore evil by a conjunction between
his natural or undeveloped character and his reflection into himself; and therefore evil belongs
neither to nature as such by itself - unless nature were supposed to be the natural character of the
will which rests in its particular content - nor to introverted reflection by itself, i.e. cognition in
general, unless this were to maintain itself in that opposition to the universal. 

With this facet of evil, its necessity, there is inevitably combined the fact that this same evil is
condemned to be that which of necessity ought not to be, i.e. the fact that evil ought to be
annulled. It is not that there ought never to be a diremption of any sort in the will - on the contrary,
it is just this level of diremption which distinguishes man from the unreasoning animal; the point is
that the will should not rest at that level and cling to the particular as if that and not the universal
were the essential thing; it should overcome the diremption as a nullity. Further, as to this necessity
of evil, it is subjectivity, as infinite self-reflection, which is present in and confronted by this
opposition of universal and particular; if it rests in this opposition, i.e. if it is evil, then it is eo ipso
independent, regarding itself as isolated, and is itself this Self-Will. Therefore if the individual
subject as such does evil, the evil is purely and simply his own responsibility. 

Addition: The abstract self-certainty which knows itself as the basis of everything has in it the
potentiality either of willing the universality of the concept or alternatively of taking a particular
content as a principle and realising that. The second alternative is evil, which therefore always
includes the abstraction of self-certainty. It is only man who is good, and he is good only because
he can also be evil. Good and evil are inseparable, and their inseparability is rooted in the fact that
the concept becomes an object to itself, and as object it eo ipso acquires the character of
difference. The evil will wills something opposed to the universality of the will, while the good will
acts in accordance with its true concept. 

The difficulty of the question as to how the will can be evil as well as good usually arises because
we think of the will as related to itself purely positively and because we represent its volition as
something determinate confronting it, as the good. But the problem of the origin of evil may be
more precisely put in the form: 'How does the negative come into the positive?' If we begin by
presupposing that in the creation of the world God is the absolutely positive, then, turn where we
will, we shall never discover the negative within that positive, since to talk of God's 'Permitting' evil
is to ascribe to him a passive relation to evil which is unsatisfactory and meaningless. In the
representative thinking of religious mythology there is no comprehension of the origin of evil; i.e.
the positive and the negative are not discovered in one another, there is only a representation of
their succession and juxtaposition, so that it is from outside that the negative comes to the positive.
But this cannot satisfy thought, which demands a reason and a necessity and insists on
apprehending the negative as itself rooted in the positive. Now the solution of the problem, the
way the concept treats the matter, is already contained in the concept, since the concept, or to
speak more concretely, the Idea, has it in its essence to differentiate itself and to posit itself
negatively. If we adhere to the purely positive, i.e. if we rest in the unmixed good which is
supposed to be good at its source, then we are accepting an empty category of the Understanding
which clings to abstractions and one-sided categories of this kind and by the very asking of this
question makes it a difficult one. If we begin with the standpoint of the concept, however, we
apprehend the positive as activity and as self-distinction. Evil and good alike have their origin in the
will and the will in its concept is both good and evil. 

The natural will is implicitly the contradiction of self-distinction, of being both inwardness and also
self-awareness. To maintain then that evil implies the further point that man is evil in so far as his
will is natural would be to contradict the usual idea that it is just the natural will which is guiltless
and good. But the natural will stands in opposition to the content of freedom, and the child and the
uneducated man, whose wills are only natural, are for that very reason liable to be called to
account for their actions only in a less degree. Now when we speak of man, we mean not the child
but the self-conscious adult, and when we speak of good, we mean the knowledge of it. It is
doubtless true that the natural is inherently innocent, neither good nor bad, but when it is drawn
into the orbit of the will which is free and knows that it is free, it acquires the character of not being
free and is therefore evil. When man wills the natural, it is no longer merely natural, but the
negative opposed to the good, i.e. to the concept of the will. 

On the other hand, if it is now objected that since evil is rooted in the concept and inevitable, man
would be guiltless if he committed it, our reply must be that a man's decision is his own act, and his
own act is freely chosen and his own responsibility. In the religious legend it is said that man is as
God when he knows good and evil; and it is true that this likeness to God is present in such
knowledge in that the inevitability here is no natural inevitability since on the contrary the decision
is really the transcendence of this duality of good and evil. When both good and evil are placed
before me, I have a choice between the two; I can decide between them and endow my
subjective character with either. Thus the nature of evil is that man may will it but need not. 

                                 ¡ì 140. 

In every end of a self-conscious subject, there is a positive aspect (see ¡ì 135)
necessarily present because the end is what is purposed in an actual concrete
action. This aspect he knows how to elicit and emphasise, and he may then
proceed to regard it as a duty or a fine intention. By so interpreting it, he is
enabled to pass off his action as good in the eyes both of himself and others,
despite the fact that, owing to his reflective character and his knowledge of the
universal aspect of the will, he is aware of the contrast between this aspect and
the essentially negative content of his action. To impose in this way on others is
hypocrisy; while to impose on oneself is a stage beyond hypocrisy, a stage at
which subjectivity claims to be absolute. 

Remark: This final, most abstruse, form of evil, whereby evil is perverted into good and good
into evil, and consciousness, in being aware of its power to effect this perversion, is also made
aware of itself as absolute, is the high-water mark of subjectivity at the level of morality; it is the
form into which evil has blossomed in our present epoch, a result due to philosophy, i.e. to a
shallowness of thought which has twisted a profound concept into this shape and usurped the
name of philosophy, just as it has arrogated to evil the name of good. 

In this Remark, I will indicate briefly the chief forms of this subjectivity which have become
current. 

(a) In hypocrisy the following moments are contained: 

     [a] knowledge of the true universal, whether knowledge in the form merely of a feeling for
     right and duty, or of a deeper cognition and apprehension of them; 
     [b] volition of the particular which conflicts with this universal; 
     [c] conscious comparison of both moments [a] and [b], so that the conscious subject is
     aware in willing that his particular volition is evil in character. 

These points are descriptive of acting with a bad conscience; hypocrisy proper involves something
more. 

At one time great importance was attached to the question whether an action was evil only in so
far as it was done with a bad conscience, i.e. with explicit knowledge of the three moments just
specified. The inference from an affirmative answer is admirably drawn by Pascal: Ils seront tous
damn¨¦s ces demi-p¨¦cheurs, qui ont quelque amour pour la vertu. Mais pour ces
franc-p¨¦cheurs, p¨¦cheurs endurcis, p¨¦cheurs sans m¨¦lange, pleins et achev¨¦s, 1'enfer ne
les tient pas; ils ont tromp¨¦ le diable ¨¤ force de s'y abandonner. 

Footnote: Lettres provinciales, iv. In the same context, Pascal also quotes Christ's intercession on the
Cross for his enemies: 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do' - a superfluous prayer if the fact
that they did not know what they did made their action innocent and so took away the need of forgiveness.
Pascal quotes there too Aristotle's distinction between the man who acts ouk eidos and the one who acts
agnoon; in the former type of ignorance, his action is not freely willed (here the ignorance depends on external
circumstances, see above, ¡ì 117) and his action is not imputable to him. But of the latter Aristotle says: 'Every
wicked man is ignorant of what he ought to do and what he ought to refrain from doing; and it is this kind of
failure which makes men unjust and in general bad.... An ignorant choice' between good and evil 'is the cause
not of the action's being involuntary' (of being non-imputable) 'but only of its being wicked'. Aristotle
evidently had a deeper insight into the connection between knowing and willing than has become common in a
superficial philosophy which teaches that the opposite of knowledge, the heart and enthusiasm, are the true
principles of ethical action. 

The subjective right of self-consciousness to know whether an action is truly good or evil in
character must not be thought of as so colliding with the absolute right of the objectivity of this
character that the two rights are represented as separable, indifferent to one another, and related
only accidentally. It was such a conception of their relation that lay in particular at the root of the
old questions about efficacious grace. On its formal side, evil is most peculiarly the individual's
own, since (a) it is precisely his subjectivity establishing itself purely and simply for itself, and for
that reason it is purely and simply the individual's own responsibility (see ¡ì 139 and the Remark
thereto); (b) on his objective side man accords with his concept inasmuch as he is mind, in a word
a rational entity, and has in his own nature as such the character of self-knowing universality.
Therefore it means failing to treat him with the respect due to his concept if his good side is
divorced from him, so that the character of his evil action as evil is divorced from him too and is
not imputed to him as evil. How determinate is the consciousness of these moments in distinction
from one another, or to what extent it has developed or failed to develop in clarity so as to
become a recognition of them, and to what degree an evil action has been done with a conscience
more or less downright evil - all these questions are the more trivial aspect of the matter, the
aspect mainly concerned with the empirical. 

(b) Evil and doing evil with a bad conscience, however, is not quite hypocrisy. Into hypocrisy
there enters in addition the formal character of falsity, first the falsity of holding up evil as good in
the eyes of others, of setting oneself up to all appearance as good, conscientious, pious, and so on
- conduct which in these circumstances is only a trick to deceive others. Secondly, however, the
had man may find in his good conduct on other occasions, or in his piety, or, in a word, in good
reasons, a justification in his own eyes for the evil he does, because he can use these reasons to
pervert its apparent character from evil into good. His ability to do this depends on the subjectivity
which, as abstract negativity, knows that all determinations are subordinate to itself and issue from
its own will. 

(c) In this perversion of evil into good we may prima facie include the form of subjectivism known
as Probabilism. Its guiding principle is that an action is permissible, and may be done with an easy
conscience, provided that the agent can hunt out any single good reason for it, be it only the
authority of a single theologian, and even if other theologians are known by the agent to dissent
ever so widely from that authority. Even in this idea there is still present the correct apprehension
that authority and a reason based on authority gives probability only, although this is supposed to
be enough to produce an easy conscience; it is granted in Probabilism that a good reason is
inevitably of such a character that there may exist along with it different reasons at least as good.
Even here we must recognise a vestige of objectivity in the admission that it is a reason which
should be the determining factor. But since the discrimination between good and evil is made to
depend on all those good reasons, including theological authorities too, despite the fact that they
are so numerous and contradictory, the implication is that it is not this objectivity of the thing, but
subjectivity, which has the last word. This means that caprice and self-will are made the arbiters of
good and evil, and the result is that ethics as well as religious feeling is undermined. But the fact
that it is private subjectivity to which the decision falls is one which Probabilism does not openly
avow as its principle; on the contrary, as has already been stated, it gives out that it is some reason
or other which is decisive, and Probabilism is to that extent still a form of hypocrisy. 

(d) In the stages of subjectivism, the next in ascending order is the view that the goodness of the
will consists in its willing the good; this willing of the abstract good is supposed to suffice, in fact
to be the sole requisite, to make its action good. As the willing of something determinate, action
has a content, but good in the abstract determines nothing, and hence it devolves on particular
subjectivity to give this content its character and constituents. just as in Probabilism anyone who is
not himself a learned R¨¦v¨¦rend P¨¨re may have the subsumption of a determinate content under
the universal predicate 'good' effected for him by the sole authority of one such theologian, so here
every subject, without any further qualification, is invested with this honour of giving a content to
good in the abstract, or in other words subsuming a content under a universal. This content is only
one of the many elements in an action as a concrete whole, and the others may perhaps entail its
description as 'criminal' and 'bad'. That determinate content which 1, as subject, give to the good,
however, is the good known to me in the action, i.e. it is my good intention (see ¡ì 114). Thus
there arises a contradiction between descriptions: according to one the action is good, according
to the other it is criminal. Hence also there seems to arise, in connection with a concrete action, the
question whether in such circumstances the intention behind it is actually good. It may generally be
the case that the good is what is actually intended; but this in fact must always be the case if it is
held that good in the abstract is the subject's determining motive. Where wrong is done through an
action which is well intentioned but in other respects criminal and bad, the wrong so done must, of
course, also be good, and the important question would seem to be: which of these sides of the
action is really the essential one? This objective question, however, is here out of place, or rather it
is the subjective consciousness alone whose decision constitutes objectivity at this point. Besides,
'essential' and 'good' mean the same thing; one is just as much an abstraction as the other. Good is
that which is essential in respect of the will; and the essential in this respect should be precisely
this, that my action be characterised as good in my eyes. But the subsumption under the good of
any content one pleases is the direct and explicit result of the fact that this abstract good is totally
devoid of content and so is simply reduced to meaning anything positive, i.e. to something which is
valid from some single point of view and which in its immediate character may even be valid as an
essential end, as for example to do good to the poor, to take thought for myself, my life, my
family, and so forth. Further, just as the good is the abstract, so the bad too must be without
content and derive its specification from my subjectivity; and it is in this way also that there arises
the moral end of hating and uprooting the bad, the nature of the bad being left unspecified. 

Theft, cowardice, murder, and so forth, as actions, i.e. as achievements of a subjective will, have
the immediate character of being satisfactions of such a will and therefore of being something
positive. In order to make the action a good one, it is only a question of recognising this positive
aspect of the action as my intention, and this then becomes the essential aspect in virtue of which
the action is made good, simply because I recognise it as the good in my intention. Theft in order
to do good to the poor, theft or flight from battle for the sake of fulfilling one's duty to care for
one's life or one's family (a poor family perhaps into the bargain), murder out of hate or revenge
(i.e. in order to satisfy one's sense of one's own rights or of right in general, or one's sense of
another's wickedness, of wrong done by him to oneself or to others or to the world or the nation
at large, by extirpating this wicked individual who is wickedness incarnate, and thereby
contributing at least one's quota to the project of uprooting the bad) - all these actions are made
well intentioned and therefore good by this method of taking account of the positive aspect of their
content. Only the bare minimum of intelligence is required to discover in any action, as those
learned theologians can, a positive side and so a good reason for it and a good intention behind it.
Hence it has been said that in the strict sense there are no wicked men, since no one wills evil for
the sake of evil, i.e. no one wills a pure negative as such. On the contrary, everyone always wills
something positive, and therefore, on the view we are considering, something good. In this
abstract good the distinction between good and evil has vanished together with all concrete duties;
for this reason, simply to will the good and to have a good intention in acting is more like evil than
good, because the good willed is only this abstract form of good and therefore to make it concrete
devolves on the arbitrary Will of the subject. 

To this context there also belongs the notorious maxim: 'The end justifies the means.' In itself and
prima facie this expression is trivial and pointless. Quite so, one may retort in terms equally
general, a just end of course justifies the means, while an unjust end does not. The phrase: so 'If
the end is right, so is the means' is a tautology, since the means is precisely that which is nothing in
itself but is for the sake of something else, and therein, i.e. in the end, has its purpose and worth -
provided of course it be truly a means. 

But when someone says that the end justifies the means, his purport is not confined to this bare
tautology; he understands by the words something more specific, namely that to use as means to a
good end something which in itself is simply not a means at all, to violate something in itself
sacrosanct, in short to commit a crime as a means to a good end, is permissible and even one's
bounden duty. (i) There floats before the minds of those who say that the end justifies the means a
vague consciousness of the dialectic of the aforesaid 'positive' element in isolated legal or ethical
principles, or of such equally vague general maxims as: 'Thou shalt not kill', or 'Thou shalt take
thought for thy welfare and the welfare of thy family'. Executioners and soldiers have not merely
the right but the duty to kill men, though there it has been precisely laid down what kind of men
and what circumstances make the killing permissible and obligatory. So also my welfare and the
welfare of my family must be subordinated to higher ends and so reduced to means to their
attainment. (ii) And yet what bears the mark of crime is not a general maxim of that kind, left
vague and still subject to a dialectic; on the contrary, its specific character is already objectively
fixed. Now what is set up against such a determinate crime, what is supposed to have deprived
the crime of its criminal nature, is the justifying end, and this is simply subjective opinion about
what is good and better. What happens here is the same as what happens when the will stops at
willing good in the abstract, i.e. the absolute and valid determinate character assigned to good and
evil, right and wrong, is entirely swept away and the determination of them is ascribed instead to
the individual's feeling, imagination, and caprice. 

(e) Subjective opinion is at last expressly given out as the measuring-rod of right and duty and it is
supposed that the conviction which holds something to be right is to decide the ethical character of
an action. Since the good we will to do is here still without content, the principle of conviction only
adds the information that the subsumption of an action under the category of good is purely a
personal matter. If this be so, the very pretence of an ethical objectivity has totally disappeared. A
doctrine like this is directly connected with the self-styled philosophy, often mentioned already,
which denies that the truth is knowable - and the truth of mind qua will, the rationality of mind in its
self-actualising process, is the laws of ethics. Asserting, as such philosophising does, that the
knowledge of the true is an empty vanity, transcending the territory of science (which is supposed
to be mere appearance), it must in the matter of action at once find its principle also in the
apparent; thereby ethics is reduced to the special theory of life held by the individual and to his
private conviction: The degradation into which philosophy has thus sunk appears doubtless at a
first glance to be only an affair of supreme indifference, an occurrence confined to the trivial field
of academic futilities; but the view necessarily makes itself a home in ethics, an essential part of
philosophy; and it is then that the true meaning of these theories makes its first appearance in and
is apprehended by the world of actuality. 

The result of the dissemination of the view that subjective conviction, and it alone, decides the
ethical character of an action is that the charge of hypocrisy, once so frequent, is now rarely heard;
you can only qualify wickedness as hypocrisy on the assumption that certain actions are inherently
and actually misdeeds, vices and crimes, and that the defaulter is necessarily aware of them as
such, because he is aware of and recognises the principles and outward acts of piety and honesty
even in the pretence to which he misapplies them. In other words, it was generally assumed as
regards evil that it is a duty to know the good and to be aware of its distinction from evil. In any
case, however, it was an absolute injunction which forbade the commission of vicious and criminal
actions and which insisted on such actions being imputed to the agent, so far as he was a man and
not a beast. But if a good heart, a good intention, a subjective conviction are set forth as the
sources from which conduct derives its worth, then there is no longer any hypocrisy or immorality
at all; for whatever a man does, he can always justify by the reflection on it of good intentions and
motives, and by the influence of that conviction it is good. 

Footnote: 'That he feels completely convinced I have not the least doubt. But how many men are led by
such feelings of conviction into the worst of misdeeds! Besides, if everything may be excused on this ground,
then that terminates the rational judgement of good and wicked, honourable and shameful, resolutions. Lunacy
in that case would have equal rights with reason; or in other words reason would have no rights whatever, its
judgement would cease to have any validity. Its voice would be a minus quantity; truth would be the
possession of the man with no doubts! I tremble at the results of such toleration, for it would be exclusively to
the advantage of unreason.' (Jacobi 1802.) 

Thus there is no longer anything absolutely vicious or criminal; and instead of the abovementioned
frank and free, hardened and unperturbed sinner, we have the man who is conscious of being fully
justified by intention and conviction. My good intention in my action and my conviction of its
goodness make it good. We speak of judging and estimating an action; but on this principle it is
only the intention and conviction of the agent, his faith, by which he ought to be judged. Not,
however, his faith in the sense in which Christ requires faith in objective truth, so that on one who
has a false faith, i.e. a conviction bad in its content, the judgement to be pronounced must be a
condemnation, i.e. one in conformity with this content. On the contrary, faith here means fidelity to
conviction, and the question to be asked about action is: 'Has the agent in his acting kept true to
his conviction Fidelity to formal subjective conviction is thus made the sole measuring-rod of duty. 

This principle, under which conviction is expressly made something subjective, cannot but thrust
upon us the thought of possible error, with the further implied presupposition of an absolute law.
But the law is no agent; it is only the actual human being who acts. And, on the aforesaid principle,
the only question, in estimating the worth of human actions, is how far he has taken up the law into
his conviction. But if on this theory it is not actions which are to be judged, i.e. measured generally,
by that law, it is impossible to see what the law is for and what end it is to serve. Such a law is
degraded to a mere external letter, in fact to an empty word, if it is only my conviction which
makes it a law and invests it with obligatory force. 

Such a law may claim its authority from God or the state. It may even have behind it the authority
of tens of centuries during which it was the bond which gave men, with all their deeds and destiny,
coherence and subsistence. And these are authorities which enshrine the convictions of countless
individuals. Now if I set against these the authority of my single conviction - for as my subjective
conviction its sole validity is authority - that at first seems a piece of monstrous self-conceit, but in
virtue of the principle that subjective conviction is to be the measuring-rod, it is pronounced not to
be self-conceit at all. 

Even if reason and conscience - which shallow science and bad sophistry can never altogether
expel - admit with a noble illogicality that error is possible, still by describing crime, and evil
generally, as only an error, we minimise the fault. To err is human - who has not been mistaken on
one point or another, whether he had fresh or pickled cabbage for dinner yesterday, and about
innumerable other things of more or less importance? But the difference between importance and
triviality vanishes if everything turns on the subjectivity of conviction and on persistence in it. The
said noble illogicality which admits the possibility of error is inevitable then in the nature of the
case, but when it comes round to say that a wrong conviction is only an error, it only falls into a
further illogicality, the illogicality of dishonesty. At one moment conviction is made the basis of
ethics and of man's supreme value, and is thus pronounced the supreme and the sacrosanct; at
another, all we have to do with is error, and my conviction is something trivial and casual, in fact
something strictly external, which may turn out this way or that. Really, my being convinced is
something supremely trivial if I cannot know the truth; for then it is a matter of indifference how I
think, and all that is left to my thinking is that empty good, the abstraction to which the
Understanding reduces the good. 

One other point. It follows further, on this principle of justification by conviction, that logic requires
me, in dealing with the way others act against my action, to admit that they are quite in the right -
so far at any rate as they maintain with faith and conviction that my action is criminal. On such
logic, not merely do I gain nothing, I am even deposed from the post of liberty and honour into a
situation of slavery and dishonour. Justice, which in the abstract is mine as well as theirs, I feel only
as a foreign subjective conviction, and when it is executed on me, I fancy myself to be treated only
by an external force. 

(f) Finally, the supreme form in which this subjectivism is completely comprised and expressed is
the phenomenon which has been called by a name borrowed from Plato - 'Irony'. The name alone,
however, is taken from Plato; he used it to describe a way of speaking which Socrates employed
in conversation when defending the Idea of truth and justice against the conceit of the Sophists and
the uneducated. What he treated ironically, however, was only their type of mind, not the Idea
itself. Irony is only a manner of talking against people. Except as directed against persons, the
essential movement of thought is dialectic, and Plato was so far from regarding the dialectical in
itself, still less irony, as the last word in thought and a substitute for the Idea, that he terminated the
flux and reflux of thinking, let alone of a subjective opinion, and submerged it in the substantiality of
the Idea. 

Footnote: My colleague, the late Professor Solger, adopted the word 'irony' which Friedrich von Schlegel
brought into use at a comparatively early period of his literary career and enhanced to equivalence with the
said principle of subjectivity knowing itself as supreme. But Solger's finer mind was above such an
exaggeration; he had philosophic insight and so seized upon, emphasised, and retained only that part of
Schlegel's view which was dialectic in the strict sense, i.e. dialectic as the pulsating drive of speculative
inquiry. His last publication, a solid piece of work, a thorough Kritik ¨¹ber die Vorlesungen des Herrn August
Wilhelm von Schlegel ¨¹ber dramatische Kunst und Literatur, I find somewhat obscure, however, and I cannot
agree with the argument which he develops. 'True irony', he says, 'arises from the view that so long as man
lives in this present world, it is only in this world that he can fulfil his "appointed task" no matter how elevated
a sense we give to this expression. Any hope we may have of transcending finite ends is foolish and empty
conceit. 'Even the highest is existent for our conduct only in a shape that is limited and finite.' Rightly
understood, this is Platonic doctrine, and a true remark in rejection of what he has referred to earlier, the empty
striving towards the (abstract) infinite. But to say that the highest is existent in a limited and finite shape, like
the ethical order (and that order is in essence actual life and action), is very different from saving that the
highest thing is a finite end. The outward shape, the form of finitude, in no way deprives the content of ethical
life of its substantiality and the infinity inherent within it. Solger continues: 'And just for this reason the
highest is in us as negligible as the lowest and perishes of necessity with us and our nugatory thoughts and
feelings. The highest is truly existent in God alone, and as it perishes in us it is transfigured into something
divine, a divinity in which we would have had no share but for its immediate presence revealed in the very
disappearance of our actuality; now the mood to which this process directly comes home in human affairs is
tragic irony.' The arbitrary name 'irony' would be of no importance, but there is an obscurity here when it is said
that it is 'the highest' which perishes with our nothingness and that it is in the disappearance of our actuality
that the divine is first revealed; e.g. again (ibid., p. 91):'We see heroes beginning to wonder whether they have
erred in the noblest and finest elements of their feelings and sentiments, not only in regard to their successful
issue, but also to their source and their worth; indeed, what elevates us is the destruction of the best itself.'
(The just destruction of utter scoundrels and criminals who flaunt their villainy ¡ª the hero of a modern tragedy
Die Schuld, is one ¡ª has an interest for criminal law, but none at all for art proper which is what is in question
here.) The tragic destruction of figures whose ethical life is on the highest plane can interest and elevate us
and reconcile us to its occurrence only in so far as they come on the scene in opposition to one another
together with equally justified but different ethical powers which have come into collision through misfortune,
because the result is that then these figures acquire guilt through their opposition to an ethical law. Out of this
situation there arises the right and wrong of both parties and therefore the true ethical Idea, which, purified and
in triumph over this one-sidedness, is thereby reconciled in us. Accordingly, it is not the highest in us which
perishes; we are elevated not by the destruction of the best but by the triumph of the true. This it is which
constitutes the true, purely ethical, interest of ancient tragedy (in romantic tragedy the character of the interest
undergoes a certain modification). All this I have worked out in detail in my Phenomenology of Mind . But the
ethical Idea is actual and pregnant in the world of social institutions without the misfortune of tragic clashes
and the destruction of individuals overcome by this misfortune. And this Idea's (the highest's) revelation of
itself in its actuality as anything but a nullity is what the external embodiment of ethical life, the state, purposes
and effects, and what the ethical self-consciousness possesses, intuits, and knows in the state and what the
thinking mind comprehends there. 

The culminating form of this subjectivity which conceives itself as the final court of appeal ¡ª our
topic here ¡ª can be nothing except what was implicitly present already in its preceding forms,
namely subjectivity knowing itself as the arbiter and judge of truth, right, and duty. It consists then
in this, that it knows the objective ethical principles, but fails in self-forgetfulness and
self-renunciation to immerse itself in their seriousness and to base action upon them. Although
related to them, it holds itself aloof from them and knows itself as that which wills and decides
thus, although it may equally well will and decide otherwise. You actually accept a law, it says, and
respect it as absolute. So do 1, but I go further than you, because I am beyond this law and can
make it to suit myself It is not the thing that is excellent, but I who am so; as the master of law and
thing alike, I simply play with them as with my caprice; my consciously ironical attitude lets the
highest perish and I merely hug myself at the thought. This type of subjectivism not merely
substitutes a void for the whole content of ethics, right, duties, and laws ¡ª and so is evil, in fact
evil through and through and universally ¡ª but in addition its form is a subjective void, i.e. it knows
itself as this contentless void and in this knowledge knows itself as absolute. 

In my Phenomenology of Mind, I have shown how this absolute self-complacency fails to rest in
a solitary worship of itself but builds up a sort of community whose bond and substance is, e.g.,
the 'mutual Asseveration of conscientiousness and good intentions, the enjoyment of this mutual
purity', but is above all 'the refreshment derived from the glory of this self-knowledge and
self-expression, from the glory of fostering and cherishing this experience'. I have shown also how
what has been called a 'beautiful soul' ¡ª that still nobler type of subjectivism which empties the
objective of all content and so fades away until it loses all actuality ¡ª is a variation of subjectivism
like other forms of the same phenomenon akin to the series of them here considered. What is said
here may be compared with the entire section (C), 'Conscience', in the Phenomenology,
especially the part dealing with the transition to a higher stage ¡ª a stage, however, there different
in characters 

Addition: Representative thinking may go further and pervert the evil will into a show of
goodness. Although it cannot alter the nature of evil, it can invest it with a show of goodness. Since
every action has a positive aspect, and since the category of good as opposed to evil is likewise
reduced to positivity, I may claim that my action in its bearing on my intention is good. Thus evil
has good linked with it not only in my consciousness but also if we look at my action on its positive
side. When self-consciousness gives out, to others only, that its action is good, this form of
subjectivism is hypocrisy. But if it goes so far as to claim that the deed is good in its own eyes
also, then we have a still higher peak of the subjectivism which knows itself as absolute. For this
type of mind absolute good and absolute evil have both vanished, and the subject is therefore at
liberty to pass himself off at discretion as anything he likes. This is the position of the absolute
sophistry which usurps the office of lawgiver and rests the distinction between good and evil on its
own caprice. The chief hypocrites are the pious ones (the Tartuffes) who are punctilious in every
ritual observance and may even be religious to all appearance, while yet they do just as they
please. There is little mention of hypocrites nowadays, partly because the accusation of hypocrisy
seems to be too harsh; partly, however, because hypocrisy in its naive form has more or less
disappeared. This downright falsehood, this veneer of goodness, has now become too transparent
not to be seen through, and the divorce between doing good with one hand and evil with the other
no longer occurs, since advancing culture has weakened the opposition between these categories. 

Instead, hypocrisy has now assumed the subtler form of Probabilism, which involves the agent's
attempt to represent a transgression as something good from the point of view of his private
conscience. This doctrine can only arise when the moral and the good are determined by authority,
with the result that there are as many reasons as there are authorities for supposing that evil is
good. Casuist theologians, Jesuits especially, have worked up these cases of conscience and
multiplied them ad infinitum. 

These cases have now been elaborated to such a high degree of subtlety that numerous clashes
have arisen between them, and the opposition between good and evil has become so weak that in
single instances they appear to turn into one another. The only desideratum now is probability, i.e.
something approximately good, something which may be supported by any single reason or
authority. Thus the special characteristic of this attitude is that its content is purely abstract; it sets
up the concrete content as something inessential or rather abandons it to bare opinion. On this
principle, anyone may have committed a crime and yet have willed the good. For example, if a
bad character is murdered, the positive side of the action may be given out to be the withstanding
of evil and the will to diminish it. 

Now the next step beyond Probabilism is that it is no longer a question of someone else's
statement or authority; it is a question only of the subject himself, i.e. of his own convictions
conviction which alone is able to make a thing good. The defect here is that everything is supposed
to fall within the orbit of conviction alone and that the absolutely right, for which this conviction
should be only the form, no longer exists. It is certainly not a matter of indifference whether I do
something by habit and custom or because I am actuated throughout by the truth which underlies
these. But objective truth is still different from my conviction, because conviction lacks the
distinction between good and evil. Conviction always remains conviction, and the bad could only
be that of which I am not convinced. 

Now while this obliteration of good and evil implies a very lofty attitude, there is involved in this
attitude the admission that it is subject to error, and to that extent it is brought down from its
pedestal into mere fortuitousness and seems undeserving of respect. Now this form of subjectivism
is irony, the consciousness that this principle of conviction is not worth much and that, lofty
criterion though it be, it is only caprice that governs it. This attitude is really a product of Fichte's
philosophy, which proclaims that the Ego is absolute, i.e. is absolute certainty, the 'universal
self-hood' which advances through a course of further development to objectivity. Of Fichte
himself it cannot property be said that he made subjective caprice a guiding principle in ethics, but,
later on, this principle of the mere particular, in the sense of 'particular self-hood', was deified by
Friedrich von Schlegel with reference to the good and the beautiful. As a result, he made objective
goodness only an image of my conviction, receiving support from my efforts alone, and dependent
for its appearance and disappearance on me as its lord and master. If I relate myself to something
objective, it vanishes at the same moment before my eyes, and so I hover over a pit of
nothingness, summoning shapes from the depths and annihilating them. This supreme type of
subjectivism can emerge only in a period of advanced culture when faith has lost its seriousness,
and its essence is simply 'all is vanity'. 

                 Transition from Morality to Ethical Life

                                 ¡ì 141.

For the good as the substantial universal of freedom, but as something still
abstract, there are therefore required determinate characteristics of some sort and
the principle for determining them, though a principle identical with the good
itself. For conscience similarly, as the purely abstract principle of determination, it
is required that its decisions shall be universal and objective. If good and
conscience are each kept abstract and thereby elevated to independent totalities,
then both become the indeterminate which ought to be determined. But the
integration of these two relative totalities into an ¡ª absolute identity has already
been implicitly achieved in that this very subjectivity of pure self-certainty, aware
in its vacuity of its gradual evaporation, is identical with the abstract universality
of the good. The identity of the good with the subjective will, an identity which
therefore is concrete and the truth of them both, is Ethical Life. 

Remark: The details of such a transition of the concept are made intelligible in logic. Here,
however, it need only be said that it is the nature of the restricted and the finite (i.e. here the
abstract good which only ought to :be [but is not], and the equally abstract subjectivity which only
ought 'to be good [but is not]) to have its opposite implicit within it, the good its actuality, and
subjectivity (the moment in which ethical life is actual) the good; but since they are one-sided they
are not yet posited in accordance with their implicit nature. They become so posited in their
negation. That is to say, in their one-sidedness, when each is bent on declining to have in it what is
in it implicitly ¡ª when the good is without subjectivity and a determinate character, and the
determining principle, subjectivity, is without what is implicit within it ¡ª and when both build
themselves into independent totalities, they are annulled and thereby reduced to moments, to
moments of the concept which becomes manifest as their unity and, having acquired reality
precisely through this positing of its moments, is now present as Idea ¡ª as the concept which has
matured its determinations to reality and at the same time is present in their identity as their implicit
essence. 

The embodiment of freedom which was [a] first of all immediate as right, is [b] characterised in the
reflection of self-consciousness as good. [c] The third stage, originating here, in its transition from
[b] to ethical life, as the truth of good and subjectivity, is therefore the truth both of subjectivity
and right. Ethical life is a subjective disposition, but one imbued with what is inherently right. The
fact that this Idea is the truth of the concept of freedom is something which, in philosophy, must be
proved, not presupposed, not adopted from feeling or elsewhere. This demonstration is contained
only in the fact that right and the moral self-consciousness both display in themselves their
regression to this Idea as their outcome. Those who hope to be able to dispense with proof and
demonstration in philosophy show thereby that they are still far from knowing the first thing about
what philosophy is. On other topics argue they may, but in philosophy they have no right to join in
the argument if they wish to argue without the concept. 

Addition: Each of the two principles hitherto discussed, namely good in the abstract and
conscience, is defective in lacking its opposite. Good in the abstract evaporates into something
completely powerless, into which I may introduce any and every content, while the subjectivity of
mind becomes just as worthless because it lacks any objective significance. Thus a longing may
arise for an objective order in which man gladly degrades himself to servitude and total subjection,
if only to escape the torment of vacuity and negation. Many Protestants have recently gone over to
the Roman Catholic Church, and they have done so because they found their inner life worthless
and grasped at something fixed, at a support, an authority, even if it was not exactly the stability of
thought which they caught. 

The unity of the subjective with the objective and absolute good is ethical life, and in it we find the
reconciliation which accords with the concept. Morality is the form of the will in general on its
subjective side. Ethical life is more than the subjective form and the self-determination of the will;
in addition it has as its content the concept of the will, namely freedom. The right and the moral
cannot exist independently; they must have the ethical as their support and foundation, for the right
lacks the moment of subjectivity, while morality in turn possesses that moment alone, and
consequently both the right and the moral lack actuality by themselves. Only the infinite, the Idea,
is actual. Right exists only as a branch of a whole or like the ivy which twines itself round a tree
firmly rooted on its own account. 




Third Part: Ethical Life

                               ¡ì 142.

Ethical life is the Idea of freedom in that on the one hand it is the good become
alive ¡ª the good endowed in self-consciousness with knowing and willing and
actualised by self-conscious action ¡ª while on the other hand self-consciousness
has in the ethical realm its absolute foundation and the end which actuates its
effort. Thus ethical life is the concept of freedom developed into the existing
world and the nature of self-consciousness. 

                                 ¡ì 143.

Since this unity of the concept of the will with its embodiment ¡ª i.e. the particular
will ¡ª is knowing, consciousness of the distinction between these two moments
of the Idea is present, but present in such a way that now each of these moments
is in its own eyes the totality of the Idea and has that totality as its foundation and
content. 

                                 ¡ì 144.

[a] The objective ethical order, which comes on the scene in place of good in the
abstract, is substance made concrete by subjectivity as infinite form. Hence it
posits within itself distinctions whose specific character is thereby determined by
the concept, and which endow the ethical order with a stable content
independently necessary and subsistent in exaltation above subjective opinion and
caprice. These distinctions are absolutely valid laws and institutions. 

Addition: Throughout ethical life the objective and subjective moments are alike present, but
both of them are only its forms. Its substance is the good, i.e. the objective is filled with
subjectivity. If we consider ethical life from the objective standpoint, we may say that in it we are
ethical unselfconsciously. In this sense, Antigone proclaims that 'no one knows whence the laws
come; they are everlasting', i.e. their determinate character is absolute and has its source in the
nature of the thing. None the less, however, the substance of ethical life has a consciousness also,
though the status of this consciousness is never higher than that of being one moment. 

                                 ¡ì 145.

It is the fact that the ethical order is the system of these specific determinations of
the Idea which constitutes its rationality. Hence the ethical order is freedom or the
absolute will as what is objective, a circle of necessity whose moments are the
ethical powers which regulate the life of individuals. To these powers individuals
are related as accidents to substance, and it is in individuals that these powers are
represented, have the shape of appearance, and become actualised. 

Addition: Since the laws and institutions of the ethical order make up the concept of freedom,
they are the substance or universal essence of individuals, who are thus related to them as
accidents only. Whether the individual exists or not is all one to the objective ethical order. It alone
is permanent and is the power regulating the life of individuals. Thus the ethical order has been
represented by mankind as eternal justice, as gods absolutely existent, in contrast with which the
empty business of individuals is only a game of see-saw. 

                                 ¡ì 146.

[b] The substantial order, in the self-consciousness which it has thus actually
attained in individuals, knows itself and so is an object of knowledge. This ethical
substance and its laws and powers are on the one hand an object over against the
subject, and from his point of view they are ¡ª are in the highest sense of
self-subsistent being. This is an absolute authority and power infinitely more
firmly established than the being of nature. 

Remark: The sun, the moon, mountains, rivers, and the natural objects of all kinds by which we
are surrounded, are. For consciousness they have the authority not only of mere being but also of
possessing a particular nature which it accepts and to which it adjusts itself in dealing with them,
using them, or in being otherwise concerned with them. The authority of ethical laws is infinitely
higher, because natural objects conceal rationality under the cloak of contingency and exhibit it
only in their utterly external and disconnected way. 

                                 ¡ì 147.

On the other hand, they are not something alien to the subject. On the contrary,
his spirit bears witness to them as to its own essence, the essence in which he has
a feeling of his selfhood, and in which he lives as in his own element which is not
distinguished from himself. The subject is thus directly linked to the ethical order
by a relation which is more like an identity than even the relation of faith or trust. 

Remark: Faith and trust emerge along with reflection; they presuppose the power of forming
ideas and making distinctions. For example, it is one thing to be a pagan, a different thing to
believe in a pagan religion. This relation or rather this absence of relation, this identity in which the
ethical order is the actual living soul of self-consciousness, can no doubt pass over into a relation
of faith and conviction and into a relation produced by means of further reflection, i.e. into an
insight due to reasoning starting perhaps from some particular purposes interests, and
considerations, from fear or hope, or from historical conditions. But adequate knowledge of this
identity depends on thinking in terms of the concept. 

                                 ¡ì 148.

As substantive in character, these laws and institutions are duties binding on the
will of the individual, because as subjective, as inherently undetermined, or
determined as particular, he distinguishes himself from them and hence stands
related to them as to the substance of his own being. 

Remark: The 'doctrine of duties' in moral philosophy (I mean the objective doctrine, not that
which is supposed to be contained in the empty principle of moral subjectivity, because that
principle determines nothing ¡ª (see ¡ì 134) is therefore comprised in the systematic development
of the circle of ethical necessity which follows in this Third Part. The difference between the
exposition in this book and the form of a 'doctrine of duties' lies solely in the fact that, in what
follows, the specific types of ethical life turn up as necessary relationships; there the exposition
ends, without being supplemented in each case by the addition that 'therefore men have a duty to
conform to this institution'. 

A 'doctrine of duties' which is other than a philosophical science takes its material from existing
relationships and shows its connection with the moralist's personal notions or with principles and
thoughts, purposes, impulses, feelings, &c., that are forthcoming everywhere; and as reasons for
accepting each duty in turn, it may tack on its further consequences in their bearing on the other
ethical relationships or on welfare and opinion. But an immanent and logical 'doctrine of duties' can
be nothing except the serial exposition of the relationships which are necessitated by the Idea of
freedom and are therefore actual in their entirety, to within the state. 

                                 ¡ì 149.

The bond of duty can appear as a restriction only on indeterminate subjectivity or
abstract freedom, and on the impulses either of the natural will or of the moral
will which determines its indeterminate good arbitrarily. The truth is, however,
that in duty the individual finds his liberation; first, liberation from dependence on
mere natural impulse and from the depression which as a particular subject he
cannot escape in his moral reflections on what ought to be and what might be;
secondly, liberation from the indeterminate subjectivity which, never reaching
reality or the objective determinacy of action, remains self-enclosed and devoid of
actuality. In duty the individual acquires his substantive freedom. 

Addition: Duty is a restriction only on the self-will of subjectivity. It stands in the way only of
that abstract good to which subjectivity adheres. When we say: 'We want to be free', the primary
meaning of the words is simply: 'We want abstract freedom', and every institution and every organ
of the state passes as a restriction on freedom of that kind. Thus duty is not a restriction on
freedom, but only on freedom in the abstract, i.e. on unfreedom. Duty is the attainment of our
essence, the winning of positive freedom. 

                                 ¡ì 150.

Virtue is the ethical order reflected in the individual character so far as that
character is determined by its natural endowment. When virtue displays itself
solely as the individual's simple conformity with the duties of the station to which
he belongs, it is rectitude. 

Remark: In an ethical community, it is easy to say what man must do, what are the duties he
has to fulfil in order to be virtuous: he has simply to follow the well-known and explicit rules of his
own situation. Rectitude is the general character which may be demanded of him by law or
custom. But from the standpoint of morality, rectitude often seems to be something comparatively
inferior, something beyond which still higher demands must be made on oneself and others,
because the craving to be something special is not satisfied with what is absolute and universal; it
finds consciousness of peculiarity only in what is exceptional. 

The various facets of rectitude may equally well be called virtues, since they are also properties of
the individual, although not specially of him in contrast with others. Talk about virtue, however,
readily borders on empty rhetoric, because it is only about something abstract and indeterminate;
and furthermore, argumentative and expository talk of the sort is addressed to the individual as to
a being of caprice and subjective inclination. In an existing ethical order in which a complete
system of ethical relations has been developed and actualised, virtue in the strict sense of the word
is in place and actually appears only in exceptional circumstances or when one obligation clashes
with another. The clash, however, must be a genuine one, because moral reflection can
manufacture clashes of all sorts to suit its purpose and give itself a consciousness of being
something special and having. made sacrifices. It is for this reason that the phenomenon of virtue
proper is commoner when societies and communities are uncivilised, since in those circumstances
ethical conditions and their actualisation are more a matter of private choice or the natural genius
of an exceptional individual. For instance, it was especially to Hercules that the ancients ascribed
virtue. In the states of antiquity, ethical life had not grown into this free system of an objective
order self-subsistently developed, and consequently it was by the personal genius of individuals
that this defect had to be made good. It follows that if a 'doctrine of virtues' is not a mere 'doctrine
of duties', and if therefore it embraces the particular facet of character, the facet grounded in
natural endowment, it will be a natural history of mind. 

Since virtues are ethical principles applied to the particular, and since in this their subjective aspect
they are something indeterminate, there turns up here for determining them the quantitative
principle of more or less. The result is that consideration of them introduces their corresponding
defects or vices, as in Aristotle, who defined each particular virtue as strictly a mean between an
excess and a deficiency. 

The content which assumes the form of duties and then virtues is the same as that which also has
the form of impulses (see Remark to ¡ì 19). Impulses have the same basic content as duties and
virtues, but in impulses this content still belongs to the immediate will and to instinctive feeling; it
has not been developed to the point of, becoming ethical. Consequently, impulses have in common
with the content of duties and virtues only the abstract object on which they are directed, an
object indeterminate in itself, and so devoid of anything to discriminate them as good or evil. Or in
other words, impulses, considered abstractly in their positive aspect alone, are good, while,
considered abstractly in their negative aspect alone, they are evil (see ¡ì 18). 

Addition: To conform to the ethical order on this or that particular occasion is hardly enough to
make a man virtuous; he is virtuous only when this mode of behaviour is a fixed element in his
character. Virtue is rather like ethical virtuosity, [Heroes ('ethical virtuosi') lived in uncivilised
conditions (see Addition to ¡ì 93) and there was no ethical life in society as they found it; but since
they introduced ethical institutions for the first time (see Remarks to ¡ì¡ì 167 and 203), they
displayed virtue as a kind of virtuosity. Nowadays, ethical life is common to everyone and consists
in conformity to the existing order, not in divergence from it.] and the reason why we speak of
virtue less nowadays than formerly is that ethical living is less like the form of a particular
individuals character. The French are par excellence the people who speak most of virtue, and
the reason is that amongst them ethical life in the individuals is more a matter of his own
idiosyncrasies or a natural mode of conduct. The Germans, on the other hand, are more
thoughtful, and amongst them the same content acquires the form of universality. 

                                 ¡ì 151.

But when individuals are simply identified with the actual order, ethical life (das
Sittliche) appears as their general mode of conduct, i.e. as custom (Sitte), while
the habitual practice of ethical living appears as a second nature which, put in the
place of the initial, purely natural will, is the soul of custom permeating it through
and through, the significance and the actuality of its existence. It is mind living
and present as a world, and the substance of mind thus exists now for the first
time as mind. 

Addition: Just as nature has its laws, and as animals, trees, and the sun fulfil their law, so
custom (Sitte) is the law appropriate to free mind. Right and morality are not yet what ethics
(Sitte) is, namely mind. In right, particularity is still not the particularity of the concept, but only that
of the natural will. So, too, at the standpoint of morality, self-consciousness is not yet mind's
consciousness of itself. At that level it is only the worth of the subject in himself that is in question,
i.e. the subject who determines himself by reference to good in contrast with evil, who still has
self-will as the form of his willing. Here, however, at the standpoint of ethics, the will is mind's will
and it has a content which is substantive and in conformity with itself. 

Education is the art of making men ethical. It begins with pupils whose life is at the instinctive level
and shows them the way to a second birth, the way to change their instinctive nature into a
second, intellectual, nature, and makes this intellectual level habitual to them. At this point the clash
between the natural and the subjective will disappears, the subject's internal struggle dies away. To
this extent, habit is part of ethical life as it is of philosophic thought also, since such thought
demands that mind be trained against capricious fancies, and that these be destroyed and
overcome to leave the way clear for rational thinking. It is true that a man is killed by habit, i.e. if
he has once come to feel completely at home in life, if he has become mentally and physically dull,
and if the clash between subjective consciousness and mental activity has disappeared; for man is
active only in so far as he has not attained his end and wills to develop his potentialities and
vindicate himself in struggling to attain it. When this has been fully achieved, activity and vitality are
at an end, and the result - loss of interest in life - is mental or physical death. 

                                 ¡ì 152.

In this way the ethical substantial order has attained its right, and its right its
validity. That is to say, the self-will of the individual has vanished together with
his private conscience which had claimed independence and opposed itself to the
ethical substance. For, when his character is ethical, he recognises as the end
which moves him to act the universal which is itself unmoved but is disclosed in
its specific determinations as rationality actualised. He knows that his own dignity
and the whole stability of his particular ends are grounded in this same universal,
and it is therein that he actually attains these. Subjectivity is itself the absolute
form and existent actuality of the substantial order, and the distinction between
subject on the one hand and substance on the other, as the object, end, and
controlling power of the subject, is the same as, and has vanished directly along
with, the distinction between them in form. 

Remark: Subjectivity. is the ground wherein the concept of freedom is realised (see ¡ì 106). At
the level of morality, subjectivity is still distinct from freedom, the concept of subjectivity; but at the
level of ethical life it is the realisation of the concept in a way adequate to the concept itself. 

                                 ¡ì 153.

The right of individuals to be subjectively destined to freedom is fulfilled when
they belong to an actual ethical order, because their conviction of their freedom
finds its truth in such an objective order, and it is in an ethical order that they are
actually in possession of their own essence or their own inner universality (see ¡ì
147). 

Remark: When a father inquired about the best method of educating his son in ethical conduct,
a Pythagorean replied: 'Make him a citizen of a state with good laws.' (The phrase has also been
attributed to others.) 

Addition: The educational experiments, advocated by Rousseau in Emile, of withdrawing
children from the common life of every day and bringing them up in the country, have turned out to
be futile, since no success can attend an attempt to estrange people from the laws of the world.
Even if the young have to be educated in solitude, it is still useless to hope that the fragrance of the
intellectual world will not ultimately permeate this solitude or that the power of the world mind is
too feeble to gain the mastery of those outlying regions. It is by becoming a citizen of a good state
that the individual first comes into his right. 

                                 ¡ì 154.

The right of individuals to their particular satisfaction is also contained in the
ethical substantial order, since particularity is the outward appearance of the
ethical order ¡ª a mode in which that order is existent. 

                                 ¡ì 155.

Hence in this identity of the universal will with the particular will, right and duty
coalesce, and by being in the ethical order a man has rights in so far as he has
duties, and duties in so far as he has rights. In the sphere of abstract right, I have
the right and another has the corresponding duty. In the moral sphere, the right of
my private judgement and will, as well as of my happiness, has not, but only
ought to have, coalesced with duties and become objective. 

Addition: A slave can have no duties; only a free man has them. If all rights were put on one
side and all duties on the other, the whole would be dissolved, since their identity alone is the
fundamental thing, and it is to this that we have here to hold fast. 

                                 ¡ì 156.

The ethical substance, as containing independent self-consciousness united with
its concept, is the actual mind of a family and a nation. 

Addition: Ethical life is not abstract like the good, but is intensely actual. Mind has actuality, and
individuals are accidents of this actuality. Thus in dealing with ethical life, only two views are
possible: either we start from the substantiality of the ethical order, or else we proceed
atomistically and build on the basis of s ingle individuals. This second point of view excludes mind
because it leads only to a juxtaposition. Mind, however, is not something single, but is the unity of
the single and the universal. 

                                 ¡ì 157.

The concept of this Idea has being only as mind, as something knowing itself and
actual, because it is the objectification of itself, the movement running through the
form of its moments. It is therefore 

(A) ethical mind in its natural or immediate phase ¡ª the Family. This
substantiality loses its unity, passes over into division, and into the phase of
relation, i.e. into 

(B) Civil Society ¡ª an association of members as self-subsistent individuals in a
universality which, because of their self-subsistence, is only abstract. Their
association is brought about by their needs, by the legal system ¡ª the means to
security of person and property ¡ª and by an external organisation for attaining
their particular and common interests. This external state 

(C) is brought back, to and welded into unity in the Constitution of the State
which is the end and actuality of both the substantial universal order and the
public life devoted thereto. 




Third Part: Ethical Life
                i The Family

 (a): Marriage - (b) Family Capital - C: Children & Dissolution


                               ¡ì 158.

The family, as the immediate substantiality of mind, is specifically characterised
by love, which is mind's feeling of its own unity. Hence in a family, one's frame
of mind is to have self-consciousness of one's individuality within this unity as the
absolute essence of oneself, with the result that one is in it not as an independent
person but as a member. 

Addition: Love means in general terms the consciousness of my unity with another, so that I am
not in selfish isolation but win my self-consciousness only as the renunciation of my independence
and through knowing myself as the unity of myself with another and of the other with me. Love,
however, is feeling, i.e. ethical life in the form of something natural. In the state, feeling disappears;
there we are conscious of unity as law; there the content must be rational and known to us. The
first moment in love is that I do not wish to be a self-subsistent and independent person and that, if
I were, then I would feel defective and incomplete. The second moment is that I find myself in
another person, that I count for something in the other, while the other in turn comes to count for
something in me. Love, therefore, is the most tremendous contradiction; the Understanding cannot
resolve it since there is nothing more stubborn than this point (Punktualit?t) of self-consciousness
which is negated and which nevertheless I ought to possess as affirmative. Love is at once the
propounding and the resolving of this contradiction. As the resolving of it, love is unity of an ethical
type. 

                                ¡ì 159.

The right which the individual enjoys on the strength of the family unity and
which is in the first place simply the individual's life within this unity, takes on the
form of right (as the abstract moment of determinate individuality) only when the
family begins to dissolve. At that point those who should be family-members both
in their inclination and in actuality begin to be self-subsistent persons, and
whereas they formerly constituted one specific moment within the whole, they
now receive their share separately and so only in an external fashion by way of
money, food, educational expenses, and the like. 

Addition: The right of the family properly consists in the fact that its substantiality should have
determinate existence. Thus it is a right against externality and against secessions from the family
unity. On the other hand, to repeat, love is a feeling, something subjective, against which unity
cannot make itself effective. The demand for unity can be sustained, then, only in relation to such
things as are by nature external and not conditioned by feeling. 

                                 ¡ì 160.

The family is completed in these three phases: 

(a) Marriage, the form assumed by the concept of the family in its immediate
phase; 
(b) Family Property and Capital (the external embodiment of the concept) and
attention to these; 
(c) The Education of Children and the Dissolution of the Family. 

                               A. Marriage
                               ¡ì 161.

Marriage, as the immediate type of ethical relationship, contains first, the moment
of physical life; and since marriage is a substantial tie, the life involved in it is life
in its totality, i.e. as the actuality of the race and its life-process. But, secondly, in
self-consciousness the natural sexual union-a union purely inward or implicit and
for that very reason existent as purely external -is changed into a union on the
level of mind, into self-conscious love. 

Addition: Marriage is in essence an ethical tie. Formerly, especially in most systems of natural
law, attention was paid only to the physical side of marriage or to its natural character.
Consequently, it was treated only as a sex relationship, and this completely barred the way to its
other characteristics. This is crude enough, but it is no less so to think of it as only a civil contract,
and even Kant does this. On this view, the parties are bound by a contract of mutual caprice, and
marriage is thus degraded to the level of a contract for reciprocal use. A third view of marriage is
that which bases it on love alone, but this must be rejected like the other two, since love is only a
feeling and so is exposed in every respect to contingency, a guise which ethical life may not
assume. Marriage, therefore, is to be more precisely characterised as ethico-legal (rechtlich
sittliche) love, and this eliminates from marriage the transient, fickle, and purely subjective aspects
of love. 

                                 ¡ì 162.

On the subjective side, marriage may have a more obvious source in the
particular inclination of the two persons who are entering upon the marriage tie,
or in the foresight and contrivance of the parents, and so forth. But its objective
source lies in the free consent of the persons, especially in their consent to make
themselves one person, to renounce their natural and individual personality to this
unity of one with the other. From this point of view, their union is a
self-restriction, but in fact it is their liberation, because in it they attain their
substantive self-consciousness. 

Remark: Our objectively appointed end and so our ethical duty is to enter the married state.
The external origin of any particular marriage is in the lure of the case contingent, and it depends
principally on the extent which reflective thought has been developed. At one extreme, the step is
that the marriage is arranged by the contrivance of benevolent parents; the appointed end of the
parties is a union of mutual love, their inclination to marry arises from the fact that each grows
acquainted with the other from the first as a destined partner. At the other extreme, it is the
inclination of the parties which comes first, appearing in them as these two infinitely particularised
individuals. The more ethical way to matrimony may be taken to be the former extreme or any
way at all whereby the decision to marry comes first and the inclination to do so follows, so that in
the actual wedding both decision and inclination coalesce. In the latter extreme, it is the uniqueness
of the infinitely particularised which makes good its claims in accordance with the subjective
principle of the modern world (see Remark to ¡ì 124). 

But those works of modern art, dramatic and other, in which the love of the sexes is the main
interest, are pervaded by a chill despite the heat of passion they portray, for they associate the
passion with accident throughout and represent the entire dramatic interest as if it rested solely on
the characters as these individuals; what rests on them may indeed be of infinite importance to
them, but is of none whatever in itself. 

Addition: Amongst peoples who hold the female sex in scant respect, marriages are arranged
by the parents at will without consulting the young people. The latter raise no objection, since at
that level of culture the particularity of feeling makes no claims for itself. For the woman it is only a
matter of getting a husband, for the man, of getting a wife. In other social conditions,
considerations of wealth, connections, political ends, may be the determining factor. In such
circumstances, great hardships may arise through making marriage a means to other ends.
Nowadays, however, the subjective origin of marriage, the state of being in love, is regarded as
the only important originating factor. Here the position is represented to be that a man must wait
until his hour has struck and that he can bestow his love only on one specific individual. 

                                 ¡ì 163. 

The ethical aspect of marriage consists in the parties' consciousness of this unity
as their substantive aim, and so in their love, trust, and common sharing of their
entire existence as individuals. When the parties are in this frame of mind and
their union is actual, their physical passion sinks to the level of a physical
moment, destined to vanish in its very satisfaction. On the other hand, the
spiritual bond of union secures its rights as the substance of marriage and thus
rises, inherently indissoluble, to a plane above the contingency of passion and the
transience of particular caprice. 

Remark: It was noted above (in ¡ì 75) that marriage, so far as its essential basis is concerned, is
not a contractual relation. On the contrary, though marriage begins in contract, it is precisely a
contract to transcend the standpoint of contract, the standpoint from which persons are regarded
in their individuality as self-subsistent units. The identification of personalities, whereby the family
becomes one person and its members become its accidents (though substance is in essence the
relation of accidents to itself), is the ethical mind. Taken by itself and stripped of the manifold
externals of which it is possessed owing to its embodiment in these individuals and the interests of
the phenomenal realm, interests limited in time and numerous other ways, this mind emerges in a
shape for representative thinking and has been revered as Penates, &c.; and in general it is in this
mind that the religious character of marriage and the family, or pietas, is grounded. It is a further
abstraction still to separate the divine, or the substantive, from its body, and then to stamp it,
together with the feeling and consciousness of mental unity, as what is falsely called 'Platonic' love.
This separation is in keeping with the monastic doctrine which characterises the moment of
physical life as purely negative and which, precisely by thus separating the physical from the
mental, endows the former by itself with infinite importance. 

Addition: The distinction between marriage and concubinage is that the latter is chiefly a matter
of satisfying natural desire, while this satisfaction is made secondary in the former. It is for this
reason that physical experiences may be mentioned in married life without a blush, although
outside the marriage tie their mention would produce a sense of shame. But it is on this account,
too, that marriage must be regarded as in principle indissoluble, for the end of marriage is the
ethical end, an end so lofty that everything else is manifestly powerless against it and made subject
to it. Marriage is not to be dissolved because of passion, since passion is subordinate to it. But it is
not indissoluble except in principle, since as Christ says, only 'for the hardness of your heart' is
divorce established. Since marriage has feeling for one of its moments, it is not absolute but weak
and potentially dissoluble. Legislators, however, must make its dissolution as difficult as possible
and uphold the right of the ethical order against caprice. 

                                 ¡ì 164. 

Mere agreement to the stipulated terms of a contrast in itself involves the genuine
transfer of the property in question (see ¡ì 79). Similarly, the solemn declaration
by the parties of their consent to enter the ethical bond of marriage, and its
corresponding recognition and confirmation by their family and community,
constitutes the formal completion and actuality of marriage. The knot is tied and
made ethical only after this ceremony, whereby through the use of signs, i.e. of
language (the most mental embodiment of mind - see ¡ì 78), the substantial thing
in the marriage is brought completely into being. As a result, the sensuous
moment, the one proper to physical life, is put into its ethical place as something
only consequential and accidental, belonging to the external embodiment of the
ethical bond, which indeed can subsist exclusively in reciprocal love and support. 

Remark: If with a view to framing or criticising legal enactments, the question is asked: what
should be regarded as the chief end of marriage?, the question may be taken to mean: which single
facet of marriage in its actuality is to be regarded as the most essential one? No one facet by itself,
however, makes up the whole range of its implicit and explicit content, i.e. of its ethical character,
and one or other of its facets may be lacking in an existing marriage without detriment to the
essence of marriage itself. 

It is in the actual conclusion of a marriage, i.e. in the wedding, that the essence of the tie is
expressed and established beyond dispute as something ethical, raised above the contingency of
feeling and private inclination. If this ceremony is taken as an external formality, a mere so-called
'civil requirement', it is thereby stripped of all significance except perhaps that of serving the
purpose of edification and attesting the civil relation of the parties. It is reduced indeed to a mere
fiat of a civil or ecclesiastical authority. As such it appears as something not merely indifferent to
the true nature of marriage, but actually alien to it. The heart is constrained by the law to attach a
value to the formal ceremony and the latter is looked upon merely as a condition which must
precede the complete mutual surrender of the parties to one another. As such it appears to bring
disunion into their loving disposition and, like an alien intruder, to thwart the inwardness of their
union. Such a doctrine ,.pretentiously claims to afford the highest conception of the freedom,
'inwardness, and perfection of love; but in fact it is a travesty of the ethical aspect of love, the
higher aspect which restrains purely sensual impulse and puts it in the background. Such restraint is
already present at the instinctive level in shame, and it rises to chastity and modesty as
consciousness becomes more specifically intelligent. In particular, the view just criticised casts
aside marriage's specifically ethical character, which consists in this, that the consciousness of the
parties is crystallised out of its physical and subjective mode and lifted to the thought of what is
substantive; instead of continually reserving to itself the contingency and caprice of bodily desire, it
removes the marriage bond from the province of this caprice, surrenders to the substantive, and
swears allegiance to the Penates; the physical moment it subordinates until it becomes something
wholly conditioned by the true and ethical character of the marriage relation and by the recognition
of the bond as an ethical one. It is effrontery and its buttress, the Understanding, which cannot
apprehend the speculative character of the substantial tie; nevertheless, with this speculative
character there correspond both ethical purity of heart and the legislation of Christian peoples. 

Addition: Friedrich von Schlegel in his Lucinde, and a follower of his in the Briefe eines
Ungenannten, I have put forward the view that the wedding ceremony is superfluous and a
formality which might be discarded. Their reason is that love is, so they say, the substance of
marriage and that the celebration therefore detracts from its worth. Surrender to sensual impulse is
here represented as necessary to prove the freedom and inwardness of love - an argument not
unknown to seducers. 

It must be noticed in connection with sex-relations that a girl in surrendering her body loses her
honour. With a man, however, the case is otherwise, because he has a field for ethical activity
outside the family. A girl is destined in essence for the marriage tie and for that only; it is therefore
demanded of her that her love shall take the form of marriage and that the different moments in
love shall attain their true rational relation to each other. 

                                 ¡ì 165. 

The difference in the physical characteristics of the two sexes has a rational basis
and consequently acquires an intellectual and ethical significance. This
significance is determined by the difference into which the ethical substantiality,
as the concept, internally sunders itself in order that its vitality may become a
concrete unity consequent upon this difference. 

                                 ¡ì 166. 

Thus one sex is mind in its self-diremption into explicit personal self-subsistence
and the knowledge and volition of free universality, i.e. the self-consciousness of
conceptual thought and the volition of the objective final end. The other sex is
mind maintaining itself in unity as knowledge and volition of the substantive, but
knowledge and volition in the form of concrete individuality and feeling. In
relation to externality, the former is powerful and active, the latter passive and
subjective. It follows that man has his actual substantive life in the state, in
learning, and so forth, as well as in labour and struggle with the external world
and with himself so that it is only out of his diremption that he fights his way to
self-subsistent unity with himself. In the family he has a tranquil intuition of this
unity, and there he lives a subjective ethical life on the plane of feeling. Woman,
on the other hand, has her substantive destiny in the family, and to be imbued
with family piety is her ethical frame of mind. 

Remark: For this reason, family piety is expounded in Sophocles' Antigone - one of the most
sublime presentations of this virtue - as principally the law of woman, and as the law of a
substantiality at once subjective and on the plane of feeling, the law of the inward life, a life which
has not yet attained its full actualisation; as the law of the ancient gods, 'the Gods of the
underworld; as 'an everlasting law, and no man knows at what time it was first put forth'. This law
is there displayed as a law opposed to public law, to the law of the land. This is the supreme
opposition in ethics and therefore in tragedy; and it is individualised in the same play in the
opposing natures of man and woman. 

Addition: Women are capable of education, but they are not made for activities which demand
a universal faculty such as the more advanced sciences, philosophy, and certain forms of artistic
production. Women may have happy ideas, taste, and elegance, but they cannot attain to the ideal.
(Ideale. By this word Hegel means 'the Beautiful and whatever tends thither' (Science of Logic, i.
163, footnote). It is to be distinguished, therefore, from Ideelle] The difference between men and
women is like that between animals and plants. Men correspond to animals, while women
correspond to plants because their development is more placid and the principle that underlies it is
the rather vague unity of feeling. When women hold the helm of government, the state is at once in
jeopardy, because women regulate their actions not by the demands of universality but by
arbitrary inclinations and opinions. Women are educated - who knows how? - as it were by
breathing in ideas, by living rather than by acquiring knowledge. The status of manhood, on the
other hand, is attained only by the stress of thought and much technical exertion. 

                                 ¡ì 167. 

In essence marriage is monogamy because it is personality - immediate exclusive
individuality - which enters into this tie and surrenders itself to it; and hence the
tie's truth and inwardness (i.e. the subjective form of its substantiality) proceeds
only from the mutual, whole-hearted, surrender of this personality. Personality
attains its right of being conscious of itself in another only in so far as the other is
in this identical relationship as a person, i.e. as an atomic individual. 

Remark: Marriage, and especially monogamy, is one of the absolute principles I on which the
ethical life of a community depends. Hence marriage comes to be recorded as one of the moments
in the founding of states by gods or heroes. 

                                 ¡ì 168. 

Further, marriage results from the free surrender by both sexes of their
personality - a personality in every possible way unique in each of the parties.
Consequently, it ought not to be entered by two people identical in stock who are
already acquainted and perfectly known to one another; for individuals in the
same circle of relationship have no special personality of their own in contrast
with that of others in the same circle. On the contrary, the parties should be
drawn from separate families and their personalities should be different in origin.
Since the very conception of marriage is that it is a freely undertaken ethical
transaction, not a tie directly grounded in the physical organism and its desires, it
follows that the marriage of blood-relations runs counter to this conception and so
also to genuine natural feeling. 

Remark: Marriage itself is sometimes said to he grounded not in natural rights but simply in
instinctive sexual impulses; or again it is treated as a contract with an arbitrary basis. External
arguments in support of monogamy have been drawn from physical considerations such as the
number of men and women. Dark feelings of repulsion are advanced as the sole ground for
prohibiting consanguineous marriage. the basis of all these views is the fashionable idea of a state
of nature and a natural origin for rights, and the lack of the concept of rationality and freedom. 

Addition: A sense of shame - to go no farther - is a bar to consanguineous marriage. But this
repugnance finds justification in the concept of the thing. What is already united, I mean, cannot be
united for the first time by marriage. It is a commonplace of stock-breeding that the offspring is
comparatively weak when animals of the same stock arc mated, since if there is to be unification
there must first be division. The force of generation, as of mind, is all the greater, the greater the
oppositions out of which it is reproduced. Familiarity, close acquaintance, the habit of common
pursuits, should not precede marriage; they should come about for the first time within it. And their
development has all the more value, the richer it is and the more facets it has. 

                                 ¡ì 169. 

The family, as person, has its real external existence in property; and it is only
when this property takes the form of capital that it becomes the embodiment of
the substantial personality of the family. 

                         B. The Family Capital
                              ¡ì 170. 

It is not merely property which a family possesses; as a universal and enduring
person, it requires possessions specifically determined as permanent and secure,
i.e. it requires capital. The arbitrariness of a single owner's particular needs is one
moment in property taken abstractly; but this moment, together with the
selfishness of desire, is here transformed into something ethical, into labour and
care for a common possession. 

Remark: In the sagas of the founding of states, or at least of a social and orderly life, the
introduction of permanent property is linked with the introduction of marriage. The nature of this
capital, however, and the proper means of its consolidation will appear in the section on civil
society. 

                                 ¡ì 171. 

The family as a legal entity in relation to others must be represented by the
husband as its head. Further, it is his prerogative to go out and work for its living,
to attend to its needs, and to control and administer its capital. This capital is
common property so that, while no member of the family has property of his
own, each has his right in the common stock. This right, however, may come into
collision with the head of the family's right of administration owing to the fact that
the ethical temper of the family is still only at the level of immediacy (see ¡ì 158)
and so is exposed to partition and contingency. 

                                 ¡ì 172. 

A marriage brings into being a new family which is self-subsistent and
independent of the clans or 'houses' from which its members have been drawn.
The tie between these and the new family has a natural basis - consanguinity, but
the new family is based on love of an ethical type. Thus an individual's property
too has an essential connection with his conjugal relationship and only a
comparatively remote one with his relation to his clan or 'house'. 

Remark: The significance of marriage settlements which impose a restriction on the couple's
common ownership of their goods, of arrangements to secure continued legal assistance for the
woman, and so forth, ties in their being provisions in case of the dissolution of the marriage, either
naturally by death, or by divorce, &c. They are also safeguards for securing that in such an
eventuality the different members of the family shall secure their share of the common stock. 

Addition: In many legal codes the wider circle of the clan is adhered to, and this is regarded as
the essential bond, while the other bond, that of each particular family, appears less important in
comparison. Thus in the older Roman law, the wife in the easily dissolved type of marriage stood
in a closer relation to her kinsfolk than to her husband and children. Under feudal law, again, the
maintenance of the splendor familiae made it necessary for only the males of the family to be
reckoned members and for the clan as a whole to count as the important thing, while the newly
founded family disappeared in comparison. Nevertheless, each new family is the essential thing in
contrast with the more remote connections of clan-kinship, and parents and children form the
nucleus proper as opposed to the clan, which is also in a certain sense called a 'family'. Hence an
individual's relation to his wealth must have a more essential connection with his marriage than with
the wider circle of his kin. 

 C. The Education of Children and the Dissolution of the Family 
                               ¡ì 173. 

In substance marriage is a unity, though only a unity of inwardness or disposition;
in outward existence, however, the unity is sundered in the two parties. It is only
in the children that the unity itself exists externally, objectively, and explicitly as a
unity, because the parents love the children as their love, as the embodiment of
their own substance. From the physical point of view, the presupposition -
persons immediately existent (as parents) - here becomes a result, a process
which runs away into the infinite series of generations, each producing the next
and presupposing the one before. This is the mode in which the single mind of the
Penates reveals its existence in the finite sphere of nature as a race. 

Addition: The relation of love between husband and wife is in itself not objective, because even
if their feeling is their substantial unity, still this unity has no objectivity. Such an objectivity parents
first acquire in their children, in whom they can see objectified the entirety of their union. In the
child, a mother loves its father and he its mother. Both have their love objectified for them in the
child. While in their goods their unity is embodied only in an external thing, in their children it is
embodied in a spiritual one in which the parents are loved and which they love. 

                                 ¡ì 174. 

Children have the right to maintenance and education at the expense of the
family's common capital. The right of the parents to the service as service of their
children is based upon and is restricted by the common task of looking after the
family generally. Similarly, the right of the parents over the wishes of their
children is determined by the object in view - discipline and education. The
punishment of children does not aim at justice as such; the aim is more subjective
and moral in character, i.e. to deter them from exercising a freedom still in the
tolls of nature and to lift the universal into their consciousness and will. 

Addition: Man has to acquire for himself the position which he ought to attain; he is not already
in possession of it by instinct. It is on this fact that the child's right to education is based. Peoples
under patriarchal government are in the same position as children; they are fed from central stores
and not regarded as self-subsistent and adults. The services which may be demanded from
children should therefore have education as their sole end and be relevant thereto; they must not
be ends in themselves, since a child in slavery is in the most unethical of all situations whatever.
One of the chief factors in education is discipline, the purport of which is to break down the child's
self-will and thereby eradicate his purely natural and sensuous self. We must not expect to achieve
this by mere goodness, since it is just the immediate will which acts on immediate fancies and
caprices, not on reasons and representative thinking. If we advance reasons to children, we leave
it open to them to decide whether the reasons are weighty or not, and thus we make everything
depend on their whim. So far as children are concerned, universality and the substance of things
reside in, their parents, and this implies that children must be obedient. If the feeling of
subordination, producing the longing to grow up, is not fostered in children, they become forward
and impertinent. 

                                 ¡ì 175. 

Children are potentially free and their life directly embodies nothing save potential
freedom. Consequently they are not things and cannot be the property either of
their parents or others. In respect of his relation to the family, the child's
education has the positive aim of instilling ethical principles into him in the form
of an immediate feeling for which differences are not yet explicit, so that thus
equipped with the foundation of an ethical life, his heart may live its early years in
love, trust, and obedience. In respect of the same relation, this education has the
negative aim of raising children out of the instinctive, physical, level on which
they are originally, to self-subsistence and freedom of personality and so to the
level on which they have power to leave the natural unity of the family. 

Remark: One of the blackest marks against Roman legislation is the law whereby children were
treated by their fathers as slaves. This gangrene of the ethical order at the tenderest point of its
innermost life is one of the most important clues for understanding the place of the Romans in the
history of the world and their tendency towards legal formalism. 

The necessity for education is present in children as their own feeling of dissatisfaction with
themselves as they are, as the desire to belong to the adult world whose superiority they divine, as
the longing to grow up. The play theory of education assumes that what is childish is itself already
something of inherent worth and presents it as such to the children; in their eyes it lowers serious
pursuits, and education itself, to a form of childishness for which the children themselves have
scant respect. The advocates of this method represent the child, in the immaturity in which he feels
himself to be, as really mature and they struggle to make him satisfied with himself as he is. But
they corrupt and distort his genuine and proper need for something better, and create in him a
blind indifference to the substantial ties of the intellectual world, a contempt of his elders because
they have thus posed before him, a child, in a contemptible and childish fashion, and finally a vanity
and conceit which feeds on the notion of its own superiority. 

Addition: As a child, man must have lived with his parents encircled by their love and trust, and
rationality must appear in him as his very own subjectivity. In the early years it is education by the
mother especially which is important, since ethical principles must be implanted in the child in the
form of feeling. It is noteworthy that on the whole children love their parents less than their parents
love them. The reason for this is that they are gradually increasing in strength, and are learning to
stand on their own feet, and so are leaving their parents behind them. The parents, on the other
hand, possess in their children the objective embodiment of their union. 

                                 ¡ì 176. 

Marriage is but the ethical Idea in its immediacy and so has its objective actuality
only in the inwardness of subjective feeling and disposition. In this fact is rooted
the fundamental contingency of marriage in the world of existence. There can be
no compulsion on people to marry; and, on the other hand, there is no merely
legal or positive bond which can hold the parties together once their dispositions
and actions have become hostile and contrary. A third ethical authority, however,
is called for to maintain the right of marriage - an ethical substantiality - against
the mere whims of hostile disposition or the accident of a purely passing mood,
and so forth. Such an authority distinguishes these from the total estrangement of
the two parties and may not grant divorce until it is satisfied that the estrangement
is total. 

Addition: It is because marriage depends entirely on feeling, something subjective and
contingent, that it may be dissolved. The state, on the other hand, is not subject to partition,
because it rests on law. To be sure, marriage ought to be indissoluble, but here again we have to
stop at this 'ought'; yet, since marriage is an ethical institution, it cannot be dissolved at will but only
by an ethical authority, whether the church or the law-court. If the parties are completely
estranged, e.g. owing to adultery, then even the ecclesiastical authority must permit divorce. 

                                 ¡ì 177. 

The ethical dissolution of the family consists in this, that once the children have
been educated to freedom of personality, and have come of age, they become
recognised as persons in the eyes of the law and as capable of holding free
property of their own and founding families of their own, the sons as heads of
new families, the daughters as wives. They now have their substantive destiny in
the new family; the old family on the other hand falls into the background as
merely their ultimate basis and origin, while a fortiori the clan is an abstraction,
devoid of rights. 

                                 ¡ì 178. 

The natural dissolution of the family by the death of the parents, particularly the
father, has inheritance as its consequence so far as the family capital is
concerned. The essence of inheritance is the transfer to private ownership of
property which is in principle common. When comparatively remote degrees of
kinship are in question, and when persons and families are so dispersed in civil
society that they have begun to gain self-subsistence, this transfer becomes the
less hard and fast as the sense of family unity fades away and as every marriage
becomes the surrender of previous family relationships and the founding of a new
self-subsistent family. 

Remark: It has been suggested I that the basis of inheritance ties in the fact that, by a man's
death, his property becomes wealth without an owner, and as such falls to the first person who
takes possession of it, because ,of course it is the relatives who are normally nearest a man's
death-bed and so they are generally the first to take possession. Hence it is supposed that this
customary occurrence is made a rule by positive legislation in the interests of orderliness. This
ingenious idea disregards the ,nature of family relationship. 

                                 ¡ì 179. 

The result of this disintegration of the family is that a man may at will either
squander his capital altogether, mainly in accordance with his private caprices,
opinions, and ends, or else look upon a circle of friends and acquaintances, &c.,
as if they were his family and make a will embodying a declaration to that effect,
with the result that they become his legal heirs. 

Remark: The ethical justification of freedom to dispose of one's property by 'will to a circle of
friends would depend on the formation of such a circle; there goes to its formation so much
accident, arbitrariness, and self-seeking, &c. - especially since testamentary hopes have a bearing
on readiness to enter it - that the ethical moment in it is only something very vague. Further, the
recognition of a man's competence to bequeath his property arbitrarily is much more likely to be
an occasion for breach of ethical obligations and for mean exertions and equally mean
subservience; and it also provides opportunity and justification for the folly, caprice, and malice of
attaching to professed benefactions and gifts vain, tyrannical, and vexatious conditions operative
after the testator's death and so in any case after his property ceases to be his. 

                                 ¡ì 180. 

The principle that the members of the family grow up to be self-subsistent
persons in the eyes of the law (see ¡ì 177) lets into the circle of the family
something of the same arbitrariness and discrimination among the natural heirs,
though its exercise there must be restricted to a minimum in order to prevent
injury to the basic family relationship. 

Remark: The mere downright arbitrariness of the deceased cannot be made the principle
underlying the right to make a will, especially if it runs counter to the substantive right of the family.
For after all no respect would be forthcoming for his wishes after his death, if not from the family's
love and veneration for its deceased fellow-member. Such arbitrariness by itself contains nothing
worthy of higher respect than the right of the family as such - on the contrary. 

The other ground for the validity of testamentary disposition would consist simply in its arbitrary
recognition by others. But such an argument may prima facie be admitted only when family ties, to
which testamentary disposition is intrinsic, become remoter and more ineffective. If they are
actually present, however, without being effective, the situation is unethical; and to give extended
validity to arbitrary dispositions at the expense of family ties eo ipso weakens the ethical character
of the latter. 

To make the father's arbitrary will within the family the main principle of inheritance was part of the
harsh and unethical legal system of Rome to which reference has been made already. That system
even gave a father power to sell his son, and if the son was manumitted by a third party, he came
under his father's potestas once more. Not until he was manumitted a third time was he actually
and finally free. The son never attained his majority de jure nor did he become a person in law;
the only property he could hold was booty won in war (peculium castrense). If he passed out of
his father's potestas after being thrice sold and manumitted, he did not inherit along with those
who had continued in bondage to the head of the family, unless the will specifically so provided.
Similarly, a wife remained attached to her family of origin rather than to the new family which by
her marriage she had helped to found, and which was now properly her own, and she was
therefore precluded from inheriting any share of the goods of what was properly her own family,
for neither wife nor mother shared in the distribution of an estate. 

Later, with the growing feeling for rationality, the unethical provisions of laws such as these and
others were evaded in the course of their administration, for example with the help of the
expression bonorum possessio instead of hereditas, and through the fiction of nicknaming a filia
a filius. This was referred to above (see Remark to ¡ì 3) as the sad necessity to which the judge
was reduced in the face of bad laws - the necessity of smuggling reason into them on the sly, or at
least into some of their consequences. Connected with this were the terrible instability of the chief
political institutions and a riot of legislation to stem the outbreak of resulting evils. 

From Roman history and the writings of Lucian and others, we are sufficiently familiar with the
unethical consequences of giving the head of a Roman family the right to name whom he pleased
as his heir. 

Marriage is ethical life at the level of immediacy; in the very nature of the case, therefore, it must
be a mixture of a substantial tie with natural contingency and inner arbitrariness. Now when by the
slave-status of children, by legal provisions such as those mentioned above as well as others
consequential upon them, and in addition by the ease of Roman divorce, pride of place is given to
arbitrariness instead of to the right of the substantial (so that even Cicero - and what fine writing
about the Honestum and Decorum there is in his De Officiis and in all sorts of other places! -
even Cicero divorced his wife as a business speculation in order to pay his debts with his new
wife's dowry), then a legal road is paved to the corruption of manners, or rather the laws
themselves necessitate such corruption. 

The institution of heirs-at-law with a view to preserving the family and its splendour by means of
fideicommissa and substitutiones (in order to favour sons by excluding daughters from inheriting,
or to favour the eldest son by excluding the other children) is an infringement of the principle of the
freedom of property (see ¡ì 62), like the admission of any other inequality in the treatment of heirs.
And besides, such an institution depends on an arbitrariness which in and by itself has no right to
recognition, or more precisely on the thought of wishing to preserve intact not so much this family
but rather this clan or 'house'. Yet it is not this clan or 'house', but the family proper which is the
Idea and which therefore possesses the right to recognition, and both the ethical disposition and
family trees are much more likely to be preserved by freedom of property and equality of
inheritance than by the reverse of these. 

Institutions of this kind, like the Roman, wholly ignore the right due to marriage, because by a
marriage the foundation of a unique actual family is eo ipso completed (see ¡ì 172), and because
what is called, in contrast with the new family, the family in the wide sense, i.e. the stirps or gens,
becomes only an abstraction (see ¡ì 177) growing less and less actual the further it recedes into
the background as one generation succeeds another. Love, the ethical moment in marriage, is by
its very nature a feeling for actual living individuals, not for an abstraction. This abstraction of the
Understanding [the gens] appears in history as the principle underlying the contribution of the
Roman Empire to world history (see ¡ì 357). In the higher sphere of the state, a right of
primogeniture arises together with estates rigidly entailed; it arises, however, not arbitrarily but as
the inevitable outcome of the Idea of the state. On this point see below, ¡ì 306. 

Addition: In earlier times, a Roman father had the right to disinherit his children and even kill
them. Later he lost both these rights. Attempts were made to forge into a legal system this
incoherence between unethical institutions and devices to rob them of that character, and it is the
retention of this incoherence which constitutes the deficiency and difficulty of the German law of
inheritance. To be sure, the right to make a will must be conceded; but in conceding it our point of
view must be that this right of free choice arises or is magnified with the dispersion and
estrangement of the members of the family. Further, the so-called 'family of friends' which
testamentary disposition brings with it may be admitted only in defect of members of the family
proper, i.e. of spouse and children. To make a will at all entails something obnoxious and
disagreeable, because in making it I reveal the names of my favourites. Favour, however, is
arbitrary; it may be gained surreptitiously by a variety of expedients, it may depend on all sorts of
foolish reasons, and as a condition of having his name included in a will, a beneficiary may be
required to subject himself to the most abject servilities. In England, the home of all sorts of
eccentricity, there is no end to the folly and whimsicality of bequests. 

                   Transition of the Family into Civil Society

                                 ¡ì 181. 

The family disintegrates (both essentially, through the working of the principle of
personality, and also in the course of nature) into a plurality of families, each of
which conducts itself as in principle a self-subsistent concrete person and
therefore as externally related to its neighbours. In other words, the moments
bound together in the unity of the family, since the family is the ethical Idea still
in its concept, must be released from the concept to self-subsistent objective
reality. This is the stage of difference. This gives us, to use abstract language in
the first place, the determination of particularity which is related to universality
but in such a way that universality is its basic principle, though still only an inward
principle; for that reason, the universal merely shows in the particular as its form.
Hence this relation of reflection prima facie portrays the disappearance of ethical
life or, since this life as the essence necessarily shows itself, this relation
constitutes the world of ethical appearance - civil society. 

Remark: The expansion of the family, as its transition into a new principle, is in the external
world sometimes its peaceful expansion until it becomes a people, i.e. a nation, which thus has a
common natural origin, or sometimes the federation of scattered groups of families under the
influence of an overlord's power or as a result of a voluntary association produced by the tie of
needs and the reciprocity of their satisfaction. 

Addition: The, starting-point for the universal here is the self-subsistence of the particular, and
the ethical order seems therefore to be lost at this point, since it is precisely the identity of the
family which consciousness takes to be the primary thing, the divine, and the source of obligation.
Now, however, a situation arises in which the particular is to be my primary determining principle,
and thus my determinacy by ethical factors has been annulled. But this is nothing but a pure
mistake, since, while I suppose that I am adhering to the particular, the universal and the necessity
of the link between particulars remains the primary and essential thing. I am thus altogether on the
level of show, and while my particularity remains my determining principle, i.e. my end, I am for
that very reason the servant of the universal which properly retains power over me in the last
resort. 




Third Part: Ethical Life
             ii Civil Society

         A: System of needs B: Justice C: Corporations


                               ¡ì 182.

The concrete person, who is himself the object of his particular aims, is, as a
totality and a mixture of caprice and physical necessity, one principle of civil
society. But the particular person is essentially so related to other particular
persons that each establishes himself and finds satisfaction by means of the
others, and at the same time purely and simply by means of the form of
universality, the second principle here. 

     Addition: Civil society is the [stage of] difference which intervenes between the family and
the state, even if its formation follows later in time than that of the state, because, as [the stage of]
difference, it presupposes the state; to subsist itself, it must have the state before its eyes as
something self-subsistent. Moreover, the creation of civil society is the achievement of the modern
world which has for the first time given all determinations of the Idea their due. If the state is
represented as a unity of different persons, as a unity which is only a partnership, then what is
really meant is only civil society. Many modem constitutional lawyers have been able to bring
within their purview no theory of the state but this. In civil society each member is his own end,
everything else is nothing to him. But except in contact with others he cannot attain the whole
compass of his ends, and therefore these others are means to the end of the particular member. A
particular end, however, assumes the form of universality through this relation to other people, and
it is attained in the simultaneous attainment of the welfare of others. Since particularity is inevitably
conditioned by universality, the whole sphere of civil Society is the territory of mediation where
there is free play for every idiosyncrasy, every talent, every accident of birth and fortune, and
where waves of every passion gush forth, regulated only by reason glinting through them.
Particularity, restricted by universality, is the only standard whereby each particular member
promotes his welfare. 

                                 ¡ì 183.

In the course of the actual attainment of selfish ends ¡ª an attainment conditioned
in this way by universality ¡ª there is formed a system of complete
interdependence, wherein the livelihood, happiness, and legal status of one man is
interwoven with the livelihood, happiness, and rights of all. On this system,
individual Happiness, &c., depend, and only in this connected system are they
actualised and secured. This system may be prima facie regarded as the external
state, the state based on need, the state as the Understanding envisages it. 

                                 ¡ì 184.

The Idea in this its stage of division imparts to each of its moments a
characteristic embodiment; to particularity it gives the right to develop and launch
forth in all directions; and to universality the right to prove itself not only the
ground and necessary form of particularity, but also the authority standing over it
and its final end. It is the system of the ethical order, split into its extremes and
lost, which constitutes the Idea¡¯s abstract moment, its moment of reality. Here
the Idea is present only as a relative totality and as the inner necessity behind this
outward appearance. 

Addition: Here ethical life is split into its extremes and lost; the immediate unity of the family has
fallen apart into a plurality. Reality here is externality, the decomposing of the concept, the
self-subsistence of its moments which have now won their freedom and their determinate
existence. Though in civil society universal and particular have fallen apart, yet both are still
reciprocally bound together and conditioned. While each of them seems to do just the opposite to
the other and supposes that it can exist only by keeping the other at arm¡¯s length, none the less
each still conditions the other. Thus, for example, most people regard the paying of taxes as
injurious to their particular interest, as something inimical and obstructive of their own ends. Yet,
however true this seems, particular ends cannot be attained without the help of the universal, and a
country where no taxes were paid could not be singled out as invigorating its citizens. Similarly, it
might seem that universal ends would be more readily attainable if the universal absorbed the
strength of the particulars in the way described, for instance, in Plato¡¯s Republic. But this, too, is
only an illusion, since both universal and particular turn into one another and exist only for and by
means of one another. If I further my ends, I further the ends of the universal, and this in turn
furthers my end. 

                                 ¡ì 185.

Particularity by itself, given free rein in every direction to satisfy its needs,
accidental caprices, and subjective desires, destroys itself and its substantive
concept in this process of gratification. At the same time, the satisfaction of need,
necessary and accidental alike, is accidental because it breeds new desires without
end, is in thoroughgoing dependence on caprice and external accident, and is held
in check by the power of universality. In these contrasts and their complexity,
civil society affords a spectacle of extravagance and want as well as of the
physical and ethical degeneration common to them both. 

Remark: The development of particularity to self-subsistence (compare Remark to ¡ì 124) is
the moment which appeared in the ancient world as an invasion of ethical corruption and as the
ultimate cause of that world¡¯s downfall. Some of these ancient states were built on the patriarchal
and religious principle, others on the principle of an ethical order which was more explicitly
intellectual, though still comparatively simple; in either case they rested on primitive unsophisticated
intuition. Hence they could not withstand the disruption of this state of mind when
self-consciousness was infinitely reflected into itself; when this reflection began to emerge, they
succumbed to it, first in spirit and then in substance, because the simple principle underlying them
lacked the truly infinite power to be found only in that unity which allows both sides of the
antithesis of reason to develop themselves separately in all their strength and which has so
overcome the antithesis that it maintains itself in it and integrates it in itself. 

In his Republic, Plato displays the substance of ethical life in its ideal beauty and truth; but he
could only cope with the principle of self-subsistent particularity, which in his day had forced its
way into Greek ethical life, by setting up in opposition to it his purely substantial state. He
absolutely excluded it from his state, even in its very beginnings in private property (see Remark to
¡ì 46) and the family, as well as in its more mature form as the subjective will, the choice of a
social position, and so forth. , It is this defect which is responsible both for the misunderstanding of
the deep and substantial truth of Plato¡¯s state and also for the usual view of it as a dream of
abstract thinking, as what is often called a ¡®mere ideal¡¯. The principle of the self-subsistent
inherently infinite personality of the individual, the principle of subjective freedom, is denied its right
in the purely substantial form which Plato gave to mind in its actuality. This principle dawned in an
inward form in the Christian religion and in an external form (and therefore in one linked with
abstract universality) in the Roman world. It is historically subsequent to the Greek world, and the
philosophic reflection which descends to its depth is likewise subsequent to the substantial Idea of
Greek philosophy. 

Addition: Particularity by itself is measureless excess, and the forms of this excess are
themselves measureless. By means of his ideas and reflections man expands his desires, which are
not a closed circle like animal instinct, and carries them on to the false infinite. At the other end of
the scale, however, want and destitution are measureless too, and the discord of this situation can
be brought into a harmony only by the state which has powers over it. Plato wished to exclude
particularity from his state, but this is no help, since help on these lines would contravene the
infinite right of the Idea to allow freedom to the particular. 

It was in the Christian religion in the first place that the right of subjectivity arose, together with the
infinity of self-awareness, and while granting this right, the whole order must at the same time retain
strength enough to put particularity in harmony with the unity of ethical life. 

                                 ¡ì 186.

But in developing itself independently to totality, the principle of particularity
passes over into universality, and only there does it attain its truth and the right to
which its positive actuality is entitled. This unity is not the identity which the
ethical order requires, because at this level, that of division (see ¡ì 184), both
principles are self-subsistent. It follows that this unity is present here not as
freedom but as necessity, since it is by compulsion that the particular rises to the
form of universality and seeks and gains its stability in that form. 

                               ¡ì 187. 

Individuals in their capacity as burghers in this state are private persons whose
end is their own interest. This end is mediated through the universal which thus
appears as a means to its realisation. Consequently, individuals can attain their
ends only in so far as they themselves determine their knowing, willing, and
acting in a universal way and make themselves links in this chain of social
connections. In these circumstances, the interest of the Idea ¡ª an interest of
which these members of civil society are as such unconscious ¡ª lies in the
process whereby their singularity and their natural condition are raised, as a result
of the necessities imposed by nature as well as of arbitrary needs, to formal
freedom and formal universality of knowing and willing ¡ª the process whereby
their particularity is educated up to subjectivity. 

Remark: The idea that the state of nature is one of innocence and that there is a simplicity of
manners in uncivilised (ungebildeter) peoples, implies treating education (Bildung) as something
purely external, the ally of corruption. Similarly, the feeling that needs, their satisfaction, the
pleasures and comforts of private life, and so forth, are absolute ends, implies treating education as
a mere means to these ends. Both these views display lack of acquaintance with the nature of mind
and the end of reason. Mind attains its actuality only by creating a dualism within itself, by
submitting itself to physical needs and the chain of these external necessities, and so imposing on
itself this barrier and this finitude, and finally by maturing (bildet) itself inwardly even when under
this barrier until it overcomes it and attains its objective reality in the finite. The end of reason,
therefore, is neither the manners of an unsophisticated state of nature, nor, as particularity
develops, the pleasure for pleasure¡¯s sake which education procures. On the contrary, its end is
to banish natural simplicity, whether the passivity which is the absence of the self, or the crude type
of knowing and willing, i.e. immediacy and singularity, in which mind is absorbed. It aims in the
first instance at securing for this, its external condition, the rationality of which it is capable, i.e. the
form of universality or the Understanding (Verst?ndigkeit). By this means alone does mind
become at home with itself within this pure externality. There, then, mind¡¯s freedom is existent and
mind becomes objective to itself in this element which is implicitly inimical to mind¡¯s appointed
end, freedom; it has to do there only with what it has itself produced and stamped with its seal. It
is in this way then that the form of universality comes explicitly into existence in thought, and this
form is the only worthy element for the existence of the Idea. The final purpose of education,
therefore, is liberation and the struggle for a higher liberation still; education is the absolute
transition from an ethical substantiality which is immediate and natural to the one which is
intellectual and so both infinitely subjective and lofty enough to have attained universality of form.
In the individual subject, this liberation is the hard struggle against pure subjectivity of demeanour,
against the immediacy of desire, against the empty subjectivity of feeling and the caprice of
inclination. The disfavour showered on education is due in part to its being this hard struggle; but it
is through this educational struggle that the subjective will itself attains objectivity within, an
objectivity in which alone it is for its part capable and worthy of being the actuality of the Idea. 

Moreover, this form of universality ¡ª the Understanding, to which particularity has worked its way
and developed itself, brings it about at the same time that particularity becomes individuality
genuinely existent in its own eyes. And since it is from this particularity that the universal derives
the content which fills it as well as its character as infinite self-determination, particularity itself is
present in ethical life as infinitely independent free subjectivity. This is the position which reveals
education as a moment immanent in the Absolute and which makes plain its infinite value. 

Addition: By educated men, we may prima facie understand those who without the obtrusion
of personal idiosyncrasy can do what others do. It is precisely this idiosyncrasy, however, which
uneducated men display, since their behaviour is not governed by the universal characteristics of
the situation. Similarly, an uneducated man is apt to hurt the feelings of his neighbours. lie simply
lets himself go and does not reflect on the susceptibilities of others. It is not that he intends to hurt
them, but his conduct is not consonant with his intention. Thus education rubs the edges off
particular characteristics until a man conducts himself in accordance with the nature of the thing.
Genuine originality, which produces the real thing, demands genuine education, while bastard
originality adopts eccentricities which only enter the heads of the uneducated. 

                                 ¡ì 188.

Civil society contains three moments: 

     (A) The mediation of need and one man¡¯s satisfaction through his labour
     and the satisfaction of the needs of all others ¡ª the System of Needs. 
     (B) The actuality of the universal principle of freedom therein contained ¡ª
     the protection of property through the Administration of Justice.
     (C) Provision against contingencies still lurking in systems (A) and (B), and
     care for particular interest, as a common interest, by means of the Public
     Authority and the Corporation. 

          A. The System of Needs

               a: Kind of Need     b: Kind of Labour     c: Classes  


                             ¡ì 189. 

Particularity is in the first instance characterised in general by its contrast with the
universal principle of the will and thus is subjective need (see ¡ì 59). This attains
its objectivity i.e. its satisfaction, by means of [a] external things, which at this
stage are likewise the property and product of the needs and wills of others, and
[b] labour and effort, the middle term between the subjective and the objective.
The aim here is the satisfaction of subjective particularity, but the universal
asserts itself in the bearing which this satisfaction has on the needs of others and
their free arbitrary wills. The show of rationality thus produced in this sphere of
finitude is the Understanding, and this is the aspect which is of most importance
in considering this sphere and which itself constitutes the reconciling element
within it. 

Remark: Political economy is the science which starts from this view of needs and labour but
then has the task of explaining mass-relationships and mass-movements in their complexity and
their qualitative and quantitative character. This is one of the sciences which have arisen out of the
conditions of the modern world. Its development affords the interesting spectacle (as in Smith,
Say, and Ricardo) of thought working upon the endless mass of details which confront it at the
outset and extracting therefrom the simple principles of the thing, the Understanding effective in the
thing and directing it. It is to find reconciliation here to discover in the sphere of needs this show of
rationality lying in the thing and effective there; but if we look at it from the opposite point of view,
this is the field in which the Understanding with its subjective aims and moral fancies vents its
discontent and moral frustration. 

Addition: There are certain universal needs such as food, drink, clothing, &c., and it depends
entirely on accidental circumstances how these are satisfied. The fertility of the soil varies from
place to place, harvests vary from year to year, one man is industrious, another indolent. But this
medley of arbitrariness generates universal characteristics by its own working; and this apparently
scattered and thoughtless sphere is upheld by a necessity which automatically enters it. To
discover this necessary element here is the object of political economy, a science which is a credit
to thought because it finds laws for a mass of accidents. It is an interesting spectacle here to see all
chains of activity leading back to the same point; particular spheres of action fall into groups,
influence others, and are helped or hindered by others. The most remarkable thing here is this
mutual interlocking of particulars, which is what one would least expect because at first sight
everything seems to be given over to the arbitrariness of the individual, and it has a parallel in the
solar system which displays to the eye only irregular movements, though its laws may none the less
be ascertained. 

  (a) The Kind of Need and Satisfaction [typical of civil society] 
                                ¡ì 190.

An animal¡¯s needs and its ways and means of satisfying them are both alike
restricted in scope. Though man is subject to this restriction too, yet at the same
time he evinces his transcendence of it and his universality, first by the
multiplication of needs and means of satisfying them, and secondly by the
differentiation and division of concrete need into single parts and aspects which in
turn become different needs, particularised and so more abstract. 

Remark: In [abstract] right, what we had before us was the person; in the sphere of morality,
the subject; in the family, the family-member; in civil society as a whole, the burgher or bourgeois.
Here at the standpoint of needs (compare Remark to ¡ì 123) what we have before us is the
composite idea which we call man. Thus this is the first time, and indeed properly the only time, to
speak of man in this sense. 

Addition: An animal is restricted to particularity. It has its instincts and means of satisfying them,
means which are limited and which it cannot overstep. Some insects are parasitic on a certain kind
of plant; some animals have a wider range and can live in different climates, but there is always a
restriction preventing them from having the range open to man. The need of shelter and clothing,
the necessity of cooking his food to make it fit to eat and to overcome its natural rawness, both
mean that man has less comfort than an animal, and indeed, as mind, he ought to have less.
Intelligence, with its grasp of distinctions, multiplies these human needs, and since taste and utility
become criteria of judgment, even the needs themselves are affected thereby. Finally, it is no
longer need but opinion which has to be satisfied, and it is just the educated man who analyses the
concrete into its particulars. The very multiplication of needs involves a check on desire, because
when many things are in I use, the urge to obtain any one thing which might be needed is less
strong, and this is a sign that want altogether is not so imperious. 

                                 ¡ì 191.

Similarly, the means to particularised needs and all the ways of satisfying these
are themselves divided and multiplied and so in turn become proximate ends and
abstract needs. This multiplication goes on ad infinitum; taken as a whole, it is
refinement, i.e. a discrimination between these multiplied needs, and judgment on
the suitability of means to their ends. 

Addition: What the English call ¡®comfort¡¯ is something inexhaustible and illimitable. [Others
can discover to you that what you take to be] comfort at any stage is discomfort, and these
discoveries never come to an end. Hence the need for greater comfort does not exactly arise
within you directly; it is suggested to you by those who hope to make a profit from its creation. 

                                 ¡ì 192.

Needs and means, as things existent realiter, become something which has being
for others by whose needs and labour satisfaction for all alike is conditioned.
When needs and means become abstract in quality (see ¡ì 191), abstraction is
also a character of the reciprocal relation of individuals to one another. This
abstract character, universality, is the character of being recognised and is the
moment which makes concrete, i.e. social, the isolated and abstract needs and
their ways and means of satisfaction. 

Addition: The fact that I must direct my conduct by reference to others introduces here the
form of universality. It is from others that I acquire the means of satisfaction and I must accordingly
accept their views. At the same time, however, I am compelled to produce means for the
satisfaction of others. We play into each other¡¯s hands and so hang together. To this extent
everything private becomes something social. In dress fashions and hours of meals, there are
certain conventions which we have to accept because in these things it is not worth the trouble to I
insist on displaying one¡¯s own discernment. The wisest thing here is to do as others do. 

                                ¡ì 193.

This social moment thus becomes a particular end-determinant for means in
themselves and their acquisition, as well as for the manner in which needs are
satisfied. Further, it directly involves the demand for equality of satisfaction with
others. The need for this equality and for emulation, which is the equalising of
oneself with others, as well as the other need also present here, the need of the
particular to assert itself in some distinctive way, become themselves a fruitful
source of the multiplication of needs and their expansion. 

                                 ¡ì 194.

Since in social needs, as the conjunction of immediate or natural needs with
mental needs arising from ideas, it is needs of the latter type which because of
their universality make themselves preponderant, this social moment has in it the
aspect of liberation, i.e. the strict natural necessity of need is obscured and man is
concerned with his own opinion, indeed with an opinion which is universal, and
with a necessity of his own making alone, instead of with an external necessity,
an inner contingency, and mere caprice. 

Remark: The idea has been advanced that in respect of his needs man lived in freedom in the
so-called ¡®state of nature¡¯ when his needs were supposed to be confined to what are known as
the simple necessities of nature, and when he required for their satisfaction only the means which
the accidents of nature directly assured to him. This view takes no account of the moment of
liberation intrinsic to labour, on which see the following Paragraphs. And apart from this, it is false,
because to be confined to mere physical needs as such and their direct satisfaction would simply
be the condition in which the mental is plunged in the natural and so would be one of savagery and
unfreedom, while freedom itself is to be found only in the reflection of mind into itself, in mind¡¯s
distinction from nature, and in the reflex of mind in nature. 

                                 ¡ì 195.

This liberation is abstract since the particularity of the ends remains their basic
content. When social conditions tend to multiply and subdivide needs, means, and
enjoyments indefinitely ¡ª a process which, like the distinction between natural
and refined needs, has no qualitative limits ¡ª this is luxury. In this same process,
however, dependence and want increase ad infinitum, and the material to meet
these is permanently barred to the needy man because it consists of external
objects with the special character of being property, the embodiment of the free
will of others, and hence from his point of view its recalcitrance is absolute. 

Addition: The entire Cynical mode of life adopted by Diogenes was nothing more or less than a
product of Athenian social life, and what determined it was the way of thinking against which his
whole manner protested. Hence it was not independent of social conditions but simply their result;
it was itself a rude product of luxury. When luxury is at its height, distress and depravity are
equally extreme, and in such circumstances Cynicism is the outcome of opposition to refinement. 

          (b) The Kind of Labour [typical of civil society]
                                 ¡ì 196.

The means of acquiring and preparing the particularised means appropriate to our
similarly particularised needs is labour. Through labour the raw material directly
supplied by nature is specifically adapted to these numerous ends by all sorts of
different processes. Now this formative change confers value on means and gives
them their utility, and hence man in what he consumes is mainly concerned with
the products of men. It is the products of human effort which man consumes. 

Addition: There is hardly any raw material which does not need to be worked on before use.
Even air has to be worked for because we have to warm it. Water is perhaps the only exception,
because we can drink it as we find it. It is by the sweat of his brow and the toil of his hands that
man obtains the means to satisfy his needs. 

                                 ¡ì 197.

The multiplicity of objects and situations which excite interest is the stage on
which theoretical education develops. This education consists in possessing not
simply a multiplicity of ideas and facts, but also a flexibility and rapidity of mind,
ability to pass from one idea to another, to grasp complex and general relations,
and so on. It is the education of the understanding in every way, and so also the
building up of language. Practical education, acquired through working, consists
first in the automatically recurrent need for something to do and the habit of
simply being busy; next, in the strict adaptation of one¡¯s activity according not
only to the nature of the material worked on, but also, and especially, to the
pleasure of other workers; and finally, in a habit, produced by this discipline, of
objective activity and universally recognised aptitudes. 

Addition: The savage is lazy and is distinguished from the educated man by his brooding
stupidity, because practical education is just education in the need and habit of being busy. A
clumsy man always produces a result he does not intend; he is not master of his own job. The
skilled worker, on the other hand, may be said to be the man who produces the thing as it ought to
be and who hits the nail on the head without shrinking (keine Spr?digkeit in seinem subjektiven
Tun gegen den Zweck findet). 

                                 ¡ì 198.

The universal and objective element in labour, on the other hand, lies in the
abstracting process which effects the subdivision of needs and means and thereby
eo ipso subdivides production and brings about the division of labour. By this
division, the labour of the individual becomes less complex, and consequently his
skill at his section of the job increases, like his output. At the same time, this
abstraction of one man¡¯s skill and means of production from another¡¯s
completes and makes necessary everywhere the dependence of men on one
another and their reciprocal relation in the satisfaction of their other needs.
Further, the abstraction of one man¡¯s production from another¡¯s makes labour
more and more mechanical, until finally man is able to step aside and install
machines in his place. 

                   (c) Capital [and class-divisions]
                                 ¡ì 199.

When men are thus dependent on one another and reciprocally related to one
another in their labour and the satisfaction of their needs, subjective self-seeking
turns into a contribution to the satisfaction of the needs of everyone else. That is
to say, by a dialectical advance, subjective self-seeking turns into the mediation of
the particular through the universal, with the result that each man in earning,
producing, and enjoying on his own account is eo ipso producing and earning for
the enjoyment of everyone else. The compulsion which brings this about is rooted
in the complex interdependence of each on all, and it now presents itself to each
as the universal permanent capital (see ¡ì 170) which gives each the opportunity,
by the exercise of his education and skill, to draw a share from it and so be
assured of his livelihood, while what he thus earns by means of his labour
maintains and increases the general capital. 

                                 ¡ì 200.

A particular man¡¯s resources, or in other words his opportunity of sharing in the
general resources, are conditioned, however, partly by his own unearned principal
(his capital), and partly by his skill; this in turn is itself dependent not only on his
capital, but also on accidental circumstances whose multiplicity introduces
differences in the development of natural, bodily, and mental characteristics,
which were already in themselves dissimilar. In this sphere of particularity, these
differences are conspicuous in every direction and on every level, and, together
with the arbitrariness and accident which this sphere contains as well, they have
as their inevitable consequence disparities of individual resources and ability. 

Remark: The objective right of the particularity of mind is contained in the Idea. Men are made
unequal by nature, where inequality is in its element, and in civil society the right of particularity is
so far from. annulling this natural inequality that it produces it out of mind and raises it to an
inequality of skill and resources, and even to one of moral and intellectual attainment. To oppose
to this right a demand for equality is a folly of the Understanding which takes as real and rational
its abstract equality and its ¡®ought-to-be¡¯. 

This sphere of particularity, which fancies itself the universal, is still only relatively identical with the
universal, and consequently it still retains in itself the particularity of nature, i.e. arbitrariness, or in
other words the relics of the state of nature. Further, it is reason, immanent in the restless system
of human needs, which articulates it into an organic whole with different members (see the
following ¡ì). 

                                 ¡ì 201.

The infinitely complex, criss-cross, movements of reciprocal production and
exchange, and the equally infinite multiplicity of means therein employed, become
crystallised, owing to the universality inherent in their content, and distinguished
into general groups. As a result, the entire complex is built up into particular
systems of needs, means, and types of work relative to these needs, modes of
satisfaction and of theoretical and practical education, i.e. into systems, to one or
other of which individuals are assigned ¡ª in other words, into class-divisions. 

Addition: The ways and means of sharing in the capital of society are left to each man¡¯s
particular choice, but the subdivision of civil society into different general branches is a necessity.
The family is the first precondition of the state, but class divisions are the second. The importance
of the latter is due to the fact that although private persons are self-seeking, they are compelled to
direct their attention to others. Here then is the root which connects self-seeking to the universal,
i.e. to the state, whose care it must be that this tie is a hard and fast one. 

                                 ¡ì 202.

The classes are specifically determined in accordance with the concept as 

     (a) the substantial or immediate [or agricultural] class; 
     (b) the reflecting or formal [or business] class; and finally,
     (c) the universal class [the class of civil servants]. 

                                 ¡ì 203.

(a) The substantial [or agricultural] class has its capital in the natural products of
the soil which it cultivates ¡ª soil which is capable of exclusively private
ownership and which demands formation in an objective way and not mere
haphazard exploitation. In face of the connection of [agricultural] labour and its
fruits with separate and fixed times of the year, and the dependence of harvests
on the variability of natural processes, the aim of need in this class turns into
provision for the future; but owing to the conditions here, the agricultural mode of
subsistence remains one which owes comparatively little to reflection and
independence of will, and this mode of life is in general such that this class has
the substantial disposition of an ethical life which is immediate, resting on family
relationship and trust. 

Remark: The real beginning and original foundation of states has been rightly ascribed to the
introduction of agriculture along with marriage, because the principle of agriculture brings with it
the formation of the land and consequentially exclusively private property (compare Remark to ¡ì
170); the nomadic life of savages, who seek their livelihood from place to place, it brings back to
the tranquillity of private rights and the assured satisfaction of their needs. Along with these
changes, sexual love is restricted to marriage, and this bond in turn grows into an enduring league,
inherently universal, while needs expand into care for a family, and personal possessions into
family goods. Security, consolidation, lasting satisfaction of needs, and so forth ¡ª things which are
the most obvious recommendations of marriage and agriculture ¡ª are nothing but forms of
universality, modes in which rationality, the final end and aim, asserts itself in these spheres. 

In this matter, nothing is of more interest than the ingenious and learned explanations which my
distinguished friend, Herr Creuzer, has given of the agrarian festivals, images, and sanctuaries of
the ancients. He shows that it was because the ancients themselves had become conscious of the
divine origin of agriculture and other institutions associated with it that they held them in such
religious veneration. 

In course of time, the character of this class as ¡®substantial¡¯ undergoes modifications through the
working of the civil law, in particular the administration of justice, as well as through the working of
education, instruction, and religion. These modifications, which occur in the other classes also, do
not affect the substantial content of the class but only its form and the development of its power of
reflection. 

Addition: In our day agriculture is conducted on methods devised by reflective thinking, i.e. like
a factory. This has given it a character like that of industry and contrary to its natural one. Still, the
agricultural class will always retain a mode of life which is patriarchal and the substantial frame of
mind proper to such a life. The member of this class accepts unreflectively what is given him and
takes what he gets, thanking God for it and living in faith and confidence that this goodness will
continue. What comes to him suffices him; once it is consumed, more comes again. This is the
simple attitude of mind not concentrated on the struggle for riches. It may be described as the
attitude of the old nobility which just ate what there was. So far as this class is concerned, nature
does the major part, while individual effort is secondary. In the business class, however, it is
intelligence which is the essential thing, and natural products can be treated only as raw materials. 

                                 ¡ì 204.

(b) The business class has for its task the adaptation of raw materials, and for its
means of livelihood it is thrown back on its work, on reflection and intelligence,
and essentially on the mediation of one man¡¯s needs and labour with those of
others. For what this class produces and enjoys, it has mainly itself, its own
industry, to thank. The task of this class is subdivided into 

     [a] work to satisfy single needs in a comparatively concrete way and to
     supply single orders ¡ª craftsmanship; 
     [b] work of a more abstract kind, mass-production to satisfy single needs,
     but needs in more universal demand ¡ª manufacture;
     [c] the business of exchange, whereby separate utilities are exchanged the
     one for the other, principally through the use of the universal medium of
     exchange, money, which actualises the abstract value of all commodities ¡ª
     trade. 

Addition: In the business class, the individual is thrown back on himself, and this feeling of
self-hood is most intimately connected with the demand for law and order. The sense of freedom
and order has therefore arisen above all in towns. The agricultural class, on the other hand, has
little occasion to think of itself; what it obtains is the gift of a stranger, of nature. Its feeling of
dependence is fundamental to it, and with this feeling there is readily associated a willingness to
submit to whatever may befall it at other men¡¯s hands. The agricultural class is thus more inclined
to subservience, the business class to freedom. 

                                 ¡ì 205.

(c) The universal class [the class of civil servants] has for its task the universal
interests of the community. It must therefore be relieved from direct labour to
supply its needs, either by having private means or by receiving an allowance
from the state which claims its industry, with the result that private interest finds
its satisfaction in its work for the universal. 

                                 ¡ì 206.

It is in accordance with the concept that class-organisation, as particularity
become objective to itself, is split in this way into its general divisions. But the
question of the particular class to which an individual is to belong is one on which
natural capacity, birth, and other circumstances have their influence, though the
essential and final determining factors are subjective opinion and the individual¡¯s
arbitrary will, which win in this sphere their right, their merit, and their dignity.
Hence what happens here by inner necessity occurs at the same time by the
mediation of the arbitrary will, and to the conscious subject it has the shape of
being the work of his own will. 

Remark: In this respect too there is a conspicuous difference, in relation to the principle of
particularity and the subject¡¯s arbitrary will, between the political life of the east and the west, and
also between that of the ancient and the modern world. In the former, the division of the whole
into classes came about objectively of itself, because it is inherently rational; but the principle of
subjective particularity was at the same time denied its rights, in that, for example, the allotment of
individuals to classes was left to the ruling class, as in Plato¡¯s Republic, or to the accident of birth,
as in the Indian caste-system. Thus subjective particularity was not incorporated into the
organisation of society as a whole; it was not reconciled in the whole, and therefore ¡ª since as an
essential moment it emerges there in any event ¡ª it shows itself there as something hostile, as a
corruption of the social order (see Remark to ¡ì 185)Either it overthrows society, as happened in
the Greek states and in the Roman Republic; or else, should society preserve itself in being as a
force or as a religious authority, for instance, it appears as inner corruption and complete
degeneration, as was the case to some extent in Sparta and is now altogether the case in India. 

But when subjective particularity is upheld by the objective order in conformity with it and is at the
same time allowed its rights, then it becomes the animating principle of the entire civil society, of
the development alike of mental activity, merit, and dignity. The recognition and the right that what
is brought about by reason of necessity in civil society and the state shall at the same time be
effected by the mediation of the arbitrary will is the more precise definition of what is primarily
meant by freedom in common parlance (see ¡ì 121). 

                                 ¡ì 207.

A man actualises himself only in becoming something definite, i.e. something
specifically particularised; this means restricting himself exclusively to one of the
particular spheres of need. In this class-system, the ethical frame of mind
therefore is rectitude and esprit de corps, i.e. the disposition to make oneself a
member of one of the moments of civil society by one¡¯s own act, through one¡¯s
energy, industry, and skill, to maintain oneself in this position, and to fend for
oneself only through this process of mediating oneself with the universal, while in
this way gaining recognition both in one¡¯s own eyes and in the eyes of others.
Morality has its proper place in this sphere where the paramount thing is
reflection on one¡¯s doings, and the quest of happiness and private wants, and
where the contingency in satisfying these makes into a duty even a single and
contingent act of assistance. 

Remark: At first (i.e. especially in youth) a man chafes at the idea of resolving on a particular
social position, and looks upon this as a restriction on his universal character and as a necessity
imposed on him purely ab extra. This is because his thinking is still of that abstract kind which
refuses to move beyond the universal and so never reaches the actual. It does not realise that if the
concept is to be determinate, it must first of all advance into the distinction between the concept
and its real existence and thereby into determinacy and particularity (see ¡ì 7) ¡ª It is only thus that
the concept can win actuality and ethical objectivity. 

Addition: When we say that a man must be a ¡®somebody¡¯, we mean that he should belong to
some specific social class, since to be a somebody means to have substantive being. A man with
no class is a mere private person and his universality is not actualised. On the other hand, the
individual in his particularity may take himself as the universal and presume that by entering a class
he is surrendering himself to an indignity. This is the false idea that in attaining a determinacy
necessary to it, a thing is restricting and surrendering itself. 

                                 ¡ì 208.

As the private particularity of knowing and willing, the principle of this system of
needs contains absolute universality, the universality of freedom, only abstractly
and therefore as the right of property. At this point, however, this right is no
longer merely implicit but has attained its recognised actuality as the protection of
property through the administration of justice. 

     B. Administration of Justice

               a: Right as Law     b: Determinate Law     c: Courts  


                               ¡ì 209.

The relatedness arising from the reciprocal bearing on one another of needs and
labour to satisfy these is first of all reflected into itself as infinite personality, as
abstract right. But it is this very sphere of relatedness ¡ª a sphere of education,
which gives abstract right the determinate existence of being something
universally recognised, known, and willed, and having a validity and an objective
actuality mediated by this known and willed character. 

Remark: It is part of education, of thinking as the consciousness of the single in the form of
universality, that the ego comes to be apprehended as a universal person in which all are identical.
A man counts as ¡®a man in virtue of his manhood alone, not because he is a Jew, Catholic,
Protestant, German, Italian, &c. This is an assertion which thinking ratifies and to be conscious of
it is of infinite importance. It is defective only when it is crystallised, e.g. as a cosmopolitanism in
opposition to the concrete life of the state. 

Addition: From one point of view, it is through the working of the system of particularity that
right becomes an external compulsion as a protection of particular interests. Even though this result
is due to the concept, right none the less only becomes something existent because this is useful for
men¡¯s needs. To become conscious in thought of his right, man must be trained to think and give
up dallying with mere sensation. We must invest the objects of our thought with the form of
universality and similarly we must direct our willing by a universal principle. It is only after man has
devised numerous needs and after their acquisition has become intertwined with his satisfaction,
that he can frame laws for himself. 

                                 ¡ì 210.

The objective actuality of the right consists, first, in its existence for
consciousness, in its being known in some way or other; secondly, in its
possessing the power which the actual possesses, in its being valid, and so also in
its becoming known as universally valid. 

                            (a) Right as Law
                                 ¡ì 211.

The principle of rightness becomes the law (Gesetz) when, in its objective
existence, it is posited (gesetzt), i.e. when thinking makes it determinate for
consciousness and makes it known as what is right and valid; and in acquiring this
determinate character, the right becomes positive law in general. 

Remark: To posit something as universal, i.e. to bring it before consciousness as universal, is, I
need hardly say, to think (compare Remarks to ¡ì¡ì 13 and 21). Thereby its content is reduced to
its simplest form and so is given its final determinacy. In becoming law, what is right first time not
only the form proper to its universality, but also its determinacy. Hence making a law is not to be
represented as merely the expression of a rule of behaviour; valid for everyone, though that is one
moment in legislation; the more important moment, the inner essence of the matter, is knowledge
of the content of the law in its determinate universality. 

Since it is only animals which have their law as instinct, while it is man alone who has law as
custom, even systems of customary law contain the moment of being thoughts and being known.
Their difference from positive law consists solely in this, that they are known only in a subjective
and accidental way, with the result that in themselves they are less determinate and the universality
of thought is less clear in them. (And apart from this, knowledge of a system of law either in
general or in its details, is the accidental possession of a few.) The supposition that it is customary
law, on the strength of its character as custom, which possesses the privilege of having become
part of life is a delusion, since he valid laws of a nation do not cease to be its customs by being
written and codified ¡ª and besides, it is as a rule precisely those versed in the deadest of topics
and the deadest of thoughts who talk nowadays of ¡®life¡¯ and of ¡®becoming part of life¡¯. When
a nation begins to acquire even a little culture, its customary law must soon come to be collected
and put together. Such a collection is a legal code, but one which, as a mere collection, is
markedly formless, indeterminate, and fragmentary. The main difference between it and a code
properly so-called is that in the latter the principles of jurisprudence in their universality, and so in
their determinacy, have been apprehended in terms of thought and expressed. English national law
or municipal law is contained, as is well known, in statutes (written laws) and in so-called
¡®unwritten¡¯ laws. This unwritten law, however, is as good as written, and knowledge of it may,
and indeed must, be acquired simply by reading the numerous quartos which it fills. The monstrous
confusion, however, which prevails both in English law and its administration is graphically
portrayed by those acquainted with the matter. In particular, they comment on the fact that, since
this unwritten law is contained in court verdicts and judgments, the judges are continually
legislators. The authority of precedent is binding on them, since their predecessors have done
nothing but give expression to the unwritten law; and yet they are just as much exempt from its
authority, because they are themselves repositories of the unwritten law and so have the right to
criticise previous judgments and pronounce whether they accorded with the unwritten law or not. 

A similar confusion might have arisen in the legal system of the later Roman Empire owing to the
different but authoritative judgments of all the famous jurists. An Emperor met the situation,
however, by a sensible expedient when, by what was called the Law of Citations, he set up a kind
of College of the jurists who were longest deceased. There was a President, and the majority vote
was accepted. 

No greater insult could be offered to a civilised people or to its lawyers than to deny them ability
to codify their law; for such ability cannot be that of constructing a legal system with a novel
content, but only that of apprehending, i.e. grasping in thought, the content of existing laws in its
determinate universality and then applying them to particular cases. 

Addition: The sun and the planets have their laws too, but they do not know them. Savages are
governed by impulses, customs, and feelings, but they are unconscious of this. When right is
posited as law and is known, every accident of feeling vanishes together with the form of revenge,
sympathy, and selfishness, and in this way the right attains for the first time its true determinacy and
is given its due honour. It is as a result of the discipline of comprehending the right that the right
first becomes capable of universality. In the course of applying the laws, clashes occur, and in
dealing with these the judge¡¯s intelligence has its proper scope; this is quite inevitable, because
otherwise carrying out the law would be something mechanical from start to finish. But to go so far
as to get rid of clashes altogether by leaving much to the judge¡¯s discretion is a far worse solution,
because even the clash is intrinsic to thought, to conscious thinking and its dialectic, while the mere
fiat of a judge would be arbitrary. 

It is generally alleged in favour of customary law that it is ¡®living¡¯, but this vitality, i.e. the identity
between the subject and what the law provides, is not the whole essence of the matter. Law
(Recht) must be known by thought, it must be a system in itself, and only as such can it be
recognised in a civilised country. The recent denial that nations ¡®have a vocation to codify their
laws¡¯ is not only an insult; it also implies the absurdity of supposing that not a single individual has
been endowed with skill enough to bring into a coherent system the endless mass of existing laws.
The truth is that it is just systematisation, i.e. elevation to the universal, which our time is pressing
for without any limit. A similar view is that collections of judgments, like those available in a
Corpus juris, are far superior to a code worked out in the most general way. The reason alleged
is that such judgments always retain a certain particularity and a certain reminiscence of history
which men are unwilling to sacrifice. But the mischievousness of such collections is made clear
enough by the practice of English law. 

                                 ¡ì 212.

It is only because of this identity between its implicit and its posited character that
positive law has obligatory force in virtue of its rightness. In being posited in
positive law, the right acquires determinate existence. Into such existence there
may enter the contingency of self-will and other particular circumstances and
hence there may be a discrepancy between the content of the law and the
principle of rightness. 

Remark: In positive law, therefore, it is the legal which is the source of our knowledge of what
is right, or, more exactly, of our legal rights (Rechtens). Thus the science of positive law is to that
extent an historical science with authority as its guiding principle. Anything over and above this
historical study is matter for the Understanding and concerns the collection of laws, their
classification on external principles, deductions from them, their application to fresh details, &c.
When the Understanding meddles with the nature of the thing itself, its theories, e.g. of criminal
law, show what its deductive argumentation can concoct. 

The science of positive law has not only the right, but even the inescapable duty, to study given
laws, to deduce from its positive data their progress in history, their applications and subdivisions,
down to the last detail, and to exhibit their implications. On the other hand, if, after all these
deductions have been proved, the further question about the rationality of a specific law is still
raised, the question may seem perverse to those who are busied with these pursuits, but their
astonishment at it should at least stop short of dismay. 

With this Remark, compare what was said in the Remark to ¡ì 3 about ¡®understanding¡¯ the law. 

                                 ¡ì 213.

Right becomes determinate in the first place when it has the form of being posited
as positive law; it also becomes determinate in content by being applied both to
the material of civil society (i.e. to the endlessly growing complexity and
subdivision of social ties and the different species of property and contract within
the society) and also to ethical ties based on the heart, on love and trust, though
only in so far as these involve abstract right as one of their aspects (see ¡ì 159) ¡ª
Morality and moral commands concern the will on its most private, subjective,
and particular side, and so cannot be a matter for positive legislation. Further
material for the determinate content of law is provided by the rights and duties
which have their source in the administration of justice itself, in the state, and so
forth. 

Addition: In the higher relationships of marriage, love, religion, and the state, the only aspects
which can become the subject of legislation are those of such a nature as to permit of their being in
principle external. Still, in this respect there is a wide difference between the laws of different
peoples. The Chinese, for instance, have a law requiring a husband to love his first wife more than
his other wives. If he is convicted of doing the opposite, corporal punishment follows. Similarly,
the legislation of the ancients in earlier times was full of precepts about uprightness and integrity
which are unsuited by nature to legal enactment because they fall wholly within the field of the inner
life. It is only in the case of the oath, whereby things are brought home to conscience, that
uprightness and integrity must be taken into account as the substance of the matter. 

                                 ¡ì 214.

But apart from being applied to particular instances, right by being embodied in
positive law becomes applicable to the single case. Hence it enters the sphere
where quantity, not the concept, is the principle of determination. This is the
sphere of the quantitative as such, of the quantitative as that which determines the
relative value in exchange of qualia. In this sphere, the concept merely lays down
a general limit, within which vacillation is still allowed. This vacillation must be
terminated, however, in the interest of getting something done, and for this reason
there is a place within that limit for contingent and arbitrary decisions. 

Remark: The purely positive side of law lies chiefly in this focusing of the universal not merely on
a particular instance, but on an isolated case, i.e. in its direct application. Reason cannot
determine, nor can the concept provide any principle whose application could decide whether
justice requires for an offence (i) a corporal punishment of forty lashes or thirty-nine, or (ii) a fine
of five dollars or four dollars ninety-three, four, &c., cents, or (iii) imprisonment of a year or three
hundred and sixty-four, three, &c., days, or a year and one, two, or three days. And yet injustice
is done at once if there is one lash too many, or one dollar or one cent, one week in prison or one
day, too many or too few. 

Reason itself requires us to recognise that contingency, contradiction, and show have a sphere and
a right of their own, restricted though it be, and it is irrational to strive to resolve and rectify
contradictions within that sphere. Here the only interest present is that something be actually done,
that the matter be settled and decided somehow, no matter how (within a certain limit). This
decision pertains to abstract subjectivity, to formal self-certainty, which may decide either by
simply holding to its power (within that limit) of settling the matter by merely terminating
deliberation and thereby dismissing it out of hand, or else by adopting some reason for decision
such as keeping to round numbers or always adopting, say thirty-nine. 

It is true that the law does not settle these ultimate decisions required by actual life; it leaves them
instead to the judge¡¯s discretion, merely limiting him by a maximum and minimum. But this does
not affect the point at issue, because the maximum and minimum are themselves in every instance
only round numbers once more. To fix them, therefore, does not exempt the judge from making a
finite, purely positive, decision, since on the contrary such a decision is still left to him by the
necessities of the case. 

Addition: There is one essential element in law and the administration of justice which contains
a measure of contingency and which arises from the fact that the law is a universal prescription
which has to be applied to the single case. If you wished to declare yourself against this
contingency, you would be talking in abstractions. The measure of a man¡¯s punishment, for
example, cannot be made equivalent to any determination of the concept of punishment, and the
decision made, whatever it be, is from this point of view arbitrary always. But this contingency is
itself necessary, and if you argue against having a code at all on the ground that any code is
incomplete, you are overlooking just that element of law in which completion is not to be achieved
and which therefore must just be accepted as it stands. 

                    (b) Law determinately existent
                                 ¡ì 215.

If laws are to have a binding force, it follows that, in view of the right of
self-consciousness (see ¡ì 132 and the Remark thereto) they must be made
universally known. 

Remark: To hang the laws so high that no citizen could read them (as Dionysius the Tyrant did)
is injustice of one and the same kind as to bury them in row upon row of learned tomes,
collections of dissenting judgments and opinions, records of customs, &c., and in a dead language
too, so that knowledge of the law of the land is accessible only to those who have made it their
professional study. Rulers who have given a national law to their peoples in the form of a
well-arranged and clear-cut legal code or even a mere formless collection of laws, like Justinian¡¯s
¡ª have been the greatest benefactors of their peoples and have received thanks and praise for
their beneficence. But the truth is that their work was at the same time a great act of justice. 

Addition: The legal profession, possessed of a special knowledge of the law, often claims this
knowledge as its monopoly and refuses to allow any layman to discuss the subject. Physicists
similarly have taken amiss Goethe¡¯s theory about colours because he did not belong to their craft
and was a poet into the bargain. But we do not need to be shoemakers to know if our shoes fit,
and just as little have we any need to be professionals to acquire knowledge of matters of
universal interest. Law is concerned with freedom, the worthiest and holiest thing in man, the thing
man must know if it is to have obligatory force for him. 

                                 ¡ì 216.

For a public legal code, simple general laws are required, and yet the nature of the
finite material to which law is applied leads to the further determining of general
laws ad infinitum. On the one hand, the law ought to be a comprehensive whole,
closed and complete; and yet, on the other hand, the need for further
determinations is continual. But since this antinomy arises only when universal
principles, which remain fixed and unchanged, are applied to particular types of
case, the right to a complete legal code remains unimpaired, like the right that
these simple general principles should be capable of being laid down and
understood apart and in distinction from their application to such particular types. 

Remark: A fruitful source of complexity in legislation is the gradual intrusion of reason, of what
is inherently and actually right, into primitive institutions which have something wrong at their roots
and so are purely historical survivals. This occurred in Roman law, as was remarked above (see
Remark to ¡ì 180), in medieval feudal law, &c. It is essential to notice, however, that the very
nature of the finite material to which law is applied necessarily entails an infinite progress in the
application to it of principles universal in themselves and inherently and actually rational. 

It is misunderstanding which has given rise alike to the demand ¡ª a morbid craving of German
scholars chiefly ¡ª that a legal code should be something absolutely complete, incapable of any
fresh determination in detail, and also to the argument that because a code is incapable of such
completion, therefore we ought not to produce something ¡®incomplete¡¯, i.e. we ought not to
produce a code at all. The misunderstanding rests in both cases on a misconception of the nature
of a finite subject-matter like private law, whose so-called ¡®completeness¡¯ is a perennial
approximation to completeness, on a misconception of the differences between the universal of
reason and the universal of the Understanding, and also in the application of the latter to the
material of finitude and atomicity which goes on for ever. ¡ª Le plus grand ennemi du Bien,
c¡¯est le Meilleur is the utterance of true common sense against the common sense of idle
argumentation and abstract reflection. 

Addition: Completeness means the exhaustive collection of every single thing, pertaining to a
given field, and no science or branch of knowledge can be complete in this sense. Now . if we say
that philosophy or any one of the sciences is incomplete, we are not far from holding that we must
wait until the deficiency is made up, since the best part may still be wanting. But take up this
attitude and advance is impossible, either in geometry, which seems to be a closed science
although new propositions do arise, or in philosophy, which is always capable of freshness in detail
even though its subject is the universal Idea. In the past, the universal law always consisted of the
ten commandments; now we can see at once that not to lay down the law ¡®Thou shalt not kill¡¯,
on the ground that a legal code cannot be complete, is an obvious absurdity. Any code could be
still better ¡ª no effort of reflection is required to justify this affirmation; we can think of the best,
finest, and noblest as still better, finer, and nobler. But a big old tree puts forth more and more
branches without thereby becoming a new tree; though it would be silly to refuse to plant a tree at
all simply because it might produce new branches. 

                                 ¡ì 217.

The principle of rightness passes over in civil society into law. My individual
right, whose embodiment has hitherto been immediate and abstract, now similarly
becomes embodied in the existent will and knowledge of everyone, in the sense
that it becomes recognised. Hence property acquisitions and transfers must now
be undertaken and concluded only in the form which that embodiment gives to
them. In civil society, property rests on contract and on the formalities which
make ownership capable of proof and valid in law. 

Remark: Original, i.e. direct, titles and means of acquisition (see ¡ì¡ì 54 ff.) are simply discarded
in civil society and appear only as isolated accidents or as subordinated factors of property
transactions. It is either feeling, refusing to move beyond the subjective, or reflection, clinging to its
abstract essences, which casts formalities aside, while the dry-as-dust Understanding may for its
part cling to formalities instead of the real thing and multiply them indefinitely. 

Apart from this, however, the march of mental development is the long and hard struggle to free a
content from its sensuous and immediate form, endow it with its appropriate form of thought, and
thereby give it simple and adequate expression. It is because this is the case that when the
development of law is just beginning, ceremonies and formalities are more circumstantial and count
rather as the thing itself than as its symbol. Thus even in Roman law, a number of forms and
especially phrases were retained from old-fashioned ceremonial usages, instead of being replaced
by intelligible forms and phrases adequately expressing them. 

Addition: Law and the right are identical in the sense that what is implicitly right is posited in the
law. I possess something, own a property, which I occupied when it was ownerless. This
possession must now further be recognised and posited as mine. Hence in civil society formalities
arise in connection with property. Boundary stones are erected as a symbol for others to
recognise. Entries are made in mortgage and property registers. Most property in civil society is
held on contract, and contractual forms are fixed and determinate. Now we may have an antipathy
to formalities of this kind and we may suppose that they only exist to bring in money to the
authorities; we may even regard them as something offensive and a sign of mistrust because they
impair the validity of the saying: ¡®A man is as good as his word.¡¯ But the formality is essential
because what is inherently right must also be posited as right. My will is a rational will; it has
validity, and its validity should be recognised by others. At this point, then, my subjectivity and that
of others must be set aside and the will must achieve the security, stability, and objectivity which
can be attained only through such formalities. 

                                 ¡ì 218.

Since property and personality have legal recognition and validity in civil society,
wrongdoing now becomes an infringement, not merely of what is subjectively
infinite, but of the universal thing which is existent with inherent stability and
strength. Hence a new attitude arises: the action is seen as a danger to society and
thereby the magnitude of the wrongdoing is increased. On the other hand,
however, the fact that society has become strong and sure of itself diminishes the
external importance of the injury and so leads to a mitigation of its punishment. 

Remark: The fact that an injury to one member of society is an injury to all others does not alter
the conception of wrongdoing, but it does alter it in respect of its outward existence as an injury
done, an injury which now affects the mind and consciousness of civil society as a whole, not
merely the external embodiment of the person directly injured. In heroic times, as we see in the
tragedy of the ancients, the citizens did not feel themselves injured by wrongs which members of
the royal houses did to one another. 

Implicitly, crime is an infinite, injury; but as an existent fact it must be measured in quantity and
quality (see ¡ì 96), and since its field of existence here has the essential character of affecting an
idea and consciousness of the validity of the laws, its danger to civil society is a determinant of the
magnitude of a crime, or even one of its qualitative characteristics. 

Now this quality or magnitude varies with the state of civil society; and this is the justification for
sometimes attaching the penalty of death to a theft of a few pence or a turnip, and at other times a
light penalty to a theft of a hundred or more times that amount. If we consider its danger to
society, this seems at first sight to aggravate the crime; but in fact it is just this which has been the
prime cause of the mitigation of its punishment. A penal code, then, is primarily the child of its age
and the state of civil society at the time. 

Addition: It seems to be a contradiction that a crime committed in society appears more
heinous and yet is punished more leniently. But while it would be impossible for society to leave a
crime unpunished, since that would be to posit it as right, still since society is sure of itself, a crime
must always be something idiosyncratic in comparison, something unstable and exceptional. The
very stability of society gives a crime the status of something purely subjective which seems to be
the product rather of natural impulse than of a prudent will. In this light, crime acquires a milder
status, and for this reason its punishment too becomes milder. If society is still internally weak, then
an example must be made by inflicting punishments, since punishment is itself an example over
against the example of crime. But in a society which is internally strong, the commission of crime is
something so feeble that its annulment must be commensurable with its feebleness. Harsh
punishments, therefore, are not unjust in and by themselves; they are related to contemporary
conditions. A criminal code cannot hold good for all time, and crimes are only shows of reality
which may draw on themselves a greater or lesser degree of disavowal. 

                        (c) The Court of Justice
                                 ¡ì 219.

By taking the form of law, right steps into a determinate mode of being. It is then
something on its own account, and in contrast with particular willing and opining
of the right, it is self-subsistent and has to vindicate itself as something universal.,
This is achieved by recognising it and making it actual in a particular case without
the subjective feeling of private interest; and this is the business of a public
authority ¡ª the court of justice. 

Remark: The historical origin of the judge and his court may have had the form of a patriarch¡¯s
gift to his people or of force or free choice; but this makes no difference to the concept of the
thing. To regard the introduction of a legal system as no more than an optional act of grace or
favour on the part of monarchs and governments (as Herr von Haller does in his Restauration der
Staatswissenschaft) is a piece of the mere thoughtlessness which has no inkling of the point at
issue in a discussion of law and the state. The point is that legal and political institutions are rational
in principle and therefore absolutely necessary, and the question of the form in which they arose or
were introduced is entirely irrelevant to a consideration of their rational basis. 

At the other extreme from Herr von Haller¡¯s point of view is the barbarous nation that the
administration of justice is now, as it was in the days when might was right, an improper exercise
of force, a suppression of freedom, and a despotism. The administration of justice must be
regarded as the fulfilment of a duty by the public authority, no less than as the exercise of a right;
and so far as it is a right, it does not depend upon an optional delegation to one authority by the
individual members of society. 

                                 ¡ì 220.

When the right against crime has the form of revenge (see ¡ì 102), it is only right
implicit, not right in the form of right, i.e. no act of revenge is justified. Instead of
the injured party, the injured universal now comes on the scene, and this has its
proper actuality in the court of law. It takes over the pursuit and the avenging of
crime, and this pursuit consequently ceases to be the subjective and contingent
retribution of revenge and is transformed into the genuine reconciliation of right
with itself, i.e. into punishment. Objectively, this is the reconciliation of the law
with itself; by the annulment of the crime, the law is restored and its authority is
thereby actualised. Subjectively, it is the reconciliation of the criminal with
himself, i.e. with the law known by him as his own and as valid for him and his
protection; when this law is executed upon him, he himself finds in this process
the satisfaction of justice and nothing save his own act. 

                                 ¡ì 221.

A member of civil society has the right in judicio stare and, correspondingly, the
duty of acknowledging the jurisdiction of the court and accepting its decision as
final when his own rights are in dispute. 

Addition: Since any individual has the right in judicio stare, he must also know what the law is
or otherwise this privilege would be useless to him. But it is also his duty to stand his trial. Under
the feudal system, the nobles often refused to stand their trial. They defied the court and alleged
that the court was wrong to demand their appearance. Feudal conditions, however, contravened
the very idea of a court. Nowadays monarchs have to recognise the jurisdiction of the court in
their private affairs, and in free states they commonly lose their case. 

                                 ¡ì 222.

In court the specific character which rightness acquires is that it must be
demonstrable. When parties go to law, they are put in the position of having to
make good their evidence and their claims and to make the judge acquainted with
the facts. These steps in a legal process are themselves rights, and their course
must therefore be fixed by law. They also constitute an essential part of
jurisprudence. 

Addition: A man may be indignant if a right which he knows he has is refused him because he
cannot prove it. But if I have a right, it must at the same time be a right posited in law. I must be
able to explain and prove it, and its validity can only be recognised in society if its rightness in
principle is also made a posited rightness in law. 

                                 ¡ì 223.

These steps in a legal process are subdivided continually within no fixed limits
into more and more actions, each being distinct in itself and a right. Hence a legal
process, in, itself in any case a means, now begins to be something external to its
end and contrasted with it. This long course of formalities is a right of the parties
at law and they have the right to traverse it from beginning to end. Still, it may be
turned into an evil, and even an instrument of wrong, and for this reason it is by
law made the duty of the parties to submit themselves to the simple process of
arbitration (before a tribunal of arbitrators) and to the attempt to reconcile their
differences out of court, in order that they ¡ª and right itself, as the substance of
the thing and so the thing really at issue may be protected against legal processes
and their misuse. 

Remark: Equity involves a departure from formal rights owing to moral or other considerations
and is concerned primarily with the content of the lawsuit. A court of equity, however, comes to
mean a court which decides in a single case without insisting on the formalities of a legal process
or, in particular, on the objective evidence which the letter of the law may require. Further, it
decides on the merits of the single case as a unique one, not with a view to disposing of it in such a
way as to create a binding legal precedent for the future. 

                                 ¡ì 224.

Amongst the rights of the subjective consciousness are not only the publication of
the laws (see ¡ì 215) but also the possibility of ascertaining the actualisation of the
law in a particular case (the course of the proceedings, the legal argument, &c.)
¡ª i.e. the publicity of judicial proceedings. The reason for this is that a trial is
implicitly an event of universal validity, and although the particular content of the
action affects the interests of the parties alone, its universal content, i.e. the right
at issue and the judgment thereon, affects the interests of everybody. 

Remark: If the members of the bench deliberate amongst themselves about the judgment which
they are to deliver, such deliberations express opinions and views still personal and so naturally are
not public. 

Addition: It is straightforward common sense to hold that the publicity of legal proceedings is
right and just. A strong reason against such publicity has always been the rank of justices; they are
unwilling to sit in public and they regard themselves as a sanctuary of law which laymen are not to
enter. But an integral part of justice is the confidence which citizens have in it, and it is this which
requires that proceedings shall be public. The right of publicity depends on the fact that (i) the aim
of the court is justice, which as universal falls under the cognisance of everyone, and (ii) it is
through publicity that the citizens become convinced that the judgment was actually just. 

                                 ¡ì 225.

By the judgment of the court, the law is applied to a single case, and the work of
judgment has two distinct aspects: first, ascertainment of the nature of the case as
a unique, single, occurrence (e.g. whether a contract, &c., &c., has been made,
whether a trespass has been committed, and if so by whom) and, in criminal
cases, reflection to determine the essential, criminal, ¡ª character of the deed (see
Remark to ¡ì 119); secondly, the subsumption of the case under the law that right
must be restored. Punishment in criminal cases is a conception falling under this
law. Decisions on these two different aspects are given by different functionaries. 

Remark: In the Roman judicial system, this distinction of functions appeared in that the Praetor
pronounced judgment on the assumption that the facts were so and so, and then appointed a
special judex to inquire into the facts. 

In English law, it is left to the insight or option of the prosecutor to determine the precise character
of a criminal act (e.g. whether it is murder or manslaughter) and the court is powerless to alter the
indictment if it finds the prosecutor¡¯s choice wrong. 

                                 ¡ì 226.

First, the conduct of the entire process of inquiry, secondly, the detailed stages of
the action between the parties (these stages themselves being rights ¡ª see ¡ì 222),
and then also the second of the aspects of the work of judgment mentioned in the
previous Paragraph, are all a task which properly belongs to the judge at law. He
is the organ of the law, and the case must be ¡®prepared for him in such a way as
to make possible its subsumption founder some principle; that is to say, it must be
stripped of its .apparent, empirical, character and exalted into a recognised fact of
a general type. 

                                 ¡ì 227.

The first aspect of the work of judgment, i.e. the knowledge of the facts of the
case as a unique, single, occurrence, and the description of its general character,
involves in itself no pronouncement on points of law. This is knowledge attainable
by any educated man. In settling the character of an action, the subjective
moment, i.e. the agent¡¯s insight and intention (see the Second Part), is the
essential thing; and apart from this, the proof depends not on objects of reason or
abstractions of the Understanding, but only on single details and circumstances,
objects of sensuous intuition and subjective certainty, and therefore does not
contain in itself any absolute, objective, probative factor. It follows that judgment
on the facts lies in the last resort with subjective conviction and conscience
(animi sententia), while the proof, resting as it does on the statements and
affidavits of others, receives its final though purely subjective verification from
the oath. 

Remark: In this matter it is of the first importance to fix our eyes on the type of proof here in
question and to distinguish it from knowledge and proof of another sort. To establish by proof a
rational category, like the concept of right itself, means to apprehend its necessity, and so
demands a method other than that requisite for the proof of a geometrical theorem. Further, in this
latter case, the figure is determined by the Understanding and made abstract in advance according
to a rule. But in the case of something empirical in content, like a fact, the material of knowledge is
a given sensuous intuition and subjective sense-certainty, and statements and affidavits about such
material. It is then a question of drawing conclusions and putting two and two together out of
depositions of that kind, attestations and other details, &c. The objective truth which emerges
from material of this kind and the method appropriate to it leads, when attempts are made to
determine it rigidly and objectively, to half-proofs and then, by further sincere deductions from
these ¡ª deductions which at the same time involve formal illogicality ¡ª to extraordinary
punishments." But such objective truth means something quite different from the truth of a rational
category or a proposition whose content the Understanding has determined for itself abstractly in
advance. To show that, since the strictly legal character of a court covers competence to ascertain
this sort of truth about empirical events, it thereby properly qualifies a court for this task and so
gives it an inherent exclusive right to perform it and lays on it the necessity of performing it ¡ª that
is the best approach to settling the question of how far decisions on points of fact, as well as on
points of law, should be ascribed to courts as strictly juristic bodies. 

Addition: No grounds can be adduced for supposing that the judge, i.e. the legal expert, should
be the only person to establish how the facts lie, for ability to do so depends on general, not on
purely legal, education. Determination of the facts of the case depends on empirical details, on
depositions about what happened, and on similar perceptual data, or again on facts from which
inferences can be drawn about the deed in question and which make it probable or improbable.
Here then, it is an assurance which should be required, not truth in the higher sense in which it is
always something eternal. Here such assurance is subjective conviction, or conscience, and the
problem is: What form should this assurance take in a court of law? The demand, commonly made
in German law, that a criminal should confess his guilt, has this to be said for it, that the right of
self-consciousness thereby attains a measure of satisfaction; consciousness must chime in with the
judge¡¯s sentence, and it is only when the criminal has confessed that the judgment loses its alien
character so far as he is concerned. But a difficulty arises here, because the criminal may lie, and
the interest of justice may be jeopardised. If, on the other hand, the subjective conviction of the
judge is to hold good, some hardship is once more involved, because the accused is no longer
being treated as a free man. Now the middle term between these extremes is trial by jury, which
meets the demand that the declaration of guilt or innocence shall spring from the soul of the
accused. 

                                 ¡ì 228.

When judgment is pronounced ¡ª so far as the function of judgment is the
subsumption under the law of the case whose nature has been settled ¡ª the right
due to the parties on the score of their self-consciousness is preserved in relation
to the law because the law is known and so is the law of the parties themselves,
and in relation to the subsumption, because the trial is public. But when a verdict
is given on the particular, subjective, and external facts of the case (knowledge of
which falls under the first of the aspects described in ¡ì 225), this right is satisfied
by the confidence which the parties feel in the subjectivity of those who give the
verdict. This confidence is based primarily on the similarity between them and the
parties in respect of their particularity, i.e. their social position, &c. 

Remark: The right of self-consciousness, the moment of subjective freedom, may be regarded
as the fundamental thing to keep before us in considering the necessity for publicity in legal
proceedings and for the so-called jury-courts, and this in the last resort is the essence of whatever
may be advanced in favour of these institutions on the score of their utility. Other points of view
and reasoning about their several advantages and disadvantages may give rise to an argumentative
exchange, but reasoning of this kind, like all deductive reasoning, is either secondary and
inconclusive, or else drawn from other and perhaps higher spheres than that of advantage. It may
be the case that if the administration of justice were entirely in the hands of professional lawyers,
and there were no lay institutions like juries, it would in theory be managed just as well, if not
better. It may be so, but even if this possibility rises by general consent to probability, or even
certainty, it still does not matter, for on the other side there is always the right of
self-consciousness, insisting on its claims and dissatisfied if laymen play no part. 

Owing to the character of the entire body of the laws, knowledge both of what is right and also of
the course of legal proceedings may become, together with the capacity to prosecute an action at
law, the property of a class which makes itself an exclusive clique by the use of a terminology like
a foreign tongue to those whose rights are at issue. If this happens, the members of civil society,
who depend for their livelihood on their industry, on their own knowledge and will, are kept
strangers to the law, not only to those parts of it affecting their most personal and intimate affairs,
but also to its substantive and rational basis, the rig itself, and the result is that they become the
wards, or even in a sense the bondsmen, of the legal profession. They may indeed have the right to
appear in court in person and to ¡®stand¡¯ there (in judicio stare), but their bodily presence is a
trifle if their minds are not to be there also, if they are not to follow the proceedings with their own
knowledge, and if the justice they receive remains in their eyes a doom pronounced ab extra. 

                                 ¡ì 229.

In civil society, the Idea is lost in particularity and has fallen asunder with the
separation of inward and outward. In the administration of justice, however, civil
society returns to its concept, to the unity of the implicit universal with the
subjective particular, although here the latter is only that present in single cases
and the universality in question is that of abstract right. The actualisation of this
unity through its extension to the whole ambit of particularity is (i) the specific
function of the Police, though the unification which it effects is only relative; (ii) it
is the Corporation which actualises the unity completely, though only in a whole
which, while concrete, is restricted. 

Addition: In civil society, universality is necessity only. When we are dealing with human needs,
it is only right as such which is steadfast. But this right ¡ª only a restricted sphere ¡ª has a bearing
simply on the protection of property; welfare is something external to right as such. This welfare,
however, is an essential end in the system of needs. Hence the universal, which in the first instance
is the right only, has to be extended over the whole field of particularity. Justice is a big thing in
civil society. Given good laws, a state can flourish, and freedom of property is a fundamental
condition of its prosperity. Still, since I am inextricably involved in particularity, I have a right to
claim that in this association with other particulars, my particular welfare too shall be promoted.
Regard should he paid to my welfare, to my particular interest, and this is done through the police
and the Corporation. 

        C. The Public Authorities

                          a: Police     b: Corporation  


                               ¡ì 230.

In the system of needs, the livelihood and welfare of every single person is a
possibility whose actual attainment is just as much conditioned by his caprices
and particular endowment as by the objective system of needs. Through the
administration of justice, offences against property or personality are annulled.
But the right actually present in the particular requires, first, that accidental
hindrances to one aim or another be removed, and undisturbed safety of person
and property be attained; and secondly, that the securing of every single person¡¯s
livelihood and welfare be treated and actualised as a right, i.e. that particular
welfare as such be so treated. 

                  (a) Police [or the public authority]
                                 ¡ì 231.

Inasmuch as it is still the particular will which governs the choice of this or that
end, the universal authority by which security is ensured remains in the first
instance, (a) restricted to the sphere of contingencies, and (b) an external
organisation. 

                                 ¡ì 232.

Crime is contingency as subjective willing of evil, and this is what the universal
authority must prevent or bring to justice. But, crime apart, the subjective willing
which is permissible in actions lawful per se and in the private use of property,
also comes into external relation with other single persons, as well as with public
institutions, other than law-courts, established for realising a common end. This
universal aspect makes private actions a matter of contingency which escapes the
agent¡¯s control and which either does or may injure others and wrong them. 

                                 ¡ì 233.

There is here only a possibility of injury; but the actual non-occurrence of injury
is at this stage not just another contingency. The point is that the actions of
individuals may always be wrongful, and this is the ultimate reason for police
control and penal justice. 

                                 ¡ì 234.

The relations between external existents fall into the infinite of the Understanding;
there is, therefore, no inherent line of distinction between what is and what is not
injurious, even where crime is concerned, or between what is and what is not
suspicious, or between what is to be forbidden or subjected to supervision and
what is to be exempt from prohibition, from surveillance and suspicion, from
inquiry and the demand to render an account of itself. These details are
determined by custom, the spirit of the rest of the constitution, contemporary
conditions, the crisis of the hour, and so forth. 

Addition: Here nothing hard and fast can be laid down and no absolute lines can be drawn.
Everything here is personal; subjective opinion enters in, and the spirit of the constitution and the
crisis of the day have to provide precision of detail. In time of war, for instance, many a thing,
harmless at other times, has to be regarded as harmful. As a result of this presence of accident, of
personal arbitrariness, the public authority acquires a measure of odium. When reflective thinking
is very highly developed, the public authority may tend to draw into its orbit everything it possibly
can, for in everything some factor may be found which might make it dangerous in one of its
bearings. In such circumstances, the public authority may set to work very pedantically and
embarrass the day-to-day life of people. But however great this annoyance, no objective line can
be drawn here either. 

                                 ¡ì 235.

In the indefinite multiplication and interconnection of day-to-day needs, (a) the
acquisition and exchange of the means to their satisfactions ¡ª satisfaction which
everyone confidently expects to be possible of attainment without hindrance, and
(b) the endeavours made and the transactions carried out in order to shorten the
process of attainment as much as possible, give rise to factors which are a
common interest, and when one man occupies himself with these his labour is at
the same time done for all. The situation is productive too of contrivances and
organisations which may be of use to the community as a whole. These universal
activities and organisations of general utility call for the oversight and care of the
public authority. 

                                 ¡ì 236.

The differing interests of producers and consumers may come into collision with
each other; and although a fair balance between them on the whole may be
brought about automatically, still their adjustment also requires a control which
stands above both and is consciously undertaken. The right to the exercise of
such control in a single case (e.g. in the fixing of the prices of the commonest
necessaries of life) depends on the fact that, by being publicly exposed for sale,
goods in absolutely universal daily demand are offered not so much to an
individual as such but rather to a universal purchaser, the public; and thus both
the defence of the public¡¯s right not to be defrauded, and also the management
of goods inspection, may lie, as a common concern, with a public authority. But
public care and direction are most of all necessary in the case of the larger
branches of industry, because these are dependent on conditions abroad and on
combinations of distant circumstances which cannot be grasped as a whole by the
individuals tied to these industries for their living. 

Remark: At the other extreme to freedom of trade and commerce in civil society is public
organisation to provide for everything and determine everyone¡¯s labour ¡ª take for example in
ancient times the labour on the pyramids and the other huge monuments in Egypt and Asia which
were constructed for public ends, and the worker¡¯s task was not mediated through his private
choice and particular interest. This interest invokes freedom of trade and commerce against
control from above; but the more blindly it sinks into self-seeking aims, the more it requires such
control to bring it back to the universal. Control is also necessary to diminish the danger of
upheavals arising from clashing interests and to abbreviate the period in which their tension should
be eased through the working of a necessity of which they themselves know nothing. 

Addition: The oversight and care exercised by the public authority aims at being a middle term
between an individual and the universal possibility, afforded by society, of attaining individual ends.
It has to undertake street-lighting, bridge-building, the pricing of daily necessaries, and the care of
public health. In this connection, two main views predominate at the present time. One asserts that
the superintendence of everything properly belongs to the public authority, the other that the public
authority has nothing at all to settle here because everyone will direct his conduct according to the
needs of others. The individual must have a right to work for his bread as he pleases, but the
public also has a right to insist that essential tasks shall be properly done. Both points of view must
be satisfied, and freedom of trade should not be such as to jeopardise the general good. 

                                 ¡ì 237.

Now while the possibility of sharing in the general wealth is open to individuals
and is assured to them by the public authority, still it is subject to contingencies
on the subjective side (quite apart from the fact that this assurance must remain
incomplete), and the more it presupposes skill, health, capital, and so forth as its
conditions, the more is it so subject. 

                                ¡ì 238.

Originally the family is the substantive whole whose function it is to provide for
the individual on his particular side by giving him either the means and the skill
necessary to enable him to earn his living out of the resources of society, or else
subsistence and maintenance in the event of his suffering a disability. But civil
society tears the individual from his family ties, estranges the members of the
family from one another, and recognises them as self-subsistent persons. Further,
for the paternal soil and the external inorganic resources of nature from which the
individual formerly derived his livelihood, it substitutes its own soil and subjects
the permanent existence of even the entire family to dependence on itself and to
contingency. Thus the individual becomes a son of civil society which has as
many claims upon him as he has rights against it. 

Addition: To be sure, the family has to provide bread for its members, but in civil society the
family¡¯ is something subordinate and only lays the foundations; its effective range is no longer so
comprehensive. Civil society is rather the tremendous power which draws men into itself and
claims from them that they work for it, owe everything to it, and do everything by its means. If man
is to be a member of civil society in this sense, he has rights and claims against it just as he had
rights and claims in the family. Civil society must protect its members and defend their rights, while
its rights impose duties on every one of its members. 

                                 ¡ì 239.

In its character as a universal family, civil society has the right and duty of
superintending and influencing education, inasmuch as education bears upon the
child¡¯s capacity to become a member of society. Society¡¯s right here is
paramount over the arbitrary and contingent preferences of parents, particularly in
cases where education is to be completed not by the parents but by others. To the
same end, society must provide public educational facilities so far as is
practicable. 

Addition: The line which demarcates the rights of parents from those of civil society is very hard
to draw here. Parents usually suppose that in the matter of education they have complete freedom
and may arrange everything as they like. The chief opposition to any form of public education
usually comes from parents and it is they who talk and make an outcry about teachers and schools
because they have a faddish dislike of them. None the less, society has a right to act on principles
tested by its experience and to compel parents to send their children to school, to have them
vaccinated, and so forth. The disputes that have arisen in France between the advocates of state
supervision and those who demand that education shall be free, i.e. at the option of the parents,
are relevant here. 

                                 ¡ì 240.

Similarly, society has the right and duty of acting as trustee to those whose
extravagance destroys the security of their own subsistence or their families. It
must substitute for extravagance the pursuit of the ends of society and the
individuals concerned. 

Addition: There was an Athenian law compelling every citizen to give an account of his source
of livelihoods Nowadays we take the view that this is nobody¡¯s business but his own. Of course
every individual is from one point of view independent, but he also plays his part in the system of
civil society, and while every man has the right to demand subsistence from it, it must at the same
time protect him from himself. It is not simply starvation which is at issue; the further end in view is
to prevent the formation of a pauperised rabble. Since civil society is responsible for feeding its
members, it also has the right to press them to provide for their own livelihood. 

                                 ¡ì 241.

Not only caprice, however, but also contingencies, physical conditions, and
factors grounded in external circumstances (see ¡ì 200) may reduce men to
poverty. The poor still have the needs common to civil society, and yet since
society has withdrawn from them the natural means of acquisition (see ¡ì 217)
and broken the bond of the family ¡ª in the wider sense of the clan (see ¡ì 181)
¡ª their poverty leaves them more or less deprived of all the advantages of
society, of the opportunity of acquiring skill or education of any kind, as well as
of the administration of justice, the public health services, and often even of the
consolations of religion, and so forth. The public authority takes the place of the
family where the poor are concerned in respect not only of their immediate want
but also of laziness of disposition, malignity, and the other vices which arise out
of their plight and their sense of wrong. 

                                ¡ì 242.

Poverty and, in general, the distress of every kind to which every individual is
exposed from the start in the cycle of his natural life has a subjective side which
demands similarly subjective aid, arising both from the special circumstances of a
particular case and also from love and sympathy. This is the place where morality
finds plenty to do despite all public organisation. Subjective aid, however, both in
itself and in its operation, is dependent on contingency and consequently society
struggles to make it less necessary, by discovering the general causes of penury
and general means of its relief, and by organising relief accordingly. 

Remark: Casual almsgiving and casual endowments, e.g. for the burning of lamps before holy
images, &c., are supplemented by public almshouses, hospitals, street-lighting, and so forth. There
is still quite enough left over and above these things for charity to do on its own account. A false
view is implied both when charity insists on having this poor-relief reserved solely to private
sympathy and the accidental occurrence of knowledge and a charitable disposition, and also when
it feels injured or mortified by universal regulations and ordinances which are obligatory. Public
social conditions are on the contrary to be regarded as all the more perfect the less (in comparison
with what is arranged publicly) is left for an individual to do by himself as his private inclination
directs. 

                                 ¡ì 243.

When civil society is in a state of unimpeded activity, it is engaged in expanding
internally in population and industry. The amassing of wealth is intensified by
generalising (a) the linkage of men by their needs, and (b) the methods of
preparing and distributing the means to satisfy these needs, because it is from this
double process of generalisation that the largest profits are derived. That is one
side of the picture. The other side is the subdivision and restriction of particular
jobs. This results in the dependence and distress of the class tied to work of that
sort, and these again entail inability to feel and enjoy the broader freedoms and
especially the intellectual benefits of civil society. 

                                 ¡ì 244.

When the standard of living of a large mass of people falls below a certain
subsistence level ¡ª a level regulated automatically as the one necessary for a
member of the society ¡ª and when there is a consequent loss of the sense of right
and wrong, of honesty and the self-respect which makes a man insist on
maintaining himself by his own work and effort, the result is the creation of a
rabble of paupers. At the same time this brings with it, at the other end of the
social scale, conditions which greatly facilitate the concentration of
disproportionate wealth in a few hands. 

Addition: The lowest subsistence level, that of a rabble of paupers, is fixed automatically, but
the minimum varies considerably in different countries. In England, even the very poorest believe
that they have rights; this is different from what satisfies the poor in other countries. Poverty in itself
does not make men into a rabble; a rabble is created only when there is joined to poverty a
disposition of mind, an inner indignation against the rich, against society, against the government,
&c. A further consequence of this attitude is that through their dependence on chance men
become frivolous and idle, like the Neapolitan lazzaroni for example. In this way there is born in
the rabble the evil of lacking self-respect enough to secure subsistence by its own labour and yet
at the same time of claiming to receive subsistence as its right. Against nature man can claim no
right, but once society is established, poverty immediately takes the form of a wrong done to one
class by another. The important question of how poverty is to be abolished is one of the most
disturbing problems which agitate modem society. 

                                 ¡ì 245.

When the masses begin to decline into poverty, (a) the burden of maintaining
them at their ordinary standard of living might be directly laid on the wealthier
classes, or they might receive the means of livelihood directly from other public
sources of wealth (e.g. from the endowments of rich hospitals, monasteries, and
other foundations). In either case, however, the needy would receive subsistence
directly, not by means of their work, and this would violate the principle of civil
society and the feeling of individual independence and self-respect in its individual
members. (b) As an alternative, they might be given subsistence indirectly through
being given work, i.e. the opportunity to work. In this event the volume of
production would be increased, but the evil consists precisely in an excess of
production and in the lack of a proportionate number of consumers who are
themselves also producers, and thus it is simply intensified by both of the
methods (a) and (b) by which it is sought to alleviate it. It hence becomes
apparent that despite an excess of wealth civil society is not rich enough, i.e. its
own resources are insufficient to check excessive poverty and the creation of a
penurious rabble. 

Remark: In the example of England we may study these phenomena on a large scale and also in
particular the results of poor-rates, immense foundations, unlimited private beneficence, and above
all the abolition of the Guild Corporations. In Britain, particularly in Scotland, the most direct
measure against poverty and especially against the loss of shame and self-respect ¡ª the subjective
bases of society ¡ª as well as against laziness and extravagance, &c., the begetters of the rabble,
has turned out to be to leave the poor to their fate and instruct them to beg in the streets. 

                                 ¡ì 246.

This inner dialectic of civil society thus drives it ¡ª or at any rate drives a specific
civil society ¡ª to push beyond its own limits and seek markets, and so its
necessary means of subsistence, in other lands which are either deficient in the
goods it has over-produced, or else generally backward in industry, &c. 

                                 ¡ì 247.

The principle of family life is dependence on the soil, on land, terra firma.
Similarly, the natural element for industry, animating its outward movement, is
the sea. Since the passion for gain involves risk, industry though bent on gain yet
lifts itself above it; instead of remaining rooted to the soil and the limited circle of
civil life with its pleasures and desires, it embraces the element of flux, danger,
and destruction. Further, the sea is the greatest means of communication, and
trade by sea creates commercial connections between distant countries and so
relations involving contractual rights. At the same time, commerce of this kind is
the most potent instrument of culture, and through it trade acquires its
significance in the history of the world. 

Rivers are not natural boundaries of separation, which is what they .have been
accounted to be in modem times. On the contrary, it is truer to say that they, and
the sea likewise, link men together. Horace is wrong when he says: 

     deus abscidit
     prudens Oceano dissociabili
     tetras. 

Remark: The proof of this lies not merely in the fact that the basins of rivers are Inhabited by a
single clan or tribe, but also, for example, in the ancient bonds between Greece, Ionia, and Magna
Graecia, between Brittany and Britain, between Denmark and Norway, Sweden, Finland, Livonia,
&c., bonds, further, which are especially striking in contrast with the comparatively slight
intercourse between the inhabitants of the littoral and those of the hinterland. To realise what an
instrument of culture lies in the link with the sea, consider countries where industry flourishes and
contrast their relation to the sea with that of countries which have eschewed sea-faring and which,
like Egypt and India, have become stagnant and in the most frightful and scandalous superstition.
Notice also how ,all great progressive peoples press onward to the sea. 

                                 ¡ì 248.

This far-flung connecting link affords the means for the colonising activity ¡ª
sporadic or systematic ¡ª to which mature civil society is driven and by which it
supplies to a part of its population a return to life on the family basis in a new
land and so also supplies itself with a new demand and field for its industry 

Addition: Civil society is thus driven to found colonies. Increase of population alone has this
effect, but it is due in particular to the appearance of a number of people who cannot secure the
satisfaction of their needs by their own labour once production rises above the requirements of
consumers. Sporadic colonisation is particularly characteristic of Germany. The emigrants
withdraw to America or Russia and remain there with no home ties, and so prove useless to their
native land. The second and entirely different type of colonisation is the systematic; the state
undertakes it, is aware of the proper method of carrying it out and regulates it accordingly. This
type was common amongst the ancients, particularly the Greeks. Hard work was not the business
of the citizens in Greece, since their energy was directed rather to public affairs. So if the
population increased to such an extent that there might be difficulty in feeding it, the young people
would be sent away to a new district, sometimes specifically chosen, sometimes left to chance
discovery. In modern times, colonists have not been allowed the same rights as those left at home,
and the result of this situation has been wars and finally independence, as may be seen in the
history of the English and Spanish colonies. Colonial independence proves to be of the greatest
advantage to the mother country, just as the emancipation of slaves turns out to the greatest
advantage of the owners. 

                                 ¡ì 249.

While the public authority must also undertake the higher directive function of
providing for the interests which lead beyond the borders of its society (see ¡ì
246), its primary purpose is to actualise and maintain the universal contained
within the particularity of civil society, and its control takes the form of an
external system and organisation for the protection and security of particular ends
and interests en masse, inasmuch as these interests subsist only in this universal.
This universal is immanent in the interests of particularity itself and, in
accordance with the Idea, particularity makes it the end and object of its own
willing and activity. In this way ethical principles circle back and appear in civil
society as a factor immanent in it; this constitutes the specific character of the
Corporation. 

                          (b) The Corporation
                                 ¡ì 250.

In virtue of the substantiality of its natural and family life, the agricultural class
has directly within itself the concrete universal in which it lives. The class of civil
servants is universal in character and so has the universal explicitly as its ground
and as the aim of its activity. The class between them, the business class, is
essentially concentrated on the particular, and hence it is to it that Corporations
are specially appropriate. 

                                 ¡ì 251.

The labour organisation of civil society is split, in accordance with the nature of
its particulars, into different branches. The implicit likeness of such particulars to
one another becomes really existent in an association, as something common to its
members. Hence a selfish purpose, directed towards its particular self-interest,
apprehends and evinces itself at the same time as universal; and a member of civil
society is in virtue of his own particular skill a member of a Corporation, whose
universal purpose is thus wholly concrete and no wider in scope than the purpose
involved in business, its proper task and interest. 

                                 ¡ì 252.

In accordance with this definition of its functions, a Corporation has the right,
under the surveillance of the public authority, (a) to look after its own interests
within its own sphere, (b) to co-opt members, qualified objectively by the
requisite skill and rectitude, to a number fixed by the general structure of society,
(c) to protect its members against particular contingencies, (d) to provide the
education requisite to fit others to become members. In short, its right is to come
on the scene like a second family for its members, while civil society can only be
an indeterminate sort of family because it comprises everyone and so is farther
removed from individuals and their special exigencies. 

Remark: The Corporation member is to be distinguished from a day labourer or from a man
who is prepared to undertake casual employment on a single occasion. The former who is, or will
become, master of his craft, is a member of the association not for casual gain on single occasions
but for the whole range, the universality, of his personal livelihood. 

Privileges, in the sense of the rights of a branch of civil society organised into a Corporation, are
distinct in meaning from privileges-proper, in the etymological sense. The latter are casual
exceptions to reversal rules; the former, however, are only the crystallisation, as regulations, of
characteristics inherent in an essential branch of society itself owing to its nature as particular. 

                                 ¡ì 253.

In the Corporation, the family has its stable basis in the sense that its livelihood is
assured there, conditionally upon capability, i.e. it has a stable capital (see ¡ì 170)
¡ª In addition, his nexus of capability and livelihood is a recognised fact, with he
result that the Corporation member needs no external marks beyond his own
membership as evidence of his skill and his regular income and subsistence, i.e. as
evidence that he is a somebody. It is also recognised that he belongs to a whole
which is itself an organ of the entire society, and that he is actively concerned in
promoting the comparatively disinterested end of this whole. Thus he commands
the respect due to one in his social position. 

Remark: The institution of Corporations corresponds, on account of its assurance of capital, to
the introduction of agriculture and private property in another sphere (see Remark to ¡ì 203). 

When complaints are made about the luxury of the business classes their passion for extravagance
¡ª which have as their concomitant creation of a rabble of paupers (see ¡ì 244) ¡ª we must not
forget that besides its other causes (e.g. increasing mechanisation of labour) this phenomenon has
an ethical ground, as was indicated above. Unless he is a member of an authorised Corporation
(and it is only by being authorised that an association becomes a Corporation), an individual is
without rank or dignity, his isolation reduces his business to re self-seeking, and his livelihood and
satisfaction become insecure. Consequently, he has to try to gain recognition for himself by giving
external proofs of success in his business, and to these proofs no limits can be set. He cannot live
in the manner of his class, for no class really exists for him, since in civil society it is only something
common to particular persons which really exists, i.e. something legally constituted and recognised.
Hence he cannot achieve for himself a way of life proper to his class and less idiosyncratic. 

Within the Corporation the help which poverty receives loses its accidental character and the
humiliation wrongfully associated with it. The wealthy perform their duties to their fellow associates
and thus riches cease to inspire either pride or envy, pride in their owners, envy in others. In these
conditions rectitude obtains its proper recognition and respect. 

                                 ¡ì 254.

The so-called ¡®natural¡¯ right of exercising one¡¯s skill and thereby earning what
there is to be earned is restricted within the Corporation only in so far as it is
therein made rational instead of natural. That is to say, it becomes freed from
personal opinion and contingency, saved from endangering either the individual
workman or others, recognised, guaranteed, and at the same time elevated to
conscious effort for a common end. 

                                 ¡ì 255.

As the family was the first, so the Corporation is the second ethical root of the
state, the one planted in civil society. The former contains the moments of
subjective particularity and objective universality in a substantial unity. But these
moments are sundered in civil society to begin with; on the one side there is the
particularity of need and satisfaction, reflected into itself, and on the other side
the universality of abstract rights. In the Corporation these moments are united in
an inward fashion, so that in this union particular welfare is present as a right and
is actualised. 

Remark: The sanctity of marriage and the dignity of Corporation membership are the two fixed
points round which the unorganised atoms of civil society revolve. 

Addition: The consideration behind the abolition of Corporations in recent times is that the
individual should fend for himself. But we may grant this and still hold that corporation membership
does not alter a man¡¯s obligation to earn his living. Under modem political conditions, the citizens
have only a restricted share in the public business of the state, yet it is essential to provide men ¡ª
ethical entities ¡ª with work of a public character over and above their private business. This work
of a public character, which the modern state does not always provide, is found in the
Corporation. We saw earlier [Addition to ¡ì 184] that in fending for himself a member of civil
society is also working for others. But this unconscious compulsion is not enough; it is in the
Corporation that it first changes into a known and thoughtful ethical mode of life. Of course
Corporations must fall under the higher surveillance of the state, because otherwise they would
ossify, build themselves in, and decline into a miserable system of castes. In and by itself, however,
a Corporation is not a closed caste; its purpose is rather to bring an isolated trade into the social
order and elevate it to a sphere in which it gains strength and respect. 

                                 ¡ì 256.

The end of the Corporation is restricted and finite, while the public authority was
an external organisation involving a separation and a merely relative identity of
controller and controlled The end of the former and the externality and relative
identity of the latter find their truth in the absolutely universal end and its absolute
actuality. Hence the sphere of civil society passes over into the state. 

Remark: The town is the seat of the civil life of business. There reflection arises, turns in upon
itself, and pursues its atomising task; each man maintains himself in and through his relation to
others who, like himself, are persons possessed of rights. The country, on the other hand, is the
seat of an ethical life resting on nature and the family. Town and country thus constitute the two
moments, still ideal moments, whose true ground is the state, although it is from them that the state
springs. 

The philosophic proof of the concept of the state is this development of ethical life from its
immediate phase through civil society, the phase of division, to the state, which then reveals itself
as the true ground of these phases. A proof in philosophic science can only be a development of
this kind. 

Since the state appears as a result in the advance of the philosophic concept through displaying
itself as the true ground [of the earlier phases], that show of mediation is now cancelled and the
state has become directly present before us. Actually, therefore, the state as such is not so much
the result as the beginning. It is within the state that the family is first developed into civil society,
and it is the Idea of the state itself which disrupts itself into these two moments. Through the
development of civil society, the substance of ethical life acquires its infinite form, which contains in
itself these two moments: (1) infinite differentiation down to the inward experience of independent
self-consciousness, and (2) the form of universality involved in education, the form of thought
whereby mind is objective and actual to itself as an organic totality in laws and institutions which
are its will in terms of thought. 




Third Part: Ethical Life
               iii. The State

 A: Constitutional Law B: International Law C: World
 History


                               ¡ì 257.

The state is the actuality of the ethical Idea. It is ethical mind qua the substantial
will manifest and revealed to itself, knowing and thinking itself, accomplishing
what it knows and in so far as it knows it. The state exists immediately in custom,
mediately in individual self-consciousness, knowledge, and activity, while
self-consciousness in virtue of its sentiment towards the state, finds in the state,
as its essence and the end-product of its activity, its substantive freedom. 

Remark: The Penates are inward gods, gods of the underworld; the mind of a nation (Athene
for instance) is the divine, knowing and willing itself. Family piety is feeling, ethical behaviour
directed by feeling; political virtue is the willing of the absolute end in terms of thought. 

                                 ¡ì 258.

The state is absolutely rational inasmuch as it is the actuality of the substantial will
which it possesses in the particular self-consciousness once that consciousness
has been raised to consciousness of its universality. This substantial unity is an
absolute unmoved end in itself, in which freedom comes into its supreme right.
On the other hand this final end has supreme right against the individual, whose
supreme duty is to be a member of the state. 

Remark: If the state is confused with civil society, and if its specific end is laid down as the
security and protection of property and personal freedom, then the interest of the individuals as
such becomes the ultimate end of their association, and it follows that membership of the state is
something optional. But the state's relation to the individual is quite different from this. Since the
state is mind objectified, it is only as one of its members that the individual himself has objectivity,
genuine individuality, and an ethical life. Unification pure and simple is the true content and aim of
the individual, and the individual's destiny is the living of a universal life. His further particular
satisfaction, activity and mode of conduct have this substantive and universally valid life as their
starting point and their result. 

Rationality, taken generally and in the abstract, consists in the thorough-going unity of the universal
and the single. Rationality, concrete in the state, consists (a) so far as its content is concerned, in
the unity of objective freedom (i.e. freedom of the universal or substantial will) and subjective
freedom (i.e. freedom of everyone in his knowing and in his volition of particular ends); and
consequently, (b) so far as its form is concerned, in self-determining action on laws and principles
which are thoughts and so universal. This Idea is the absolutely eternal and necessary being of
mind. 

But if we ask what is or has been the historical origin of the state in general, still more if we ask
about the origin of any particular state, of its rights and institutions, or again if we inquire whether
the state originally arose out of patriarchal conditions or out of fear or trust, or out of
Corporations, &c., or finally if we ask in what light the basis of the state's rights has been
conceived and consciously established, whether this basis has been supposed to be positive divine
right, or contract, custom, &c. - all these questions are no concern of the Idea of the state. We are
here dealing exclusively with the philosophic science of the state, and from that point of view all
these things are mere appearance and therefore matters for history. So far as the authority of any
existing state has anything to do with reasons, these reasons are culled from the forms of the law
authoritative within it. 

The philosophical treatment of these topics is concerned only with their inward side, with the
thought of their concept. The merit of Rousseau's contribution to the search for this concept is that,
by adducing the will as the principle of the state, he is adducing a principle which has thought both
for its form and its content, a principle indeed which is thinking itself, not a principle, like
gregarious instinct, for instance, or divine authority, which has thought as its form only.
Unfortunately, however, as Fichte did later, he takes the will only in a determinate form as the
individual will, and he regards the universal will not as the absolutely rational element in the will, but
only as a 'general' will which proceeds out of this individual will as out of a conscious will. The
result is that he reduces the union of individuals in the state to a contract and therefore to
something based on their arbitrary wills, their opinion, and their capriciously given express consent;
and abstract reasoning proceeds to draw the logical inferences which destroy the absolutely divine
principle of the state, together with its majesty and absolute authority. For this reason, when these
abstract conclusions came into power, they afforded for the first time in human history the
prodigious spectacle of the overthrow of the constitution of a great actual state and its complete
reconstruction ab initio on the basis of pure thought alone, after the destruction of all existing and
given material. The will of its re-founders was to give it what they alleged was a purely rational
basis, but it was only abstractions that were being used; the Idea was lacking; and the experiment
ended in the maximum of frightfulness and terror. 

Confronted with the claims made for the individual will, we must remember the fundamental
conception that the objective will is rationality implicit or in conception, whether it be recognised
or not by individuals, whether their whims be deliberately for it or not. We must remember that its
opposite, i.e. knowing and willing, or subjective freedom (the only thing contained in the principle
of the individual will) comprises only one moment, and therefore a one-sided moment, of the Idea
of the rational will, i.e. of the will which is rational solely because what it is implicitly, that it also is
explicitly. 

The opposite to thinking of the state as something to be known and apprehended as explicitly
rational is taking external appearances - i.e. contingencies such as distress, need for protection,
force, riches, &c. - not as moments in the state's historical development, but as its substance. Here
again what constitutes the guiding thread of discovery is the individual in isolation - not, however,
even so much as the thought of this individuality, but instead only empirical individuals, with
attention focused on their accidental characteristics, their strength and weakness, riches and
poverty, &c. This ingenious idea of ignoring the absolute infinity and rationality in the state and
excluding thought from apprehension of its inward nature has assuredly never been put forward in
such an unadulterated form as in Herr von Haller's Restauration der Staatswissenschaft. I say
'unadulterated', because in all other attempts to grasp the essence of the state, no matter on what
one-sided or superficial principles, this very intention of comprehending the state rationally has
brought with it thoughts, i.e. universal determinations. Herr von Haller, however, with his eyes
open, has not merely renounced the rational material of which the state consists, as well as the
form of thought, but he has even gone on with passionate fervour to inveigh against the form and
the material so set aside. Part of what Herr von Haller assures us is the 'widespread' effect of his
principles. This Restauration undoubtedly owes to the fact that, in his exposition, he has
deliberately dispensed with thought altogether, and has deliberately kept his whole book all of a
piece with its lack of thought. For in this way he has eliminated the confusion and disorder which
lessen the force of an exposition where the accidental is treated along with hints of the substantial,
where the purely empirical and external are mixed with a reminiscence of the universal and
rational, and where in the midst of wretched inanities the reader is now and again reminded of the
loftier sphere of the infinite. For the same reason again his exposition is consistent. He takes as the
essence of the state, not what is substantive but the sphere of accident, and consistency in dealing
with a sphere of that kind amounts to the complete inconsistency of utter thoughtlessness which
jogs along without looking behind, and is just as much at home now with the exact opposite of
what it approved a moment ago. 

Addition: The state in and by itself is the ethical whole, the actualisation of freedom; and it is an
absolute end of reason that freedom should be actual. The state is mind on earth and consciously
realising itself there. In nature, on the other hand, mind actualises itself only as its own other, as
mind asleep. Only when it is present in consciousness, when it knows itself as a really existent
object, is it the state. In considering freedom, the starting-point must be not individuality, the single
self-consciousness, but only the essence of self-consciousness; for whether man knows it or not,
this essence is externally realised as a self-subsistent power in which single individuals are only
moments. The march of God in the world, that is what the state is. The basis of the state is the
power of reason actualising itself as will. In considering the Idea of the state, we must not have our
eyes on particular states or on particular institutions. Instead we must consider the Idea, this actual
God, by itself. On some principle or other, any state may be shown to be bad, this or that defect
may be found in it; and yet, at any rate if one of the mature states of our epoch is in question, it has
in it the moments essential to the existence of the state. But since it is easier to find defects than to
understand the affirmative, we may readily fall into the mistake of looking at isolated aspects of the
state and so forgetting its inward organic life. The state is no ideal work of art; it stands on earth
and so in the sphere of caprice, chance, and error, and bad behaviour may disfigure it in many
respects. But the ugliest of men, or a criminal, or an invalid, or a cripple, is still always a living man.
The affirmative, life, subsists despite his defects, and it is this affirmative factor which is our theme
here. 

Footnote: I have described the book sufficiently to show that it is of an original kind. There might be
something noble in the author's indignation by itself, since it was kindled by the false theories, mentioned
above, emanating principally from Rousseau, and especially by the attempt to realise them in practice. But to
save himself from these theories, Herr von Haller has gone to the other extreme by dispensing with thought
altogether and consequently it cannot be said that there is anything of intrinsic value in his virulent hatred of
all laws and legislation, of all expressly and legally determinate rights. The hatred of law, of right made
determinate in law, is the shibboleth whereby fanaticism, flabby-mindedness, and the hypocrisy of good
intentions are clearly and infallibly recognised for what they are, disguise themselves as they may. 

Originality like Herr von Haller's is always a curious phenomenon, and for those of my readers who are not yet
acquainted with his book I will quote a few specimen passages. This is how he lays down his most important
basic proposition: 'Just as, in the inorganic world, the greater dislodges the less and the mighty the weak .... so
in the animal kingdom, and then amongst human beings, the same law appears in nobler' (often, too, surely in
ignobler?) 'forms', and 'this, therefore, is the eternal, unalterable, ordinance of God, that the mightier rules, must
rule, and will always rule'. It is clear enough from this, let alone from what follows, in what sense 'might' is taken
here. It is not the might of justice and ethics, but only the irrational power of brute force. Herr von Haller then
goes on to support this doctrine on various grounds, amongst them that 'nature with amazing wisdom has so
ordered it that the mere sense of personal superiority irresistibly ennobles the character and encourages the
development of just those virtues which are most necessary for dealing with subordinates'. He asks with a
great elaboration of undergraduate rhetoric [ibid.] 'whether it is the strong or the weak in the kingdom of
science who more misuse their trust and their authority in order to achieve their petty selfish ends and the ruin
of the credulous; whether to be a past master in legal learning is not to be a pettifogger, a leguleius, one who
cheats the hopes of unsuspecting clients, who makes white black and black white, who misapplies the law and
makes it a vehicle for wrongdoing, who brings to beggary those who need his assistance and tends them as
the hungry vulture tends the innocent lamb', &c., &c. Herr von Haller forgets here that the point of this rhetoric
is to support his proposition that the rule of the mightier is an everlasting ordnance of God; so presumably it is
by the same ordinance that the vulture rends the innocent lamb, and that hence the mighty are quite right to
treat their unsuspecting clients as the weak and to make use of knowledge of the law to empty their pockets. It
would be too much, however, to ask that two thoughts should be put together where there is really not a single
one. 

It goes without saying that Herr von Haller is an enemy of codes of law. In his view, the laws of the land, are
on the one hand, in principle 'unnecessary, because they spring self-explanatory from the laws of nature'. If
men had remained satisfied with 'self-explanatory' as the basis of their thinking, then they would have been
spared the endless labour devoted, since ever there were states, to legislation and legal codes, and which is
still devoted thereto and to the study of positive law. 'On the other hand, laws are not exactly promulgated for
private individuals, but as instructions to puisne judges, acquainting them with the will of the high court'.
Apart from that, the provision of law-courts is and all over the place) not a state duty, but a favour, help
rendered by the authorities, and 'quite supererogatory'; it is not the most perfect method of guaranteeing men's
rights; on the contrary, it is an insecure and uncertain method, 'the only one left to us by our modern lawyers.
They have reft us of the other three methods, of just those which lead most swiftly and surely to the goal,
those which, unlike law-courts,, friendly nature has given to man for the safeguarding of his rightful freedom'.
And these three methods are - what do you suppose? - (1) Personal acceptance and inculcation of the law of
nature; (2) Resistance to wrong; (3) Flight, when there is no other remedy'. Lawyers are unfriendly indeed, it
appears, in comparison with the friendliness of nature! 'But the natural, divine, law, given to everyone by
nature the all-bountiful, is: Honour everyone as thine equal' (on the author's principles this should read
'Honour not the man who is thine equal, but the one who is mightier'); 'hurt no man who hurts thee not;
demand from him nothing but what he owes' (but what does he owe?); 'nay more, love thy neighbour and serve
him when thou canst'. The 'implanting of this law' is to make a legislator and a constitution superfluous. It
would be curious to see how Herr von Haller makes it intelligible why legislators and constitutions have
appeared in the world despite this 'implanting'. 

In vol. iii, the author comes to the 'so-called national liberties', by which he means the laws and constitutions of
nation states. Every legally constituted right is in this wide sense of the word a 'liberty'. Of these laws he says,
inter alia, that 'their content is usually very insignificant, although in books a high value may be placed on
documentary liberties of that kind'. When we then realise that the author is speaking here of the national
liberties of the German Estates, of the English people (e.g. Magna Carta which is little read, and on account of
its archaic phraseology still less understood', the Bill of Rights, and so forth), of the people of Hungary, &c.,
we are surprised to find that these Possessions, formerly so highly prized, are only insignificant; and no less
Surprised to learn that it is only in books that these nations place a value on laws whose co-operation has
entered into every coat that is worn Ind every crust that is eaten, and still enters into every day and hour of the
lives of everyone. 

To carry quotation further, Herr von Haller speaks particularly, ill of the Prussian General Legal Code, because
of the 'incredible' influence on it of the errors of false philosophy (though in this instance at any rate the fault
cannot be ascribed to Kant's philosophy, a topic on which Herr von Haller is at his angriest), especially where
it speaks of the state, the resources of the state, the end of the state, the head of the state, his duties, and
those of civil servants, and so forth. Herr von Haller finds particularly mischievous 'the right of defraying the
expenses of the state by levying taxes on the private wealth of individuals, on their businesses, on goods
produced or consumed. Under those circumstances, neither the king himself (since the resources of the state
belong to the state and are not the private property of the king), nor the Prussian citizens can call anything
their own, neither their person nor their property; and all subjects are bondslaves to the law, since they may
not withdraw themselves from the service of the state.' 

In this welter of incredible crudity, what is perhaps most comical of all is the emotion with which Herr von
Haller describes his unspeakable pleasure in his discoveries - 'a joy such as only the friend of truth can feel
when after honest search he has become confident that he has found as it were' (yes indeed? 'is it were' is
right!) 'the voice of nature, the very word of God'. (The truth is that the word of God very clearly distinguishes
its revelations from the voices of nature and unregenerate man.) 'The author could have sunk to the ground in
open amazement, a stream of joyful tears burst from his eyes, and living religious feeling sprang up in him there
and then., Herr von Haller might have discovered by his 'religious feeling' that he should rather bewail his
condition as the hardest chastisement of God. For the hardest thing which man can experience is to be so far
excluded from thought and reason, from respect for the laws, and from knowing how infinitely important and
divine it is that the duties of the state and the rights of the citizens, as well as the rights of the state and the
duties of the citizens, should be defined by law - to be so far excluded from all this that absurdity can foist
itself upon him as the word of God. 

                                 ¡ì 259.

The Idea of the state: 

     (A) has immediate actuality and is the individual state as a self-dependent
     organism - the Constitution or Constitutional Law; 

     (B) passes over into the relation of one state to other states - International
     Law; 

     (C) is the universal Idea as a genus and as an absolute power over individual
     states - the mind which gives itself its actuality in the process of
     World-History. 

Remark: The state in its actuality is essentially an individual state, and beyond that a particular
state. Individuality is to be distinguished from particularity. The former is a moment in the very Idea
of the state, while the latter belongs to history. States as such are independent of one another, and
therefore their relation to one another can only be an external one, so that there must be a third
thing standing above them to bind them together. Now this third thing is the mind which gives itself
actuality in world-history and is the absolute judge of states. Several states may form an alliance to
be a sort of court with jurisdiction over others, there may be confederations of states, like the Holy
Alliance for example, but these are always relative only and restricted, like perpetual peace'. The
one and only absolute judge, which makes itself authoritative against the particular and at all times,
is the absolute mind which manifests itself in the history of the world as the universal and as the
genus there operative. 

 A. Constitutional Law

                                 ¡ì 260.

The state is the actuality of concrete freedom. But concrete freedom consists in
this, that personal individuality and its particular interests not only achieve their
complete development and gain explicit recognition for their right (as they do in
the sphere of the family and civil society) but, for one thing, they also pass over
of their own accord into the interest of the universal, and, for another thing, they
know and will the universal; they even recognise it as their own substantive mind;
they take it as their end and aim and are active in its pursuit. The result is that the
universal does not prevail or achieve completion except along with particular
interests and through the co-operation of particular knowing and willing; and
individuals likewise do not live as private persons for their own ends alone, but in
the very act of willing these they will the universal in the light of the universal,
and their activity is consciously aimed at none but the universal end. The principle
of modern states has prodigious strength and depth because it allows the principle
of subjectivity to progress to its culmination in the extreme of self-subsistent
personal particularity, and yet at the same time brings it back to the substantive
unity and so maintains this unity in the principle of subjectivity itself. 

Addition: The Idea of the state in modern times has a special character in that the state is the
actualisation of freedom not in accordance with subjective whim but in accordance with the
concept of the will, i.e. in accordance with its universality and divinity. Immature states are those in
which the Idea of the state is still veiled and where its particular determinations have not yet
attained free self-subsistence. In the states of classical antiquity, universality was present, but
particularity had not then been released, given free scope, and brought back to universality, i.e. to
the Universal end of the whole. The essence of the modern state is that the universal be bound up
with the complete freedom of its particular members and with private well-being, that thus the
interests of family and civil society must concentrate themselves on the state, although the
-universal end cannot be advanced without the personal knowledge and will of its particular
members, whose own rights must be maintained. Thus the universal must be furthered, but
subjectivity on the other hand must attain its full and living development. It is only when both these
moments subsist in their strength that the state can be regarded as articulated and genuinely
organised. 

                               ¡ì 261. 

In contrast with the spheres of private rights and private welfare (the family and
civil society), the state is from one point of view an external necessity and their
higher authority; its nature is such that their laws and interests are subordinate to
it and dependent on it. On the other hand, however, it is the end immanent within
them, and its strength lies in the unity of its own universal end and aim with the
particular interest of individuals, in the fact that individuals have duties to the state
in proportion as they have rights against it (see ¡ì 155). 

Remark: In the Remark to ¡ì 3 above, reference was made to the fact that it was Montesquieu
above all who, in his famous work L¡¯Esprit des Lois, kept in sight and tried to work out in detail
both the thought of the dependence of laws - in particular, laws concerning the rights of persons -
on the specific character of the state, and also the philosophic notion of always treating the part in
its relation to the whole. 

Duty is primarily a relation to something which from my point of view is substantive, absolutely
universal. A right, on the other hand, is simply the embodiment of this substance and thus is the
particular aspect of it and enshrines my particular freedom. Hence at abstract levels, right and duty
appear parcelled out on different sides or in different persons. In the state, as something ethical, as
the inter-penetration of the substantive and the particular, my obligation to what is substantive is at
the same time the embodiment of my particular freedom. This means that in the state duty and right
are united in one and the same relation. But further, since none the less the distinct moments
acquire in the state the shape and reality peculiar to each, and since therefore the distinction
between right and duty enters here once again, it follows that while implicitly, i.e. in form, identical,
they at the same time differ in content. In the spheres of personal rights and morality, the necessary
bearing of right and duty on one another falls short of actualisation; and hence there is at that point
only an abstract similarity of content between them, i.e. in those abstract spheres, what is one
man's right ought also to be another's, and what is one man's duty ought also to be another's. The
absolute identity of right and duty in the state is present in these spheres not as a genuine identity
but only as a similarity of content, because in them this content is determined as quite general and
is simply the fundamental principle of both right and duty, i.e. the principle that men, as persons,
are free. Slaves, therefore, have no duties because they have no rights, and vice versa. (Religious
duties are not here in point.) 

In the course of the inward development of the concrete Idea, however, its moments become
distinguished and their specific determinacy becomes at the same time a difference of content. In
the family, the content of a son's duties to his father differs from the content of his rights against
him; the content of the rights of a member of civil society is not the same as the content of his
duties to his prince and government. 

This concept of the union of duty and right is a point of vital importance and in it the inner strength
of states is contained. 

Duty on its abstract side goes no farther than the persistent neglect and proscription of a man's
particular interest, on the ground that it is the inessential, even the discreditable, moment in his life.
Duty, taken concretely as Idea, reveals the moment of particularity as itself essential and so
regards its satisfaction as indisputably necessary. In whatever way an individual may fulfil his duty,
he must at the same time find his account therein and attain his personal interest and satisfaction.
Out of his position in the state, a right must accrue to him whereby public affairs shall be his own
particular affair. Particular interests should in fact not be set aside or completely suppressed;
instead, they should be put in correspondence with the universal, and thereby both they and the
universal are upheld. The isolated individual, so far as his duties are concerned, is in subjection;
but as a member of civil society he finds in fulfilling his duties to it protection of his person and
property, regard for his private welfare, the satisfaction of the depths of his being, the
consciousness and feeling of himself as a member of the whole; and, in so far as he completely
fulfils his duties by performing tasks and services for the state, he is upheld and preserved. Take
duty abstractly, and the universal's interest would consist simply in the completion as duties of the
tasks and services which it exacts. 

Addition: In the state everything depends on the unity of universal and particular. In the states
of antiquity, the subjective end simply coincided with the state's will. In modern times, however,
we make claims for private judgement, private willing, and private conscience. The ancients had
none of these in the modern sense; the ultimate thing with them was the will of the state. Whereas
under the despots of Asia the individual had no inner life and no justification in himself, in the
modern world Man insists on respect being paid to his inner life. The conjunction of duty and right
has a twofold aspect: what the state demands from us as a duty is eo ipso our right as individuals,
since the state is nothing but the articulation of the concept of freedom. The determinations of the
individual will are given an objective embodiment through the state and thereby they attain their
truth and their actualisation for the first time. The State is the one and only prerequisite of the
attainment of particular ends and welfare. 

                               ¡ì 262. 

The actual Idea is mind, which, sundering itself into the two ideal spheres of its
concept, family and civil society, enters upon its finite phase, but it does so only
in order to rise above its ideality and become explicit as infinite actual mind. It is
therefore to these ideal spheres that the actual Idea assigns the material of this its
finite actuality, viz. human beings as a mass, in such a way that the function
assigned to any given individual is visibly mediated by circumstances, his caprice
and his personal choice of his station in life (see ¡ì 185 and the Remark thereto). 

Addition: In Plato's state, subjective freedom does not count, because people have their
occupations assigned to them by the Guardians. In many oriental states, this assignment is
determined by birth. But subjective freedom, which must be respected, demands that individuals
should have free choice in this matter. 

                               ¡ì 263. 

In these spheres in which its moments, particularity and individuality, have their
immediate and reflected reality, mind is present as their objective universality
glimmering in them as the power of reason in necessity (see ¡ì 184), i.e. as the
institutions considered above. 

Addition: The state, as mind, sunders itself into the particular determinations of its concept, of
its mode of being. We might use here an illustration drawn from nature. The nervous system is the
sensitive system proper; it is the abstract moment, the moment of being by oneself and so of
having identity with oneself. But analysis of sensation reveals, that it has two aspects and these are
distinct in such a way that each of them seems to be a whole system by itself The first is feeling in
the abstract, keeping oneself self-enclosed, the dull movement which goes on internally,
reproduction, internal self-nutrition, growth, and digestion. The second moment is that this
self-related existence has over against it the moment of difference, a movement outwards. This is
irritability, sensation moving outwards. This constitutes a system of its own, and there are some of
the lower types of animals which have developed this system alone, while they lack the
soul-charged unity of inner sensation. If we compare these natural features with those of mind,
then the family must be paralleled with sensibility and civil society with irritability. Now the third is
the state, the nervous system as I a whole, something inwardly organised; but this lives only in so
far as both moments (in this case family and civil society) are developed within it. The laws
regulating family and civil society are the institutions of the rational order which glimmers in them.
But the ground and final truth of these institutions is mind, their universal end and known objective.
The family too is ethical, only its end is not known as such, while it is the separation between one
man and another which makes civil society what it is. 

                                 ¡ì 264.

Mind is the nature of human beings en masse and their nature is therefore
twofold: (i) at one extreme, explicit individuality of consciousness and will, and
(ii) at the other extreme, universality which knows and wills what is substantive.
Hence they attain their right in both these respects only in so far as both their
private personality and its substantive basis are actualised. Now in the family and
civil society they acquire their right in the first of these respects directly and in the
second indirectly, in that (i) they find their substantive self-consciousness in social
institutions which are the universal implicit in their particular interests, and (ii) the
Corporation supplies them with an occupation and an activity directed on a
universal end. 

                                 ¡ì 265.

These institutions are the components of the constitution (i.e. of rationality
developed and actualised) in the sphere of particularity. They are, therefore, the
firm foundation not only of the state but also of the citizen's trust in it and
sentiment towards it. They are the pillars of public freedom since in them
particular freedom is realised and rational, and therefore there is implicitly present
even in them the union of freedom and necessity. 

Addition: As was remarked earlier on, the sanctity of marriage and the institutions in which civil
society is an appearance of ethical life constitute the stability of the whole, i.e. stability is secured
when universal affairs are the affairs of each member in his particular capacity. What is of the
utmost importance is that the law of reason should be shot through and through by the law of
particular freedom, and that my particular end should become identified with the universal end, or
otherwise the state is left in the air. The state is actual only when its members have a feeling of their
own self-hood and it is stable only when public and private ends are identical. It has often been
said that the end of the state is the happiness of the citizens. That imperfectly true. If all is not well
with them, if their subjective aims are not satisfied, if they do not find that the state as such is the
means to their satisfaction, then the footing of the state itself is insecure. 

                                 ¡ì 266.

But mind is objective and actual to itself not merely as this necessity and as a
realm of appearance, but also as the ideality and the heart of this necessity. Only
in this way is this substantive universality aware of itself as its own object and
end, with the result that the necessity appears to itself in the shape of freedom as
well. 

                               ¡ì 267. 

This necessity in ideality is the inner self-development of the Idea. As the
substance of the individual subject, it is his political sentiment [patriotism]; in
distinction therefrom, as the substance of the objective world, it is the organism
of the state, i.e. it is the strictly political state and its constitution. 

Addition: The unity of the freedom which knows and wills itself is present first of all as
necessity. Here substance is present as the subjective existence of individuals. Necessity's other
mode of being, however, is the organism, i.e. mind is a process internal to itself, it articulates itself
within, posits differences in itself, and thereby completes the cycle of its life. 

                               ¡ì 268. 

The political sentiment, patriotism pure and simple, is assured conviction with
truth as its basis ¡ª mere subjective assurance is not the outcome of truth but is
only opinion ¡ª and a volition which has become habitual. In this sense it is simply
a product of the institutions subsisting in the state, since rationality is actually
present in the state, while action in conformity with these institutions gives
rationality its practical proof. This sentiment is, in general, trust (which may pass
over into a greater or lesser degree of educated insight), or the consciousness that
my interest, both substantive and particular, is contained and preserved in
another's (i.e. in the state's) interest and end, i.e. in the other's relation to me as
an individual. In this way, this very other is immediately not an other in my eyes,
and in being conscious of this fact, I am free. 

Remark: Patriotism is often understood to mean only a readiness for exceptional sacrifices and
actions. Essentially, however, it is the sentiment which, in the relationships of our daily life and
under ordinary conditions, habitually recognises that the community is one's substantive
groundwork and end. It is out of this consciousness, which during life's daily round stands the test
in all circumstances, that there subsequently also arises the readiness for extraordinary exertions.
But since men would often rather be magnanimous than law-abiding, they readily persuade
themselves that they possess this exceptional patriotism in order to be sparing in the expression of
a genuine patriotic sentiment or to excuse their lack of it. If again this genuine patriotism is looked
upon as that which may begin of itself and arise from subjective ideas and thoughts, it is being
confused with opinion, because so regarded patriotism is deprived of its true ground, objective
reality. 

Addition: Immature minds delight in argumentation and fault-finding, because it is easy enough
to find fault, though hard to see the good and its inner necessity. The learner always begins by
finding fault, but the scholar sees the positive merit in everything. In religion, this or that is quickly
dismissed as superstitious, but it is infinitely harder to apprehend the truth underlying the
superstition. Hence men's apparent sentiment towards the state is to be distinguished from what
they really will; inwardly they really will the thing, but they cling to details and take delight in the
vanity of pretending to know better. We are confident that the state must subsist and that in it
alone can particular interests be secured. But habit blinds us to that on which our whole existence
depends. When we walk the streets at night in safety, it does not strike us that this might be
otherwise. This habit of feeling safe has become second nature, and we do not reflect on just how
this is due solely to the working of special institutions. Commonplace thinking often has the
impression that force holds the state together, but in fact its only bond is the fundamental sense of
order which everybody possesses. 

                                 ¡ì 269.

The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically determined content from the
various members of the organism of the state. This organism is the development
of the Idea to its differences and their objective actuality. Hence these different
members are the various powers of the state with their functions and spheres of
action, by means of which the universal continually engenders itself, and
engenders itself in a necessary way because their specific character is fixed by the
nature of the concept. Throughout this process the universal maintains its identity,
since it is itself the presupposition of its own production. This organism is the
constitution of the state. 

Addition: The state is an organism, i.e. the development of the Idea to the articulation of its
differences. Thus these different sides of the state are its various powers with their functions and
spheres of action, by means of which the universal continually engenders itself in a necessary way;
in this process it maintains its identity since it is presupposed even in its own production. This
organism is the constitution of the state; it is produced perpetually by the state, while it is through it
that the state maintains itself. If the state and its constitution fall apart, if the various members of the
organism free themselves, then the unity produced by the constitution is no longer an accomplished
fact. This tallies with the fable about the belly and the other members. The nature of an organism is
such that unless each of its parts is brought into identity with the others, unless each of them is
prevented from achieving autonomy, the whole must perish. By listing attributes, axioms, &c., no
progress can be made in assessing the nature of the state; it must be apprehended as an organism.
One might as well try to understand the nature of God by listing his attributes, while the truth is that
we must intuit God's life in that life itself. 

                               ¡ì 270. 

     (1) The abstract actuality or the substantiality of the state consists in the fact
     that its end is the universal interest as such and the conservation therein of
     particular interests since the universal interest is the substance of these. 

     (2) But this substantiality of the state is also its necessity, since its
     substantiality is divided into the distinct spheres of its activity which
     correspond to the moments of its concept, and these spheres, owing to this
     substantiality, are thus actually fixed determinate characteristics of the state,
     i.e. its Powers. 

     (3) But this very substantiality of the state is mind knowing and willing itself
     after passing through the forming process of education. The state, therefore,
     knows what it wills and knows it in its universality, i.e. as something
     thought. 

Hence it works and acts by reference to consciously adopted ends, known
principles, and laws which are not merely implicit but are actually present to
consciousness; and further, it acts with precise knowledge of existing conditions
and circumstances, inasmuch as its actions have a bearing on these. 

Remark: This is the place to allude to the relation of the state to religion, because it is often
reiterated nowadays" that religion is the basis of the state, and because those who make this
assertion even have the impertinence to suggest that, once it is made, political science has said its
last word. No doctrine is more fitted to produce so much confusion, more fitted - indeed to exalt
confusion itself to be the constitution of the state and the proper form of knowledge. 

In the first place, it may seem suspicious that religion is principally sought and recommended for
times of public calamity, disorder, and oppression, and that people are referred to it as a solace in
face of wrong or as a hope in compensation for loss. Then further, while the state is mind on earth
(der Geist der in der Welt steht), religion may sometimes be looked upon as commanding
downright indifference to earthly interests, the march of events, and current affairs, and so to turn
men's attention to religion does not seem to be the way to exalt the interest and business of the
state into the fundamental and serious aim of life. On the contrary, this suggestion seems to assert
that politics is wholly a matter of caprice and indifference, either because this way of talking merely
amounts to saying that it is only the aims of passion and lawless force, &c., which bear sway in the
state, or because this recommendation of religion is supposed to be of self-sufficient validity, and
religion is to claim to decide the law and administer it. While it might seem a bitter jest to stifle all
animus against tyranny by asserting that the oppressed find their consolation in religion, it still must
not be forgotten that religion may take a form leading to the harshest bondage in the fetters of
superstition and man's degraded subservience to animals. (The Egyptians and the Hindus, for
instance, revere animals as beings higher than themselves.) This phenomenon may at least make it
evident that we ought not to speak of religion at all in general terms and that we really need a
power to protect us from it in some of its forms and to espouse against them the rights of reason
and self-consciousness. 

The essence of the relation between religion and the state can be determined, however, only if we
recall the concept of religion. The content of religion is absolute truth, and consequently the
religious is the most sublime of all dispositions. As intuition, feeling, representative knowledge, its
task is concentrated upon God as the unrestricted principle and cause on which everything hangs.
It thus involves the demand that everything else shall be seen in this light and depend on it for
corroboration, justification, and verification. It is in being thus related to religion that state, laws,
and duties all alike acquire for consciousness their supreme confirmation and their supreme
obligatoriness, because even the state, laws, and duties are in their actuality something determinate
which passes over into a higher sphere and so into that on which it is grounded. It is for this reason
that in religion there lies the place where man is always assured of finding a consciousness of the
unchangeable, of the highest freedom and satisfaction, even within all the mutability of the world
and despite the frustration of his aims and the loss of his interests and possessions. 

Footnote: Religion, knowledge and science have as their principle a form peculiar to each and different
from that of the state. They therefore enter the state partly as mean - means to education and (a higher)
mentality - partly in so far as they are in essence ends in themselves, for the reason that they are embodied in
existent institutions. In both these respects the principles of tile state have, in their application, a bearing on
them. A comprehensive, concrete treatise on the state would also have to deal with those spheres of life is well
as with art and such things as mere geographical matters, and to consider their place in the state and their
bearing on it. In this book, however, it is the principle of the state in its own special sphere which is being fully
expounded in accordance with the Ideal, and it is only in passing that reference can be made to the principles
of religion, &c., and to the application of the right of the state to them. 

Remark: Now if religion is in this way the groundwork which includes the ethical realm in
general, and the state's fundamental nature - the divine will - in particular, it is at the same time only
a groundwork; and it is at this point that state and religion begin to diverge. The state is the divine
will, in the sense that it is mind present on earth, unfolding itself to be the actual shape and
organisation of a world. Those who insist on stopping at the form of religion, as opposed to the
state, are acting like those logicians who think they are right if they continually stop at the essence
and refuse to advance beyond that abstraction to existence, or like those moralists (see Remark to
¡ì 140) who will only good in the abstract and leave it to caprice to decide what is good. Religion
is a relation to the Absolute, a relation which takes the form of feeling, representative thinking,
faith; and, brought within its all-embracing circumference, everything becomes only accidental and
transient. Now if, in relation to the state, we cling to this form of experience and make it the
authority for the state and its essential determinant, the state must become a prey to weakness,
insecurity, and disorder, because it is an organism in which firmly fixed distinct powers, laws, and
institutions have been developed. In contrast with the form of religion, a form which draws a veil
over everything determinate, and so comes to be purely subjective, the objective and universal
element in the state, i.e. the laws, acquires a negative instead of a stable and authoritative
character, and the result is the production of maxims of conduct like the following: 'To the
righteous man no law is given; only be pious, and for the rest, practise what thou wilt; yield to thine
own caprice and passion, and if thereby others suffer wrong, commend them to the consolations
and hopes of religion, or better still, call them irreligious and condemn them to perdition.' This
negative attitude, however, may not confine itself to an inner disposition and attitude of mind; it
may turn instead to the outside world and assert its authority there, and then there is an outbreak
of the religious fanaticism which, like fanaticism in politics, discards all government and legal order
as barriers cramping the inner life of the heart and incompatible with its infinity, and at the same
time proscribes private property, marriage, the ties and work involved in civil society, &c., &c., as
degrading to love and the freedom of feeling. But since even then decisions must somehow be
made for everyday life and practice, the same doctrine which we had before (see Remark to ¡ì
140, where we dealt generally with the subjectivity of the will which knows itself to be absolute)
turns up again here, namely that subjective ideas, i.e. opinion and capricious inclination, are to do
the deciding. 

In contrast with the truth thus veiled behind subjective ideas and feelings, the genuine truth is the
prodigious transfer of the inner into the outer, the building of reason into the real world, and this
has been the task of the world during the whole course of its history. It is by working at this task
that civilised man has actually given reason an embodiment in law and government and achieved
consciousness of the fact. Those who 'seek guidance from the Lord' and are assured that the
whole truth is directly present in their unschooled opinions, fail to apply themselves to the task of
exalting their subjectivity to consciousness of the truth and to knowledge of duty and objective
right. The only possible fruits of their attitude are folly, abomination, and the demolition of the
whole ethical order, and these fruits must inevitably be reaped if the religious disposition holds
firmly and exclusively to its intuitive form and so turns against the real world and the truth present
in it in the form of the universal, i.e. of the laws. Still, there is no necessity for this disposition to
turn outward and actualise itself in this way. With its negative standpoint, it is of course also open
to it to remain something inward, to accommodate itself to government and law, and to acquiesce
in these with sneers and idle longings, or with a sigh of resignation. It is not strength but weakness
which has turned religious feeling nowadays into piety of a polemical kind, whether the polemic be
Connected with some genuine need or simply with unsatisfied vanity. Instead of subduing one's
opinions by the labour of study, and subjecting one's will to discipline and so elevating it to free
obedience, the line of least resistance is to renounce knowledge of objective truth. Along this line
we may preserve a feeling of abject humility and so also of self-conceit, and claim to have ready to
hand in godliness everything requisite for seeing into the heart of law and government, for passing
sentence on them, and laying down what their character should and must be; and of course if we
take this line, the source of our claims is a pious heart, and they are therefore infallible and
unimpeachable, and the upshot is that since we make religion the basis of our intentions and
assertions, they cannot be criticised on the score of their shallowness or their immorality. 

But if religion be religion of a genuine kind, it does not run counter to the state in a negative or
polemical way like the kind just described. It rather recognises the state and upholds it, and
furthermore it has a position and an external organisation of its own. The practice of its worship
consists in ritual and doctrinal instruction, and for this purpose possessions and property are
required, as well as individuals dedicated to the service of the flock. There thus arises a relation
between the state and the church. To determine this relation is a simple matter. In the nature of the
case, the state discharges a duty by affording every assistance and protection to the church in the
furtherance of its religious ends; and, in addition, since religion is an integrating factor in the state,
implanting a sense of unity in the depths of men's minds, the state should even require all its citizens
to belong to a church - a church is all that can be said, because since the content of a man's faith
depends on his private ideas, the state cannot interfere with it. A state which is strong because its
organisation is mature may be all the more liberal in this matter; it may entirely overlook details of
religious practice which affect it, and may even tolerate a sect (though, of course, all depends on
its numbers) which on religious grounds declines to recognise even its direct duties to the state.
The reason for the state's liberal attitude here is that it makes over the members of such sects to
civil society and its laws, and is content if they fulfil their direct duties to the state passively, for
instance by such means as commutation or the performance of a different service. 

Footnote: Quakers, Anabaptists, &c., may be said to be active members only of civil society, and they may
be regarded as private persons standing in merely private relations to others. Even when this position has
been allowed them, they have been exempted from taking the oath. They fulfil their direct duties to the state in
a passive way; one of the most important of these duties, the defence of the state against its enemies, they
refuse outright to fulfil, and their refusal may perhaps be admitted provided they perform some other service
instead. To sects of this kind, the state's attitude is toleration in the strict sense of the word, because since
they decline to recognise their duty to the state, they may not claim the rights of citizenship. On one occasion
when the abolition of the slave-trade was being pressed with great vigour in the American Congress, a member
from one of the Southern States made the striking retort: 'Give us our slaves, and you may keep your Quakers.'
Only if the state is otherwise strong can it overlook and suffer such anomalies, because it can then rely
principally on the strength of custom and the inner rationality of its institutions to diminish and close the gap
between the existence of anomalies and the full assertion of its own strict rights. Thus technically it may have
been right to refuse a grant of even civil rights to the Jews on the ground that they should be regarded as
belonging not merely to a religious sect but to a foreign race. But the fierce outcry raised against the Jews,
from that point of view and others, ignores the fact that they are, above all, nien; and manhood, so far from
being a mere superficial, abstract quality (see Remark to ¡ì 209), is on the contrary itself the basis of the fact
that what civil rights rouse in their possessors is the feeling of oneself as counting in civil society as a person
with rights, and this feeling of self-hood, infinite and free from all restrictions, is the root from which the
desired similarity indisposition and ways of thinking comes into being. To exclude the Jews from rights, on the
other hand, would rather be to confirm the isolation with which they have been reproached - a result for which
the state refusing them rights would be blamable and reproachable, because by so refusing, it would
misunderstood its own basic principle, its nature as an objective and powerful institution (compare the end of
the Remark to ¡ì 268). The exclusion of the Jews from civil rights may be supposed to be a right of the highest
kind and may be demanded on that ground; but experience has shown that so to exclude them is the silliest
folly, and the way in which governments now treat them has proved itself to be both prudent and dignified. 

Remark: But since the church owns property and carries on besides the practice of worship,
and since therefore it must have people in its service, it forsakes the inner for the worldly life and
therefore enters the domain of the state, and eo ipso comes under its laws. The oath and ethical
ties generally, like the marriage bond, entail that inner permeation and elevation of sentiment
which acquires its deepest confirmation through religion. But since ethical ties are in essence ties
within the actual rational order, the first thing is to affirm within that order the rights which it
involves. Confirmation of these rights by the church is secondary and is only the inward,
comparatively abstract, side of the matter. 

As for the other ways in which an ecclesiastical communion gives expression to itself, so far as
doctrine is concerned the inward preponderates over the outward to a greater extent than is the
case with acts of worship and other lines of conduct connected with these, in which the legal side
at least seems at once to be a matter for the state. (It is true, of course, that churches have
managed to exempt their ministers and property from the power and jurisdiction of the state, and
they have even arrogated to themselves jurisdiction over laymen as well in matters in which religion
co-operates, such as divorce and the taking of the oath, &c.) Public control of actions of this kind
is indeterminate in extent, but this is due to the nature of public control itself and obtains similarly in
purely civil transactions (see ¡ì 234). When individuals, holding religious views in common, form
themselves into a church, a Corporation, they fall under the general control and oversight of the
higher state officials. Doctrine as such, however, has its domain in conscience and falls within the
right of the subjective freedom of self-consciousness, the sphere of the inner life, which as such is
not the domain of the state. Yet the state, too, has a doctrine, since its organisation and whatever
rights and constitution are authoritative within it exist essentially in the form of thought as law. And
since the state is not a mechanism but the rational life of self-conscious freedom, the system of the
ethical world, it follows that an essential moment in the actual state is the mental attitude of the
citizens, and so their consciousness of the principles which this attitude implies. On the other
hand, the doctrine of the church is not purely and simply an inward concern of conscience. As
doctrine it is rather the expression of something, in fact the expression of a subject-matter which is
most closely linked, or even directly concerned, with ethical principles and the law of the land.
Hence at this point the paths of church and state either coincide or diverge at right angles. The
difference of their two domains may be pushed by the church into sheer antagonism since, by
regarding itself as enshrining the content of religions content which is absolute - it may claim as its
portion mind, in general and so the whole ethical sphere, and conceive the state as a mere
mechanical scaffolding for the attainment of external, non - mental, ends. It may take itself to be
the Kingdom of God, or at least as the road to it or its vestibule, while it regards the state as the
kingdom of this world, i.e. of the transient and the finite. In a word, it may think that it is an end in
itself, while the state is a mere means. These claims produce the demand, in connection with
doctrinal instruction, that the state should not only allow the church to do as it likes with complete
freedom, but that it should pay unconditional respect to the church's doctrines as doctrines,
whatever their character, because their determination is supposed to be the task of the church
alone. The church bases this claim on the wide ground that the whole domain of mind (Geist) is its
property. But science and all types of knowledge also have a footing in that domain and, like a
church, they build themselves into a whole with a guiding principle of its own, and, with even better
justification, may regard themselves as occupying the position which the church claims. Hence
science also may in the same way demand to be independent of the state, which is then supposed
to be a mere means with the task of providing for science as though science were an end in itself. 

Further, for determining the relation between church and state, it makes no difference whether the
leaders of congregations or individuals ordained to the service of the church feel impelled to
withdraw from the state and lead a sort of secluded life of their own, so that only the other church
members are subject to the state's control, or whether they remain within the state except in their
capacity as ecclesiastics, a capacity which they take to be but one side of their life. the most
striking thing about such a - conception of the church's relation to the state is that it implies the idea
- that the state's specific function consists in protecting and securing everyone's life, property, and
caprice, in so far as these do not encroach upon the life, property, and caprice of others. The state
from this point of view is treated simply as an organisation to satisfy men's necessities. In this way
the element of absolute truth, of mind in its higher development, is placed, as subjective religious
feeling or theoretical science, beyond the reach of the state. The state, as the laity pure and simple,
is confined to paying its respects to this element and so is entirely deprived of any strictly ethical
character. Now it is, of course, a matter of history that in times and under conditions of barbarism,
all higher forms of intellectual life had their seat only in the church, while the state was a mere
mundane rule of force, caprice, and passion. At such times it was the abstract opposition of state
and church which was the main underlying principle of history (see ¡ì 359). But it is far too blind
and shallow a proceeding to declare that this situation is the one which truly corresponds with the
Idea. The development of this Idea has proved this rather to be the truth, that mind, as free and
rational, is implicitly ethical, while the Idea in its truth is rationality actualised; and this it is which
exists as the state. Further, this Idea has made it no less clearly evident that the ethical truth in it is
present to conscious thought as a content worked up into the form of universality, i.e. as law - in
short, that the state knows its aims, apprehends and gives practical proof of them with a clear -
cut consciousness and in accordance with principles. Now, as I said earlier, religion has the truth
as its universal subject-matter, but it possesses it only as a given content which has not been
apprehended in its fundamental characteristics as a result of thinking and the use of concepts.
Similarly, the relation of the individual to this subject-matter is an obligation grounded on authority,
while the 'witness of his own spirit and heart', i.e. that wherein the moment of freedom resides, is
faith and feeling. It is philosophic insight which sees that while church and state differ in form, they
do not stand opposed in content, for truth and rationality are the content of both. Thus when the
church begins to teach doctrines (though there are and have been some churches with a ritual only,
and others in which ritual is the chief thing, while doctrine and a more educated consciousness are
only secondary), and when these doctrines touch on objective principles, on thoughts of the ethical
and the rational, 'then their expression eo ipso brings the church into the domain of the state. In
contrast with the church's faith and authority in matters affecting ethical principles, rightness, laws,
institutions, in contrast with the church's subjective conviction, the state is that which knows. Its
principle is such that its content is in essence no longer clothed with the form of feeling and faith
but is determinate thought. 

If the content of absolute truth appears in the form of religion as a particular content, i.e. as the
doctrines peculiar to the church as a religious community, then these doctrines remain out of the
reach of the state (in Protestantism they are out of the reach of priests too because, as there is no
laity there, so there is no priesthood to be an exclusive depository of church doctrine). Since
ethical principles and the organisation of the state in general are drawn into the domain of religion
and not only may, but also should, be established by reference thereto, this reference gives
religious credentials to the state itself. On the other hand, however, the state retains the right and
the form of self-conscious, objective, rationality, the right to make this form count and to maintain
it against pretensions springing from truth in a subjective dress, no matter how such truth may
girdle itself with certitude and authority. 

The state is universal in form, a form whose essential principle is thought. This explains why it was
in the state that freedom of thought and science had their origin. It was a church, on the other
hand, which burnt Giordano Bruno, forced Galileo to recant on his knees his exposition of the
Copernican view of the solar system, and so forth. 

Footnote: When Galileo published the discoveries' about the phases of Venus, &c., which he had made
with the aid of the telescope, 'he showed that they incontestably proved the motion of the earth. But this idea
of the motion of the earth was declared heretical by an assembly of Cardinals, and Galileo, its most famous
advocate, was haled before the Inquisition and compelled to recant it, under pain of severe imprisonment. One
of the strongest of passions is the love of truth in a man of genius. ... Convinced of the motion of the earth as a
result of his own observations, Galileo meditated a long while on a new work in which he had resolved to
develop all the proofs in its favour. But in order at the same time to escape from the persecution of which
otherwise he would inevitably have been the victim, he hit upon the device of expounding them in the form of
dialogues between three speakers.... It is obvious enough in them that the advantage lies with the advocate of
the Copernican system; but since Galileo did not decide between the speakers, and gave as much weight as
possible to the objections raised by the partisans of Ptolemy, he might well have expected to be left to enjoy
undisturbed the peace to which his advanced age and his labours had entitled him.... In his seventieth year he
was haled once more before the tribunal of the Inquisition.... He was imprisoned and required to recant his
opinions a second time under threat of the penalty fixed for a relapse into heresy. ... He was made to sign an
abjuration in the following terms: "I, Galileo, appearing in person before the court in my seventieth year,
kneeling, and with my eyes on the holy Gospels which I hold in my hands, abjure, damn, and execrate with my
whole heart and true belief the absurd, false, and heretical doctrine of the motion of the earth.. . ." What a
spectacle! An aged, venerable man, famous throughout a long life exclusively devoted to the study of nature,
abjuring on his knees, against the witness of his own conscience, the truth which he had demonstrated so
convincingly! By the judgement of the Inquisition he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment. A year later
he was set at liberty through the intercession of the Grand Duke of Florence. . . . He died in 1642. . . . Europe
mourned his loss. It had been enlightened by his labours and was exasperated by the judgement passed by a
detested tribunal on a man of his greatness.' (Laplace: Exposition du syst¨¨me du monde, Book V, chap. 4.) 

Remark: Science too, therefore, has its place on the side of the state since it has one element, its
form, in common with the state, and its aim is knowledge, knowledge of objective truth and
rationality in terms of thought. Such knowledge may, of course, fall from the heights of science into
opinion and deductive argumentation, and, turning its attention to ethical matters and the
organisation of the state, set itself against their basic principles. And it may perhaps do this while
making for this opining as if it were reason and the right of subjective self-consciousness - the
same pretentious claim as the church makes for its own sphere, the claim, namely, to be free from
restraint in its opinions and convictions. 

This principle of the subjectivity of knowing has been dealt with above (see Remark to ¡ì 140) - It
is here only necessary to add a note on the twofold attitude of the state to this opining. On the one
hand, in so far as opining is mere opining, a purely subjective matter, it is without any genuine
inherent force or power, plume itself as it may; and from this point of view the state may be as
totally indifferent to it as the painter who sticks to the three primary colours on his palette is
indifferent to the academic wisdom which tells him there are seven. On the other hand, however,
when this opining of bad principles embodies itself in a general organisation corrosive of the actual
order, the state has to set its face against it and protect objective truth and the principles of ethical
life (and it must do the same in face of the formulae of unconditioned subjectivity if these have
proposed to take the starting point of science as their basis, and turn state educational institutions
against the state by encouraging them to make against it claims as pretentious as those of a
church); while, vice versa, in face of a church claiming unrestricted and unconditional authority, the
state has in general to make good the formal right of self-consciousness to its own insight, its own
conviction, and, in short, its own thought of what is to hold good as objective truth. 

Mention may also be made of the 'unity of state and church' - a favourite topic of modern
discussion and held up by some as the highest of ideals. While state and church are essentially one
in truth of principle and disposition, it is no less essential that, despite this unity, the distinction
between their forms of consciousness should be externalised as a distinction between their special
modes of existence. This often desired unity of church and state is found under oriental
despotisms, but an oriental despotism is not a state, or at any rate not the self-conscious form of
state which is alone worthy of mind, the form which is organically developed and where there are
rights and a free ethical life. 

Further, if the state is to come into existence as the self-knowing ethical actuality of mind, it is
essential that its form should be distinct from that of authority and faith. But this distinction emerges
only in so far as the church is subjected to inward divisions. It is only thereafter that the state, in
contrast with the particular sects, has attained to universality of thought - its formal principle - and
is bringing this universality into existence. (In order to understand this, it is necessary to know not
only what universality is in itself, but also what its existence is. Hence so far from its being or its
having been a misfortune for the state that the church is disunited, it is only as a result of that
disunion that the state has been able to reach its appointed end as a self-consciously rational and
ethical organisation. Moreover, this disunion is the best piece of good fortune which could have
befallen either the church or thought so far as the freedom and rationality of either is concerned). 

Addition: The state is actual, and its actuality consists in this, that the interest of the whole is
realised in and through particular ends. Actuality is always the unity of universal and particular, the
universal dismembered in the particulars which seem to be self-subsistent, although they really are
upheld and contained only in the whole. Where this unity is not present, a thing is not actual even
though it may have acquired existence. A bad state is one which merely exists; a sick body exists
too, but it has no genuine reality. A hand which is cut off still looks like a hand, and it exists, but
without being actual. Genuine actuality is necessity; what is actual is inherently necessary.
Necessity consists in this, that the whole is sundered into the differences of the concept and that
this divided whole yields a fixed and permanent determinacy, though one which is not fossilised but
perpetually recreates itself in its dissolution. 

To a mature state thought and consciousness essentially belong. Therefore the state knows what it
wills and knows it as something thought. Now since knowing has its seat in the state, the seat of
science must be there too and not in the church. Despite this, it is often said nowadays that the
state must grow out of religion. The state is mind fully mature and it exhibits its moments in the
daylight of consciousness. Now the fact that what is hidden in the Idea steps forth into objective
existence gives the state the appearance of something finite, and so the state reveals itself as a
domain of worldliness, while religion displays itself as a domain of the infinite. If this be so, the
state seems to be the subordinate, and since what is finite cannot stand on its own feet, the state is
therefore said to need the church as its basis. As finite, it lacks justification, and it is only through
religion that it can become sacrosanct and pertain to the infinite. This handling of the matter,
however, is supremely one-sided. Of course the state is essentially worldly and finite; it has
particular ends and particular powers; but its worldly character is only one of its aspects, and it is
only to an unintelligent superficial glance that it is finite and nothing more. For the state has a
life-giving soul, and the soul which animates it is subjectivity, which creates differences and yet at
the same time holds them together in unity. In the realm of religion too there are distinctions and
limitations. God, it is said, is triune; thus there are three persons whose unity alone is Spirit (Geist).
Therefore to apprehend the nature of God concretely is to apprehend it through distinctions alone.
Hence in the kingdom of God there are limitations, just as there are in the world, and to hold that
mind (Geist) on earth, i.e. the state, is only a finite mind, is a one-sided view, since there is nothing
irrational about actuality. Of course a bad state is worldly and finite and nothing else, but the
rational state is inherently infinite. 

Secondly, it is averred that the state must deny e its justification from religion. In religion, the Idea
is mind in the inwardness of the heart, but it is this same Idea which gives itself a worldly form as
the state and fashions for itself an embodiment and an actuality in knowing and willing. Now if you
say that the state must be grounded on religion, you may mean that it should rest on rationality and
arise out of it; but your statement may also be misunderstood to mean that men are most adroitly
schooled to obedience if their minds are shackled by a slavish religion. (The Christian religion,
however, is the religion of freedom, though it must be admitted that this religion may become
changed in character and perverted from freedom to bondage when it is infected with
superstition.) Now if you mean that men must have religion so that their minds, already shackled,
may the more easily be oppressed by the state, then the purport of your statement is bad. But if
you mean that men ought to respect the state, this whole whose limbs they are, then of course the
best means of effecting this is to give them philosophical insight into the essence of the state,
though, in default of that, a religious frame of mind may lead to the same result. For this reason, the
state may have need of religion and faith. But the state remains essentially distinct from religion,
since whatever it claims, it claims in the form of a legal duty, and it is a matter of indifference to it in
what spirit that duty is performed. The field of religion, on the other hand, is the inner life, and just
as the state would jeopardise the right of that life if, like religion, it made claims on it, so also when
the church acts like a state and imposes penalties, it degenerates into a religion of tyranny. 

A third difference which is connected with the foregoing is that the content of religion is and
remains veiled, and consequently religion's place is in the field of the heart, feeling, and
representative thinking. In this field everything has the form of subjectivity. The state, on the other
hand, actualises itself and gives its specific institutions a stable, objective, existence. Now if
religious feeling wished to assert itself in the state in the same way as it is wont to do in its own
field, it would overturn the organisation of the state, because the different organs of the state have
latitude to pursue their several distinct paths, while in religion everything is always referred back to
the whole. If this whole, then, wished to engulf all the concerns of the state, this would be
tantamount to fanaticism; the wish to have the whole in every particular could be fulfilled only by
the destruction of the particular, and fanaticism is just the refusal to give scope to particular
differences. Hence to say: 'To the pious man no law is given' is nothing but an expression of this
same fanaticism. Once piety usurps the place of the state, it cannot tolerate the determinate but
simply shatters it. It is quite consistent with this if piety leaves decisions to conscience, to the inner
life, and is not governed by reasons. This inner life does not develop into reasoned argument or
give an account of itself. Hence if piety is to pass for the actuality of the state, all laws are cast to
the winds and subjective feeling is the legislator. This feeling may be pure caprice, and whether it is
or not can only be learnt from its actions. But by becoming actions and precepts, its actions
assume the guise of laws, and this is just the very opposite of the subjective feeling with which we
started. This feeling has God for its object, and we might make him the determinant of everything.
But God is the universal Idea and this feeling can regard him only as the indeterminate, which is
too immature to determine what is existent in the state in a developed form. It is precisely the fact
that everything in the state is fixed and secure which is the bulwark against caprice and dogmatic
opinion. Religion as such, then, ought not to be the governor. 

                               ¡ì 271. 

The constitution of the state is, in the first place, the organisation of the state and
the self-related process of its organic life, a process whereby it differentiates its
moments within itself and develops them to self-subsistence. Secondly, the state
is an individual, unique and exclusive, and therefore related to others. Thus it
turns its differentiating activity outward and accordingly establishes within itself
the ideality of its subsisting inward differentiations. 

Addition: Just as irritability in the living organism is itself from one point of view something
inward, something pertaining to the organism as such, so here again the outward reference is an
inward tendency. The inner side of the state as such is the civil power, while its outward tendency
is the military power, although this has a fixed place inside the state itself. Now to have both these
powers in equilibrium constitutes an important factor in the spirit of the state. Sometimes the civil
power is wholly effaced and rests entirely on the military power, as was the case, for instance, in
the time of the Roman Emperors and the Praetorians. At other times, nowadays for example, the
military power is a mere by-product of the civil power once all the citizens are conscriptable. 

     1. The Constitution (on its internal side only)
          2. Sovereignty vis-¨¤-vis foreign States

   B. International Law

                               ¡ì 330.

International law springs from the relations between autonomous states. It is for
this reason that what is absolute in it retains the form of an ought-to-be, since its
actuality depends on different wills each of which is sovereign. 

Addition: States are not private persons but completely autonomous totalities in themselves,
and so the relation between them differs from a moral relation and a relation involving private
rights. Attempts have often been made to regard the state as a person with the rights of persons
and as a moral entity. But the position with private persons is that they are under the jurisdiction of
a court which gives effect to what is right in principle. Now a relation between states ought also to
be right in principle, but in mundane affairs a principle ought also to have power. Now since there
is no power in existence which decides in face of the state what is right in principle and actualises
this decision, it follows that so far as international relations are concerned we can never get
beyond an 'ought'. The relation between states is a relation between autonomous entities which
make mutual stipulations but which at the same time are superior to these stipulations. 

                                 ¡ì 331.

The nation state is mind in its substantive rationality and immediate actuality and
is therefore the absolute power on earth. It follows that every state is sovereign
and autonomous against its neighbours. It is entitled in the first place and without
qualification to be sovereign from their point of view, i.e. to be recognised by
them as sovereign. At the same time, however, this title is purely formal, and the
demand for this recognition of the state, merely on the ground that it is a state, is
abstract. Whether a state is in fact something absolute depends on its content, i.e.
on its constitution and general situation; and recognition, implying as it does an
identity of both form and content, is conditional on the neighbouring state's
judgement and will. 

Remark: A state is as little an actual individual without relations to other states (see ¡ì 322) as
an individual is actually a person without rapport with other persons (see ¡ì 71 and elsewhere).
The authority of a state and, more particularly, so far as its foreign relations are concerned, of its
monarch also, is partly a purely domestic matter (one state should not meddle with the domestic
affairs of another). On the other hand, however, it is no less essential that this authority should
receive its full and final legitimation through its recognition by other states, although this recognition
requires to be safeguarded by the proviso that where a state is to be recognised by others, it shall
likewise recognise them, i.e. respect their autonomy; and so it comes about that they cannot be
indifferent to each other's domestic affairs. 

The question arises how far a nomadic people, for instance, or any people on a low level of
civilisation, can be regarded as a state. As once was the case with the Jews and the Mohammedan
peoples, religious views may entail an opposition at a higher level between one people and its
neighbours and so preclude the general identity which is requisite for recognition. 

Addition: When Napoleon said before the Peace of Campoformio that 'the French Republic
needs recognition as little as the sun requires it', what his words implied was simply the thing's
strength which carries with it, without any verbal expression, the guarantee of recognition. 

                                 ¡ì 332.

The immediate actuality which any state possesses from the point of view of
other states is particularised into a multiplicity of relations which are determined
by the arbitrary will of both autonomous parties and which therefore possess the
formal nature of contracts pure and simple. The subject-matter of these contracts,
however, is infinitely less varied than it is in civil society, because in civil society
individuals are reciprocally interdependent in the most numerous respects, while
autonomous states are principally wholes whose needs are met within their own
borders. 

                                 ¡ì 333.

The fundamental proposition of international law (i.e. the universal law which
ought to be absolutely valid between states, as distinguished from the particular
content of positive treaties) is that treaties, as the ground of obligations between
states, ought to be kept. But since the sovereignty of a state is the principle of its
relations to others, states are to that extent in a state of nature in relation to each
other. Their rights are actualised only in their particular wills and not in a
universal will with constitutional powers over them. This universal proviso of
international law therefore does not go beyond an ought-to-be, and what really
happens is that international relations in accordance with treaty alternate with the
severance of these relations. 

Remark: There is no Praetor to judge between states; at best there may be an arbitrator or a
mediator, and even he exercises his functions contingently only, i.e. in dependence on the
particular wills of the disputants. Kant had an idea for securing 'perpetual peace' by a League of
Nations to adjust every dispute. It was to be a power recognised by each individual state, and
was to arbitrate in all cases of dissension in order to make it impossible for disputants to resort to
war in order to settle them. This idea presupposes an accord between states; this would rest on
moral or religious or other grounds and considerations, but in any case would always depend
ultimately on a particular sovereign will and for that reason would remain infected with
contingency. 

                                 ¡ì 334.

It follows that if states disagree and their particular wills cannot be harmonised,
the matter can only be settled by war. A state through its subjects has widespread
connections and many-sided interests, and these may be readily and considerably
injured; but it remains inherently indeterminable which of these injuries is to be
regarded as a specific breach of treaty or as an injury to the honour and
autonomy of the state. The reason for this is that a state may regard its infinity
and honour as at stake in each of its concerns, however minute, and it is all the
more inclined to susceptibility to injury the more its strong individuality is
impelled as a result of long domestic peace to seek and create a sphere of activity
abroad. 

                                 ¡ì 335.

Apart from this, the state is in essence mind and therefore cannot be prepared to
stop at just taking notice of an injury after it has actually occurred. On the
contrary, there arises in addition as a cause of strife the idea of such an injury as
the idea of a danger threatening from another state, together with calculations of
degrees of probability on this side and that, guessing at intentions, &c., &c. 

                                 ¡ì 336.

Since states are related to one another as autonomous entities and so as particular
wills on which the very validity of treaties depends, and since the particular will of
the whole is in content a will for its own welfare pure and simple, it follows that
welfare is the highest law governing the relation of one state to another. This is all
the more the case since the Idea of the state is precisely the supersession of the
clash between right (i.e. empty abstract freedom) and welfare (i.e. the particular
content which fills that void), and it is when states become concrete wholes that
they first attain recognition (see ¡ì 331). 

                                 ¡ì 337.

The substantial welfare of the state is its welfare as a particular state in its specific
interest and situation and its no less special foreign affairs, including its particular
treaty relations.. Its government therefore is a matter of particular wisdom, not of
universal Providence (compare Remark to ¡ì 324). Similarly, its aim in relation to
other states and its principle for justifying wars and treaties is not a universal
thought (the thought of philanthropy) but only its actually injured or threatened
welfare as something specific. and peculiar to itself. 

Remark: At one time the opposition between morals and politics, and the demand that the latter
should conform to the former, were much canvassed. On this point only a general remark is
required here. The welfare of a state has claims to recognition totally different from those of the
welfare of the individual. The ethical substance, the state, has its determinate being, i.e. its right,
directly embodied in something existent, something not abstract but concrete, and the principle of
its conduct and behaviour can only be this concrete existent and not one of the many universal
thoughts supposed to be moral commands. When politics is alleged to clash with morals and so to
be always wrong, the doctrine propounded rests on superficial ideas about morality, the nature of
the state, and the state's relation to the moral point of view. 

                                 ¡ì 338.

The fact that states reciprocally recognise each other as states remains, even in
war ¡ª the state of affairs when rights disappear and force and chance hold sway
¡ª a bond wherein each counts to the rest as something absolute. Hence in war,
war itself is characterised as something which ought to pass away. It implies
therefore the proviso of, the jus gentium ¡ª that the possibility of peace be
retained (and so, for example, that envoys must be respected), and, in general,
that war be not waged against domestic institutions, against the peace of family
and private life, or against persons in their private capacity. 

Addition: Modern wars are therefore humanely waged, and person is not set over against
person in hatred. At most, personal enmities appear in the vanguard, but in the main body of the
army hostility is something vague and gives place to each side's respect for the duty of the other. 

                                 ¡ì 339.

Apart from this, relations between states (e.g. in war-time, reciprocal agreements
about taking prisoners; in peace-time, concessions of rights to subjects of other
states for the purpose of private trade and intercourse, &c.) depend principally
upon the customs of nations, custom being the inner universality of behaviour
maintained in all circumstances. 

Addition: The European peoples form a family in accordance with the universal principle
underlying their legal codes, their customs, and their civilisation. This principle has modified their
international conduct accordingly in a state of affairs [i.e. war] otherwise dominated by the mutual
infliction of evils. The relations of state to state are uncertain, and there is no Praetor available to
adjust them. The only higher judge is the universal absolute mind, the world mind. 

                                 ¡ì 340.

It is as particular entities that states enter into relations with one another. Hence
their relations are on the largest scale a maelstrom of external contingency and the
inner particularity of passions, private interests and selfish ends, abilities and
virtues, vices, force, and wrong. All these whirl together, and in their vortex the
ethical whole itself, the autonomy of the state, is exposed to contingency. The
principles of the national minds are wholly restricted on account of their
particularity, for it is in this particularity that, as existent individuals, they have
their objective actuality and their self-consciousness. Their deeds and destinies in
their reciprocal relations to one another are the dialectic of the finitude of these
minds, and out of it arises the universal mind, the mind of the world, free from all
restriction, producing itself as that which exercises its right ¡ª and its right is the
highest right of all ¡ª over these finite minds in the 'history of the world which is
the world's court of judgement'. 

          C. World History

                               ¡ì 341.

The element in which the universal mind exists in art is intuition and imagery, in
religion feeling and representative thinking, in philosophy pure freedom of
thought. In world history this element is the actuality of mind in its whole
compass of internality and externality alike. World history is a court of judgement
because in its absolute universality, the particular - i.e. the Penates, civil society,
and the national minds in their variegated actuality is present as only ideal, and the
movement of mind in this element is the exhibition of that fact. 

                                 ¡ì 342.

Further, world history is not the verdict of mere might, i.e. the abstract and
non-rational inevitability of a blind destiny. On the contrary, since mind is
implicitly and actually reason, and reason is explicit to itself in mind as
knowledge, world history is the necessary development, out of the concept of
mind's freedom alone, of the moments of reason and so of the self-consciousness
and freedom of mind. This development is the interpretation and actualisation of
the universal mind. 

                                 ¡ì 343.

The history of mind is its own act. Mind is only what it does, and its act is to
make itself the object of its own consciousness. In history its act is to gain
consciousness of itself as mind, to apprehend itself in its interpretation of itself to
itself. This apprehension is its being and its principle, and the completion of
apprehension at one stage is at the same time the rejection of that stage and its
transition to a higher. To use abstract phraseology, the mind apprehending this
apprehension anew, or in other words returning to itself again out of its rejection
of this lower stage of apprehension, is the mind of the stage higher than that on
which it stood in its earlier apprehension. 

Remark: The question of the perfectibility and Education of the Human Race arises here.
Those who have maintained this perfectibility have divined something of the nature of mind,
something of the fact that it is its nature to have gnothi seanton as the law of its being, and, since
it apprehends that which it is, to have a form higher than that which constituted its mere being. But
to those who reject this doctrine, mind has remained an empty word, and history a superficial play
of casual, so-called 'merely human', strivings and passions. Even if, in connection with history, they
speak of Providence and the plan of Providence, and so express a faith in a higher power, their
ideas remain empty because they expressly declare that for them the plan of Providence is
inscrutable and incomprehensible. 

                                 ¡ì 344.

In the course of this work of the world mind, states, nations, and individuals arise
animated by their particular determinate principle which has its interpretation and
actuality in their constitutions and in the whole range of their life and condition.
While their consciousness is limited to these and they are absorbed in their
mundane interests, they are all the time the unconscious tools and organs of the
world mind at work within them. The shapes which they take pass away, while
the absolute mind prepares and works out its transition to its next higher stage. 

                                 ¡ì 345.

Justice and virtue, wrongdoing, power and vice, talents and their achievements,
passions strong and weak, guilt and innocence, grandeur in individual and national
life, autonomy, fortune and misfortune of states and individuals, all these have
their specific significance and worth in the field of known actuality; therein they
are judged and therein they have their partial, though only partial justification.
World-history, however, is above the point of view from which these things
matter. Each of its stages is the presence of a necessary moment in the Idea of
the world mind, and that moment attains its absolute right in that stage. The
nation whose life embodies this moment secures its good fortune and fame, and
its deeds are brought to fruition. 

                                 ¡ì 346.

History is mind clothing itself with the form of events or the immediate actuality
of nature. The stages of its development are therefore presented as immediate
natural principles. These, because they are natural, are a plurality external to one
another, and they are present therefore in such a way that each of them is
assigned to one nation in the external form of its geographical and anthropological
conditions. 

                                 ¡ì 347.

The nation to which is ascribed a moment of the Idea in the form of a natural
principle is entrusted with giving complete effect to it in the advance of the
self-developing self-consciousness of the world mind. This nation is dominant in
world history during this one epoch, and it is only once (see ¡ì 345) that it can
make its hour strike. In contrast with this its absolute right of being the vehicle of
this present stage in the world mind's development, the minds of the other nations
are without rights, and they, along with those whose hour has struck already,
count no longer in world history. 

Remark: The history of a single world-historical nation contains (a) the development of its
principle from its latent embryonic stage until it blossoms into the self-conscious freedom of ethical
life and presses in upon world history; and (b) the period of its decline and fall, since it is its
decline and fall that signalises the emergence in it of a higher principle as the pure negative of its
own. When this happens, mind passes over into the new principle and so marks out another nation
for world-historical significance. After this period, the declining nation has lost the interest of the
absolute; it may indeed absorb the higher principle positively and begin building its life on it, but the
principle is only like an adopted child, not like a relative to whom its ties are immanently vital and
vigorous. Perhaps it loses its autonomy, or it may still exist, or drag out its existence, as a
particular state or a group of states and involve itself without rhyme or reason in manifold
enterprises at home and battles abroad. 

                                 ¡ì 348.

All actions, including world-historical actions, culminate with individuals as
subjects giving actuality to the substantial (see Remark to ¡ì 279). They are the
living instruments of what is in substance the deed of the world mind and they are
therefore directly at one with that deed though it is concealed from them and is
not their aim and object (see ¡ì 344). For the deeds of the world mind, therefore,
they receive no honour or thanks either from their contemporaries (see ¡ì 344) or
from public opinion in later ages. All that is vouchsafed to them by such opinion
is undying fame in respect of the subjective form of their acts. 

                                 ¡ì 349.

A nation does not begin by being a state. The transition from a family, a horde, a
clan, a multitude, &c., to political conditions is the realisation of the Idea in the
form of that nation. Without this form, a nation, as ¡ª an ethical substance ¡ª
which is what it is implicitly, lacks the objectivity of possessing in its own eyes
and in the eyes of others, a universal and universally valid embodiment in laws,
i.e. in determinate thoughts, and as a result it fails to secure recognition from
others. So long as it lacks objective law and an explicitly established rational
constitution, its autonomy is formal only and is not sovereignty. 

Remark: It would be contrary even to commonplace ideas to call patriarchal conditions a
'constitution' or a people under patriarchal government a state 'or its independence' sovereignty'.
Hence, before history actually begins, we have on the one hand dull innocence, devoid of interest,
and, on the other, the courage of revenge and of the struggle for formal recognition (see ¡ì 331
and Remark to ¡ì 57) 

                                 ¡ì 350.

It is the absolute right of the Idea to step into existence in clear-cut laws and
objective institutions, beginning with marriage and agriculture (see Remark to ¡ì
203), whether this right be actualised in the form of divine legislation and favour,
or in the form of force and wrong. This right is the right of heroes to found states.

                                 ¡ì 351.

The same consideration justifies civilised nations in regarding and treating as
barbarians those who lag behind them in institutions which are the essential
moments of the state. Thus a pastoral people may treat hunters as barbarians, and
both of these are barbarians from the point of view of agriculturists, &c. The
civilised nation is conscious that the rights of barbarians are unequal to its own
and treats their autonomy as only a formality. 

Remark: When wars and disputes arise in such circumstances, the trait which gives them a
significance for world history is the fact that they am struggles for recognition in connection with
something of specific intrinsic worth. 

                                 ¡ì 352.

The concrete Ideas, the minds of the nations, have their truth and their destiny in
the concrete Idea which is absolute universality, i.e. in the world mind. Around its
throne they stand as the executors of its actualisation and as signs and ornaments
of its grandeur. As mind, it is nothing but its active movement towards absolute
knowledge of itself and therefore towards freeing its consciousness from the form
of natural immediacy and so coming to itself. Therefore the principles of the
formations of this self-consciousness in the course of its liberation - the
world-historical realms - are four in number. 

                                 ¡ì 353.

In its first and immediate revelation, mind has as its principle the shape of the
substantial mind, i.e. the shape of the identity in which individuality is absorbed in
its essence and its claims are not explicitly recognised. 

The second principle is this substantial mind endowed with knowledge so that
mind is both the positive content and filling of mind and also the individual
self-awareness which is the living form of mind. This principle is ethical
individuality as beauty. 

The third principle is the inward deepening of this individual self-awareness and
knowledge until it reaches abstract universality and therefore infinite opposition to
the objective world which in the same process has become mind-forsaken. 

The principle of the fourth formation is the conversion of this opposition so that
mind receives in its inner life its truth and concrete essence, while in objectivity it
is at home and reconciled with itself. The mind which has thus reverted to the
substantiality with which it began is the mind which has returned out of the
infinite opposition, and which consequently engenders and knows this its truth as
thought and as a world of actual laws. 

                                 ¡ì 354.

In accordance with these four principles, the world-historical realms are the
following: (1) the Oriental, (2) the Greek, (3) the Roman, (4) the Germanic. 

                                 ¡ì 355.
                        (1) The Oriental realm.

The world-view of this first realm is substantial, without inward division, and it
arises in natural communities patriarchically governed. According to this view, the
mundane form of government is theocratic, the ruler is also a high priest or God
himself; constitution and legislation are at the same time religion, while religious
and moral commands, or usages rather, are at the same time natural and positive
law. In the magnificence of this r6gime as a whole, individual personality loses its
rights and perishes; the external world of nature is either directly divine or else
God's ornament, and the history of the actual is poetry. Distinctions are
developed in customs, government, and state on their many sides, and in default
of laws and amidst the simplicity of manners, they become unwieldy, diffuse, and
superstitious ceremonies, the accidents of personal power and arbitrary rule, and
class differences become crystallised into hereditary castes. Hence in the Oriental
state nothing is fixed, and what is stable is fossilised; it lives therefore only in an
outward movement which becomes in the end an elemental fury and desolation.
Its inner calm is merely the calm of non-political life and immersion in feebleness
and exhaustion. 

Remark: A still substantial, natural, mentality is a moment in the development of the state, and
the point at which any state takes this form is the absolute beginning of its history. This has been
emphasised and demonstrated with learning and profound insight in connection with the history of
particular states by Dr. Stuhr in his book Der Untergang. der Naturstaaten - work in which he
leads the way to a rational treatment of constitutional history and of history generally. The principle
of subjectivity and self-conscious freedom is there too shown to be the principle of the Germanic
people, but the book goes no further than the decline of natural states, and consequently the
principle is only brought to the point where it appears either as a restless mobility, as human
caprice and corruption, or in its particular form as emotion, and where it has not yet developed to
the objectivity of the self-conscious substantiality or to an organised legal system. 

                                 ¡ì 356.
                         (2) The Greek realm.

This realm possesses this substantial unity of finite and infinite, but only as a
mysterious background, suppressed in dim recesses of the memory, in caves and
traditional imagery. This background, reborn out of the mind which differentiates
itself to individual mentality, emerges into the daylight of knowing and is
tempered and transfigured into beauty and a free and unruffled ethical life. Hence
it is in a world of this character that the principle of personal individuality arises,
though it is still not self-enclosed but kept in its ideal unity. The result is that the
whole is divided into a group of particular national minds; ultimate decision is
ascribed not to the subjectivity of explicitly independent self-consciousness but to
a power standing above and outside it (see Remark to ¡ì 279); on the other hand,
the due satisfaction of particular needs is not yet comprised in the sphere of
freedom but is relegated exclusively to a class of slaves. 

                                 ¡ì 357.
                         (3) The Roman realm.

In this realm, differentiation is carried to its conclusion, and ethical life is
sundered without end into the extremes of the private self-consciousness of
persons on the one hand, and abstract universality on the other. This opposition
begins in the clash between the substantial intuition of an aristocracy and the
principle of free personality in democratic form. As the opposition grows, the first
of these opponents develops into superstition and the maintenance of heartless
self-seeking power, while the second becomes more and more corrupt until it
sinks into a rabble. Finally, the whole is dissolved and the result is universal
misfortune and the destruction of ethical life. National heroes die away into the
unity of a Pantheon, all individuals are degraded to the level of private persons
equal with one another, possessed of formal rights, and the only bond left to hold
them together is abstract insatiable self-will. 

                                 ¡ì 358.
                       (4) The Germanic realm.

Mind and its world are thus both alike lost and plunged in the infinite grief of that
fate for which a people, the Jewish people, was held in readiness. Mind is here
pressed back upon itself in the extreme of its absolute negativity. This is the
absolute turning point; mind rises out of this situation and grasps the infinite
positivity of this its inward character, i.e. it grasps the principle of the unity of the
divine nature and the human, the reconciliation of objective truth and freedom as
the truth and freedom appearing within self-consciousness and subjectivity, a
reconciliation with the fulfilment of which the principle of the north, the principle
of the Germanic peoples, has been entrusted. 

                                 ¡ì 359.

This principle is first of all inward and abstract; it exists in feeling as faith, love,
and hope, the reconciliation and resolution of all contradiction. It then discloses its
content, raising it to become actuality and self-conscious rationality, to become a
mundane realm proceeding from the heart, fidelity, and comradeship of free men,
a realm which in this its subjectivity is equally a realm of crude individual caprice
and barbarous manners. This realm it sets over against a world of beyond, an
intellectual realm, whose content is indeed the truth of its (the principle's) mind,
but a truth not yet thought and so still veiled in barbarous imagery. This world of
beyond, as the power of mind over the mundane heart, acts against the latter as a
compulsive and frightful force. 

                                 ¡ì 360.

These two realms stand distinguished from one another though at the same time
they are rooted in a single unity and Idea. Here their distinction is intensified to
absolute opposition and a stern struggle ensues in the course of which the realm
of mind lowers the place of its heaven to an earthly here and now, to a common
worldliness of fact and idea. The mundane realm, on the other hand, builds up its
abstract independence into thought and the principle of rational being and
knowing, i.e. into the rationality of right and law. In this way their opposition
implicitly loses its marrow and disappears. The realm of fact has discarded its
barbarity and unrighteous, caprice, while the realm of truth has abandoned the
world of beyond and its arbitrary force, so that the true reconciliation which
discloses the state as the image and actuality of reason has become objective. In
the state, self-consciousness finds in an organic development the actuality of its
substantive knowing and willing; in religion, it finds the feeling and the
representation of this its own truth as an ideal essentiality; while in philosophic
science, it finds the free comprehension and knowledge of this truth as one and
the same in its mutually complementary manifestations, i.e. in the state, in nature,
and in the ideal world. 






The End
