Chapter IV

Politics and Ethics

 I. Mill's Problem

    In the Political Economy Mill had touched upon certain
ethical and political questions. These are explicitly treated in
a later group of works. The first and most important was the
essay upon Liberty (1859). I have already spoken of the elaborate
composition of this, his most carefully written treatise.(1*) The
book, welcomed by many even of his opponents, contains also the
clearest statement of his most characteristic doctrine. The
treatises on Representative Government (1861), upon the
Subjection of Women (written at the same time, but not published
till 1869), and upon Utilitarianism (in Fraser's Magazine, 1861,
and as a book in 1863), are closely connected with the Liberty,
and together give what may be called his theory of conduct.(2*) I
shall try to bring out their leading principles.
    The Liberty, says Mill, could have no claim to originality
except in so far as thoughts which are already common property
receive a special impress when uttered by a thoughtful mind.
Hymns to liberty, indeed, have been sung so long and so
persistently that the subject ought to have been exhausted. The
admission that liberty can be in any case an evil is generally
evaded by a device of touching simplicity. Liberty, when bad, is
not called liberty. 'Licence, they mean,' as Milton puts it,
'when they cry liberty.' Bentham exposes the sophistry very
neatly as a case of 'sham-distinctions' in the book of
'Fallacies.'(3*)
    The general sentiment is perfectly intelligible from the
jacobin point of view. At a time when legislators were supposed
to have created constitutions, and priests to have invented
religions, history was taken as a record of the struggle of
mankind against fraud and force. War is simply murder on a large
scale, and government force organised to support tyrants. All
political evils can be attributed to kings, and superstition to
priests, without blaming subjects for slavishness and stupidity.
Such language took the tone of a new gospel during the great
revolutionary movements of the eighteenth century. Men who were
sweeping away the effete institutions upheld by privileged
classes assumed 'Liberty' to be an absolute and ultimate
principle. The Utilitarians, though political allies, were
opposed in theory to this method of argument. Liberty, like
everything else, must be judged by its effects upon happiness.
Society, according to them, is held together by the sovereign.
His existence, therefore, is essentially necessary, and his power
almost unlimited. The greater was the importance of deciding when
and where it should be used. Bentham and James Mill assumed that
all ends would be secured by making the sovereign the servant of
the people, and therefore certain to aim at the greatest
happiness. They reached the same conclusions, therefore, as those
who reached them by a rather shorter cut, and their doctrine
differed little in its absolute and a priori tendency. Thorough
democracy would give the panacea. J. S. Mill had become
heretical. I have noticed in his life how he had been alarmed by
the brutality and ignorance of the lowest classes, and had come
to doubt whether 'liberty,' as understood by his masters, would
not mean the despotic rule of the ignorant. The doubts which he
felt were shared by many who had set out with the same political
creed.
    Here we come once more to the essentially false position in
which the philosophical radicals found themselves. The means
which they heartily approved led to ends which they entirely
repudiated. They not only approved, but were most active in
advocating, the adoption of democratic measures. They demanded,
in the name of liberty, that men should have a share in making
the laws by which they were bound. The responsibility of rulers
was, according to James Mill, the one real principle of politics;
and it followed that, to use the sacred phrase, the 'sinister
interests, which distract them should be destroyed. The
legislation which followed the Reform Bill gave an approximate
sanction to their doctrine. The abolition of rotten-boroughs
destroyed the sinister interest of the land owners; the reform of
municipalities, the sinister interest of the self-elected
corporations; the new poor-law, the sinister interest of the
parish vestries; and the ecclesiastical reforms showed that great
prelates and ancient cathedrals were not too sacred to be
remodelled and made responsible. The process inevitably smoothed
the way for centralisation. The state, one may say, was beginning
to come to life. The powers which, in a centralised government,
are exercised by an administrative hierarchy, had been treated
under the category of private property. To introduce
responsibility was to remove the obstacles to uniform machinery.
Vigorous action by a central authority had been impossible so
long as power had been parcelled out among a number of different
centres, each regarding its privileges as invested with all the
sanctity of private property. The duke, who claimed that he
'might do as he would with his own' -- including his boroughs --
had surrendered that part of his property to the new voters. They
enjoyed their rights not as a personal attribute, but ill virtue
of satisfying some uniform condition. For the time, indeed, the
condition included, not simply a ripe age and masculine sex, but
'ten-pound householdership.' Power held by men as members of a
class is, at any rate, no longer private property, but something
belonging to the class in general, and naturally used in the
interests of the class collectively. The legislature could make
general rules where it used rather to confirm a set of distinct
bargains made with each proprietor of ultimate authority. So far,
the generalising and centralising process was both inevitable and
approved by the Utilitarians. Nor could they, as prominent
advocates of codification and law-reform generally, object to the
increased vigour of legislation no longer trammelled by the
multitude of little semi-independent centres. But a further
implication often escaped their notice. 'Liberty' is increased by
destroying privilege in the sense that the individual acquires
more influence upon the laws that bind him. But it does not
follow that he will be 'freer' in the sense of having fewer laws
to bind him. The contrary was the case. The objection to the
privileges was precisely that the possessors retained them
without discharging the correlative functions. The nobles and the
corporations had not been too active, but too indolent. They had
left things undone, or left them to be done after a haphazard
fashion by individual energy. The much-lauded 'self-government'
implied an absence of government, or precisely the state of
things which was no longer possible when the old privileges were
upset. The newly organised municipalities had to undertake duties
which had been neglected by the close corporations, and others
which had been clumsily discharged by individuals. The result was
that the philosophical radicals found that they were creating a
Frankenstein. They were not limiting the sphere of government in
general, only giving power to a new class which would in many
ways use it more energetically. The difference came out in the
economic matters where the doctrine of non-interference had been
most actively preached. The Chartists and their allies claimed
their 'rights' as indisputable possessions, whatever might be the
consequences. To the Utilitarians this meant that the Chartists
were prepared in the name of a priori principles to attack the
most necessary institutions, and fly in the face of 'laws of
nature.' The old system had tended to keep the poor man down. The
Chartist system would help him to plunder the rich. The right
principle was to leave everything to 'supply and demand.' As the
contrast became clearer, some of the philosophical radicals
subsided into Whiggism, and others sank into actual Tories. Mill
remained faithful, but with modified views. He had seen in the
hostility of the lower classes to sound economy an illustration
of the ignorance, selfishness, and brutality of the still
uneducated mass.(4*) But he drew a moral of his own. The
impression made upon him by Tocqueville's Democracy in America is
characteristic. That remarkable book led him to aim at a
philosophical view of the whole question. It was an impartial
study of the whole question of the social and political
tendencies summed up in the phrase, 'democracy.' The general
result was to open Mill's eyes to both the good and evil sides of
democracy, to regard democracy in some shape as inevitable
instead of making it a religion or denouncing it as diabolical;
and to consider how the evils might be corrected while free play
might be allowed to the beneficial tendencies. It enlightened
him, he says, more especially on the great question of
centralisation, and freed him from the 'unreasoning prejudices'
which led some of the radicals to oppose even such measures as
the new Poor Law.(5*) So much may indicate Mill's general
attitude; and, if his conclusions were questionable, the main
purpose was so far eminently philosophical.
    Mill begins his Liberty by insisting upon the danger to which
his attention had been roused by the course of events. The
conflict between liberty and authority led to the demand that
rulers should become.responsible to their subjects; and when this
result was secured, a new evil appeared. The tyranny of the
majority might supplant the tyranny of rulers; and, if less
formidable politically, might be even worse spiritually. 'Social
tyranny' may be more penetrative than political, and enslave the
soul itself.(6*) In England the 'yoke of law' may be lighter, but
the 'yoke of opinion' is perhaps heavier than elsewhere in
Europe. When the masses have learned their power, they will
probably be as tyrannical in legislation as in public
opinion.(7*) The purpose of his essay is to assert 'one very
simple principle' by which this tendency may be restrained. That
principle is (briefly) that the sole end which warrants
interference with individual action is 'self-protection.' He will
argue not from 'abstract rights,' but from 'utility' understood
in its largest sense, and corresponding 'to the interests of a
man as a progressive being.'

 II. INTELLECTUAL LIBERTY

    The principle thus formulated is applicable both in the
sphere of speculation and in the sphere of conduct. Mill first
considers 'liberty of thought and discussion.' He has here the
advantage of starting from a generally admitted principle. Every
one now admits, in words at least, the doctrine of toleration.
Mill might have adduced a catena of authorities beginning with
the seventeenth century writers who, having themselves suffered
persecution, were slowly perceiving that persecution even of
error was objectionable. It is a proof of his ability that he
could give fresh interest to so old a topic. In the previous
generation indeed it had still been a practical question. The
early Utilitarians had to attack the disqualifications imposed
upon dissenters, and had remonstrated against the persecution of
Carlisle. That incident had started Mill's literary career.
Moreover, as he points out, the prosecutions of Pooley, Truelove,
and Mr Holyoake showed that the old spirit was not extinct in
1857.(8*) Still, these were but 'rags and remnants of
persecution.' In denouncing them Mill was going with the tide.
The ground upon which he plants his argument is more significant.
The older writers had chiefly insisted upon the question of
right. It cannot be just to punish a man for acting rightly, and
it must surely be right for me to speak what I conscientiously
believe to be true. One of James Mill's articles in the
Westminster took this ground. Samuel Bailey had argued that a man
cannot be responsible to men for his beliefs, inasmuch as they
are beyond his own control. He may be foolish, but he cannot be
immoral -- a thesis which James Mill defended against certain
theological opponents.(9*) J. S. Mill, taking the ground of
'utility,' is led to wider considerations. He argues in substance
that the suppression of opinions or of their free utterance is
always opposed to the most vital interests of society. Hence the
question as to liberty of thought connects itself with the whole
question as to liberty of conduct. It comes under his general
principle as to the rightful provinces of collective and
individual action. His general conclusion upon freedom of
dismission is summed up in four propositions.(10*) The opinions
suppressed may, in the first place, be true. To deny that
possibility is to assume infallibility. Secondly, if not wholly,
they may be partly, true; and to suppress them is to prevent
necessary corrections of the accepted beliefs. Thirdly, even a
true opinion which refuses to be tested by controversy will be
imperfectly understood. And fourthly, an opinion so held will
become a dead formula, and only 'cumber the ground,' preventing
the growth of real and heartfelt convictions.
    The general validity of the arguments is unimpeachable, and
the vigour of statement deserves all commendation. Mill puts
victoriously the case for the entire freedom of thought and
discussion. The real generosity of sentiment, and the obvious
sincerity which comes from preaching what he had practised, gives
new force to well-worn topics. The interest of the race not only
requires the fullest possible liberty to form and to communicate
our own opinions, but rather makes the practice a duty. Though
Mill gives the essential reasons, his presentation of the case
has significant peculiarities. Even if an opinion be true, he
says, it ought to be open to discussion. He proceeds to urge the
more doubtful point, that contradiction, even when the truth is
contradicted, is desirable in itself. Free discussion not only
destroys error, but invigorates truth. It preserves a wholesome
intellectual atmosphere, which kills the weeds and stimulates the
healthy growths. In mathematical reasoning, indeed, the evidence
is all on one side. There are no objections, and no answers to
objections. But as soon as we reach any question of the truths
even of physical, and still more of the moral, sciences, truth
must be attained by balancing 'two sets of conflicting
reasons.'(11*) The doctrine, true or false, which is not
contradicted, comes to be held as a 'dead belief.' An objector is
supposed to observe that on this showing, the existence of error
is necessary to the vitality of truth, and that a belief must
perish just because it is unanimously accepted. Mill 'affirms no
such thing.' He admits 'that the stock of accepted truths must
increase.' But the growth of unanimity, though 'inevitable and
indispensable,' has its drawbacks. It would be desirable to
encourage contradiction even by artificial contrivances. The
Socratic dialectics and the school disputations more or less
supplied a want which we have now no means of satisfying.(12*) By
systematic discussion of first principles, men are forced to
understand the full bearing and the true grounds of their
professed beliefs. This doctrine is illustrated, and no doubt was
derived in part from the early discussions in which Mill had
trained his logical powers. It suggests a valuable mode of mental
discipline; but as a statement of the conditions of belief, it
seems to confuse the accident with the essence. The bare fact of
sincere contradiction surely tends to weaken belief; and
resistance to contradiction, though it measures the strength of
belief, is not the cause of its strength. No doubt a truth may be
strengthened in passing through the ordeal of contradiction, so
far as we are thus forced to realise its meaning. The same result
may be produced by other means, and, above all, by applying
belief to practice. We believe in arithmetical truths, partly
because the oftener we have to count the more we realise the
truth that two and two make four. Whatever the original source of
our beliefs, the way to make them vivid is to act upon them. Mill
himself incidentally observes that men have a living belief in
religious doctrines, 'just up to the point to which it is usual
to act upon them.'(13*) That, I take it, hits the point. The
doctrine, for example, that we should turn the second cheek is
practically superseded, not because it is never contradicted, but
because it does not correspond to our genuine passions or
actions. Beliefs, true or erroneous, preserve their vitality so
long as they are put into practice, and not the less because they
are held unanimously. What is true is that they are then rather
instincts than opinions. Beliefs do not die when unchallenged,
but are the more likely to be 'dormant' or held implicitly
without conscious formulation.
    This leads to a further result. As Mill insists in the Logic,
'verification' is an essential part of proof. To act upon a
belief is one way of verifying. The fact that we apply a theory
successfully is also a valid proof that it is true in the great
mass of everyday knowledge. But a religious belief is not
verified in the same sense. The fact that I act upon it, and am
satisfied with my action, proves that it is in harmony with my
emotions, not that it is a true statement about facts. The
persuasive force often remains, though the logic has become
unsatisfactory. This suggests the question as to the nature of a
satisfactory 'verification.' We clearly hold innumerable beliefs
which we have not fully tested for ourselves. Mill supposes his
opponent to urge that simple people must take many things on
trust.(14*) We might rather say that even the wisest has to take
nine-tenths of his beliefs on trust. We may rightly believe many
truths which we are incompetent either to discover or to prove
directly because we can verify them indirectly. We can accept
whole systems of truth, though we are unable to follow the direct
proofs. A belief in astronomical theories, for example, is
justified for the vast majority, not because they can understand
the arguments of Laplace or Newton, but because they may know how
elaborately and minutely the conclusions of astronomers are daily
verified. The question is not whether we should take things on
trust; we cannot help it; but upon what conditions our trust
becomes rational. Authority cannot simply justify itself; but it
is reasonable to trust an authority which challenges constant
examination of its credentials and thorough verification of its
conclusions.
    Mill's tendency is not, of course, to deny, but to treat this
too slightly. He is inclined to regard ' authority' as something
logically opposed to reason, or, in other words, to accept the
old Protestant version of the 'right of private judgment'; or to
speak as if every man had to build up his whole structure of
belief from the very foundations. There is, he would admit, a
structure of knowledge erected by the convergence of competent
inquirers, and tested by free discussion and careful verification
at every point of its growth. New theories give and receive
strength from their 'solidarity' with established theories; and
'authority' is derived from the reciprocal considerations of
various results of investigation. Mill is apt to speak as if each
thinker and each opinion were isolated. The 'real advantage which
truth has, consists,' he says, 'in this, that though a true
opinion may be often suppressed, it will be generally
rediscovered, and may be rediscovered at a favourable moment,
when it will escape persecution and grow strong enough to defend
itself.'(15*) Persecution may succeed and often has succeeded.
The doctrine that it cannot succeed is a 'pleasant falsehood'
which has become commonplace by repetition. The statement is
surely incomplete. Errors, like truths, may be 'rediscovered' or
revived. There are 'idols of the tribe' -- fallacies dependent
upon permanent weaknesses of the intellect itself, which appear
at all ages and may gain strength under favourable circumstances.
Truth becomes definitively established when it is capable of
fitting in with a nucleus of verified and undeniable truth. Mill
seems to have in mind such a truth as the discovery of a
particular fact. If the existence of America had been forgotten,
it would be rediscovered by the next Columbus. If the dream of an
Atlantis had once vanished, we need never dream it again. But the
statement is inadequate when the truth discovered is some new law
which not merely adds to our knowledge, but helps to systematise
and to affect our whole method of reasoning.
    This position affects Mill's view of the efficacy of
persecution. He argues, rather oddly, from the suppression of
Lollards, Hussites, and Protestants. Mill certainly did not hold
that the suppressed opinions were true; and he does not attempt
to prove that they would not have died out of themselves. If
Protestantism was suppressed in Spain, the reason may have been
that it was so little congenial to the Spanish people, that the
persecutions were on the side of the really dominant tendencies
of the majority. That a tree without roots may fall the quicker
when the wind blows needs no proof; but is not conclusive as to
the effect upon a living tree. The true view, I venture to think,
is different.(16*) Opinions are not a set of separate dogmas
which can be caught and stamped out by themselves. So long as
thought is active it works by methods too subtle to be met by
such coarse weapons. It allows the dogma to persist, but
evacuates it of meaning. The whole structure becomes honeycombed
and rotten, as when in France sceptics had learned to say
everything without overtly saying anything. Persecution directed
against this or that separate theory only embitters and poisons a
process which is inevitable if people are to think at all; and
persecution can only succeed, either where it is superfluous, or
where it is so systematic and vigorous as to suppress all
intellectual activity. In either case the result is most
lamentable, and the admission only strengthens the case against
persecuting. Persecution can only succeed by paralysing the whole
intellectual movement.
    I think, then, that Mill, though essentially in the right,
has an inadequate perception of one aspect of the question.
Elsewhere(17*) he complains that we have substituted an
apotheosis of instinct for an apotheosis of reason, and so fallen
into an infinitely more 'degrading idolatry.' Here, he seems
inclined to attack all beliefs not due to the individual reason
acting independently. He accentuates too decidedly the absolute
value, not of freedom, but of its incidental result,
contradiction. He seems to hold that opposition to an established
opinion is good in itself. He would approve of circle-squarers
and perpetual-motion makers because they oppose established
scientific doctrines. He admires originality even when it implies
stupidity. Intelligence shows itself as much in recognising a
valid proof as in rejecting a fallacy; and the progress of
thought is as dependent upon co-operation and the acceptance of
rational authority as upon rejecting errors and declining to
submit to arbitrary authority. A man after all ought to realise
the improbability of his being right against a consensus of great
thinkers. Mill himself remarks, when criticising Bentham, that
even originality is not 'a more necessary part of the
philosophical character than a thoughtful regard for previous
thinkers and for the collective mind of the human race.'(18*)
That, I take it, is perfectly true, but is apt to pass out of
sight in his argument. The ideal state is not one of perpetual
contradiction of first principles, but one in which contradiction
has led to the establishment of a rational authority.

 III. THE DECAY OF INDIVIDUALITY

    I have insisted upon this chiefly because a similar error
seems to intrude into the more difficult problems which follow.
The real difficulty of toleration arises when we have to draw the
line between speculation and action. Is it possible to
discriminate absolutely? to give absolute freedom to thought and
yet to maintain institutions which presuppose agreement upon at
least some general principles? If men, as Mill asks, should be
free to form and to utter opinions, should they not be free to
act upon their opinions -- to carry them out, so long at least as
it is 'at their own risk and peril' -- in their lives?(19*) How
does the principle present itself in this case? Mill has
declined(20*) to take advantage of any assumption of absolute
right. He wishes to give a positive ground; to show that the
liberty which he demands corresponds in point of fact to a
necessary factor of human progress. His own doctrine is that the
'development of individuality is one of the leading essentials of
well-being'; and he adopts as identical the doctrine of Wilhelm
von Humboldt,(21*) that the right end of man is 'the highest and
most harmonious development of his powers to a complete and
consistent whole.' Humboldt considers this end to be 'prescribed
by the eternal or immutable dictates of reason.' Mill would
prefer, we may suppose, to have regarded it as the uniform
teaching of experience. In either case, it is a broad and
elevated doctrine which few thinkers would deny in general terms.
It is, moreover, eminently characteristic of Mill in his best
mood. He never wrote more forcibly than in his exposition of this
doctrine. He is now stimulated by the belief that he is preaching
in painfully deaf ears: In advocating freedom of thought or
denouncing despotism he was enforcing the doctrines most certain
of popular applause. But nobody cared much for 'individuality' or
objected to the subtler forms of moral tyranny. The masses are
satisfied with their own ways; and even 'moral and social
reformers' want as a rule to suppress all morality but their own.
Mill is uttering forebodings common to the most cultivated class.
The fear lest the growth of democracy should imply a crushing out
of all the higher culture has been uttered in innumerable forms
by some of our most eloquent writers and keenest thinkers. The
course of events since Mill's death has certainly not weakened
such fears. The problem is still with us, and certainly not
solved. Mill's view is eminently characteristic of his whole
doctrine. How, starting as a democrat, he had been led to a
strong sense or the possible evils of democracy, I have already
tried to show. I have now to inquire into the relation of this
view to his general theory.
    'Custom' in conduct corresponds to tradition in opinion. So
far as you make it your guide, you need no faculty but that of
'ape-like imitation.'(22*) You cultivate neither your reason nor
your will when you let the world choose your plan of life. You
become at best a useful automaton -- not a valuable human being;
and of all the works of man, which should be perfected and
beautified, the first in importance is surely man himself.
Obedience to custom implies condemnation of 'strong impulses' as
a snare and a peril. And yet strong impulses are but a name for
energy, and may be the source of the 'most passionate love of
virtue and the sternest self-control.' Individual energy was once
perhaps too strong for the 'social principle.' Now 'society' has
fairly got the better of individuality. We live in dread of the
omnipresent censorship of our neighbours, desire only to do what
others do, bow even our minds to the yoke, shun 'eccentricity' as
a crime, and allow our human capacities to be starved and
withered. Calvinism, he says, preaches explicitly that self-will
is the 'one great offence of men.' Such a creed generates 'a
pinched and hidebound type of human nature.' Men are cramped and
dwarfed, as trees are clipped into pollards. It has lost sight of
qualities belonging to a different type of excellence. 'It may be
better to be a John Knox than an Alcibiades; but it is better to
be a Pericles than either.'
    Clipping and cramping means loss of 'individuality', and
'individuality' may be identified with 'development.' This, he
says, might close the argument; but he desires to give further
reasons to prove to those who do not desire liberty for
themselves that it should be conceded to others. His main point
is the vast importance of genius, which can only exist in an
atmosphere of freedom. The 'initiation of all wise and noble
things comes, and must come, from individuals.' He is not such a
'hero-worshipper' as to desire a heroic tyrant, but he ardently
desires a heroic leader; and where eccentricity is a reproach,
genius will never be able to expand. Press all people into the
same mould, condemn tastes which are not the tastes of the
majority, and every deviation from the beaten path becomes
impossible. Yet public opinion tends to become more stifling.
'Its ideal of character is to be without character.' 'Already
energetic characters on any large scale are becoming merely
traditional.' The greatness of England is now all collective. We
are individually small, and capable of great things only by our
'habit of combining.' 'Men of another stamp made England what it
has been, and men of another stamp will be needed to prevent its
decline.' The evil is summed up in the 'despotism of custom.'
China is a standing warning. It had the 'rare good fortune ' of
possessing a particularly good set of customs. But the customs
have become stereotyped, the people all cast into the same mould,
and China therefore is what England is tending to become.
    Hitherto European progress has been due to the diversity of
character and culture of the various nations. It is losing that
advantage. Nations are assimilated; ranks and professions are
losing their distinctive characters; we all read the same books,
listen (not quite all of us?) to the same sermons, and have the
same ends. The process is accelerated by all the past changes.
The extension of education, the extension of means of
communication, the extension of manufactures, and, above all, the
supremacy of public opinion, are all in its favour. With 'so
great a mass of influences hostile to individuality' it is 'not
easy to see how it can stand its ground.'
    When Mill, as a young man, suddenly reflected that, if all
his principles were adopted, he should still be unhappy, he did
not doubt their truth. But now he seems to be emphatically
asserting that the victory of all the principles for which he and
his friends had contended would be itself disastrous. 'Progress'
meant precisely the set of changes which he now pronounces to
lead to stagnation. Democracy in full activity will extinguish
the very principle of social vitality. And yet, when at a later
period Mill became a politician, he gave his vote as heartily as
the blindest enthusiast for measures which inaugurated a great
step towards democracy. His sincerity in both cases is beyond a
doubt, and gives emphasis to the problem, how his practical
political doctrine can be reconciled with his doctrine of
development.
    The first question provoked by such assertions is the
question whether this is a correct, still more, whether it is an
exhaustive, diagnosis of the social disease? May not Mill be
emphasising one aspect of a complex problem, and seeing the
extinction of that 'individuality' which is really an element of
welfare, in the extinction of such an 'individualism' as is
incompatible with social improvement? His general aim is
unimpeachable. The harmonious development of all our faculties
represents a worthy ideal. The first or most essential of all
human virtues, as Humboldt had said, is energy; for the greater
the vitality, the more rich and various the type which can be
evolved by cultivation. Yet it may be doubted whether the two
aims suggested will always coincide. Energy certainly may go with
narrowness, with implicit faith and limited purpose. The stream
flows more forcibly in a defined channel. If Knox was inferior to
Pericles or, say, the Jew to the Greek, the inferiority was not
in energy or endurance. The efflorescence of Greek culture was
short lived, it has been said, because there was too much
Alcibiades and too little of Moses.(23*) Culture tends to
effeminacy unless guarded by 'renunciation' and regulated by
concentration upon distinct purpose. As in the question of
toleration, Mill overestimates the value of mere contradiction,
so in questions of conduct he seems to overestimate mere
eccentricity. Yet eccentricity is surely bad so far as it is
energy wasted; expended upon trifles or devoted to purposes which
a wider knowledge shows to be chimerical. To balance and
correlate the various activities, to direct energy to the best
purposes, and to minimise a needless antagonism is as essential
to development as to give free play to the greatest variety of
healthy activities.
    Mill's doctrine may thus be taken as implying a historical
generalisation. Historical generalisations are wrong as a rule;
and one defect in this seems to be evident. Are energetic
characters really rarer than of old? We may dismiss the illusion
which personified whole processes of slow evolution in the name
of some great prophet or legislator. It may still be true that
the importance of the individual has really been greater in
former epochs. The personal qualities of William the Conqueror or
of Hildebrand may have affected history more than the personal
qualities of Bismarck or of Pius IX. The action of great men,
indeed, at all periods whatever, is essentially dependent upon
their social environment; but personal idiosyncrasies may count
for more in the total result at one period than another. The
fortunes of a rude tribe may be, not only more obviously but more
really, dependent upon the character of its chief than the
fortunes of a civilised nation upon the character of its prime
minister. And, therefore, it may be, the individual as a more
important factor in the result, seems to represent greater
individual energy. Yet the energy of the old feudal baron, who
could ride roughshod over his weaker neighbours or coerce them
with fire and sword, is not necessarily greater than the energy
of the modern statesman, who has by gentler means slowly to weld
together alliances of nations, to combine and inspirit parties,
to direct public opinion, and to act therefore with constant
reference to the national or cosmopolitan order.
    Mill's(24*) lamentation over the pettiness of modern English
statesmen is familiar. What is really implied? England, as Mill
the democrat would have said, was once a country of castes: the
priest, the noble, the merchant, the peasant, represented
distinct types. Each class was bound by an unalterable custom and
conforms to inherited traditions; each, again, discharged some
simple or general function now distributed among many minor
classes. In later phrase, modern England has been made by
processes of 'differentiation' and 'integration.' The old class
lines have disappeared, the barriers of custom have been broken
down, the old functions have been specialised, and instead of
independent individual action, the whole system of life depends
upon the elaborate and indefinitely ramified systems of
co-operation, deliberate or unconscious. The obvious result is a
growth of organic unity, accompanied by an equal development of
diversity. Each unit can be assigned to a more special function,
because other functions are assigned to co-operating units, and
greater mutual dependence is implied in the greater variety of
careers and activities. In his democratic phase, Mill blesses
this process altogether; he approves the destruction of privilege
and caste distinctions; he approves the 'division of labour,' the
increased diversity of occupation, and the consequent growth of
co-operation; he desires the fuller responsibility of the ruling
class or the closer dependence of government upon the people. But
in the later phase, when he emphasises the evils of democracy,
does he not condemn what is a necessary implication in the very
process which he approves? The division of labour, he now
observes, narrows a man's life and interests; the necessity of
co-operation narrows the sphere of 'individuality'; and the
process which gives diversity to society as a whole implies
certain uniformities in the social atoms. The less the variety in
the units, the greater is the facility of arranging them in
different configurations. The eccentric man is a cross-grained
piece of timber which cannot be worked into the state.
'Individuality' is so far a hindrance to the power of entering
into an indefinite number of combinations. And yet so far as
'individuality' diminishes, the responsibility of government
means the subordination of rulers to the average commonplace
stupidity. What, then, is the 'individuality' which may be called
unconditionally good? How are we to define the danger so as to
avoid condemning the conformity which is a necessary implication
of progress? How are we to manage 'differentiation' at the
expense of 'integration'; to exalt such 'individuality' as is
incompatible with 'sociality'; and to regard 'eccentricity' and
'antagonism' and contradiction as valuable in themselves instead
of accidental results in particular cases of originality which in
some sense is priceless? Here, I think, is the real difficulty.
Have we to deal with forces necessarily 'counteracting' each
other, in Mill's phrase, or with forces which can be combined in
a healthy organism? Mill undoubtedly supposes that some
conciliation is possible. The historical view has shown the evil.
We have now to consider the remedy to be applied to the various
forms in which it affects economic, political, and ethical
conditions. The general principle has been given.
'Self-protection' is the only justification for the interference
of society with the individual. Although absolute liberty would
mean anarchy, we may still demand a maximum of liberty, and
suppress such a use of liberty by one man as would in fact
restrain the liberty of another. Mill, like Bentham, holds to the
purely empirical view. Interference is bad when the harm caused
by the coercion is not counterbalanced by the good.
    Bentham's doctrine is not only plausible but, within a
certain sphere, points to one of the most obvious and essential
conditions of useful legislation. The Utilitarians were always
affected by the legal principles from which they started. In the
case of criminal law, Mill's principle marks the obvious minimum
of interference. A state must suppress violence. If I claim
liberty to break your head, the policeman is bound to interfere.
If you and I claim the same loaf, the state, even if it be a
communistic state, must either settle which is to eat it, or
leave us to fight for it. And, again, if the principle does not
fix the maximum of legislation, it points to the most obvious
limiting considerations. The state means the judge and the
policeman, who cannot look into the heart, and must classify
criminal action by its definable external characteristics. It can
reach the murderer but not the malevolent man, who would murder
if he could. It is therefore incompetent to punish wickedness
except so far as wickedness is manifested by overt acts. If it
went further it would be unjust, because acting blindly, as well
as intolerably inquisitorial. Nor can it generally punish actions
which produce no assignable injury to individuals. To punish a
man for neglecting definite duties is necessary; but to try to
punish the idleness which may have caused the neglect would be
monstrous. The state would have to be omniscient and omnipresent,
and at most would favour hypocrisy instead of virtue. Briefly,
the law is far too coarse an instrument for the function of
enforcing morality in general. It must generally confine itself
to cases where injury is inflicted upon an assignable person and
by conduct defined by definite outward manifestations. This had
been clearly stated by Bentham. Mill, in his chapter on the
'limits of the authority of society upon the individual,' insists
upon objections obvious in the legal case. Can we deduce from
these legal limits a general principle defining the relation
between society and its units? I notice first the difficulty
already suggested by the Political Economy.

 IV. ECONOMIC APPLICATION

    How, as Mill had asked, in speaking of the economic aspects
of government interference, are we to mark out the space which is
to be sacred from 'authoritative intrusion'? So long as the
social state is simple, the application is easy. When one savage
catches the deer, and another the salmon, each may be forbidden
to take the other's game by force. Each man has a right to the
fruits of his own labour. In the actual state of things there is
not this charming simplicity. A man's wealth is not a definable
material object, but a bundle of rights of the most complex kind;
and rights to various parts of the whole national income, which
are the product of whole systems of previous compacts, The
possessor has not even in the vaguest sense 'created' his wealth;
he has more or less contributed the labour of brains and hands to
the adaptation of things to use, or enjoys his rights in virtue
of an indefinite number of transactions, bargains made by
himself, or bequests transferring the rights to new generations.
To protect his property is to protect a multifarious system of
rights accruing in all manner of ways, and to sanction the
voluntary contracts in virtue of which the whole elaborate
network of rights corresponds to the complex social order. The
tacit assumption of the economists was that this order was in
some sense 'natural' and law an artificial or extra-natural
compulsion. Can the line be drawn? The legal regulation has been
an essential though a subordinate part of the whole process. Law,
at an early stage, is an undistinguishable part of customs, which
has become differentiated from mere custom as settled governments
have been evolved and certain definite functions assigned to the
sovereign power. We cannot say that one set of institutions is
due to law and another to customs or to voluntary contracts. The
laws which regulate property in land or inheritance or any form
of association have affected every stage of the process and have
not affected it as conditions imposed from without, but as a part
of the whole elaboration. The principle that 'self-protection' is
the only justification of interference then becomes hard of
application. I am to do what I like with my own. That may be
granted, for 'my own' is that with which I may do what I like.
But if I am allowed in virtue of this doctrine to make any
contracts or to dispose of my property in any way that please, it
follows that the same sanctity is transferred to the whole system
which has grown up by voluntary action at every point, and which
is therefore regarded as the 'natural' or spontaneous order. Now
the actual course of events, as Mill maintains, produced a
society with vast inequalities of wealth a society which, as he
declares, does not even show an approximation to justice, or in
which a man's fortunes are determined not by his merits but by
accident. On this interpretation of the principle of
non-interference, it follows that in the name of legal 'liberty'
you approve a process destructive of 'liberty' in fact. Every man
is allowed no doubt by the laws to act as circumstances admit;
but the circumstances may permit some people to enjoy every
conceivable pleasure and to develop every faculty, while they
condemn others to find their only pleasure in gin, and to have
such development as can be acquired in 'London slums.' A famous
judge pointed out ironically that the laws of England were the
same for the rich and the poor; that is, the same price was
charged for justice whether the applicants could afford it or
not. Is it not a mockery to tell a man that he is free to do as
he pleases, if it only means that he may choose between
starvation and the poorhouse? Mill had himself been inclined to
remedy the evils by invoking an omnipotent legislature to
undertake very drastic measures of reform. Equal laws will
produce equal results when, in point of fact, they apply to men
under equal conditions. If a society consists of mutually
independent and self-supporting individuals, the principle of
non-interference may work smoothly. Each man has actually his own
secret sphere, and the law only affects the exchange of
superfluous advantages among independent units. But that is to
say that to make your rule work, you must prevent all that
process of development which is implied in civilisation. Society
must be forced to be 'individualistic' in order that the formula
may be applicable. Self-protection means the protection of
existing rights. If they are satisfactory, the result of
protecting them will be satisfactory. But if the actual order,
however produced, is essentially unjust, the test becomes
illusory. Yet, if the laws are to interfere to prevent the growth
of inequality, what becomes of the sacred sphere of
individuality?
    Here we have the often-noted conflict between equality and
liberty. Leave men free, and inequalities must arise. Enforce
equality and individuality is cramped or suppressed. And yet
inequality certainly means a pressure upon the weaker which may
lead to virtual slavery. We must admit that neither liberty nor
equality can be laid down as absolute principles. The attempt to
treat any formula in this fashion leads to the perplexities
exemplified in Mill's treatment of the 'liberty' problem. His
doctrines cannot be made to fit accurately the complexities of
the social order. 'Equality' and 'liberty' define essential
'moments' in the argument, though neither can be made to support
an absolute conclusion.
    The difficulty was indicated in Bentham's treatment of
'security' and 'equality.' Both, he said, were desirable, but
when there was a conflict 'equality' must give way to 'security.'
Here we come to another closely allied doctrine. 'Security'
implies 'responsibility.' A man must be secure that he may be
industrious. He will not labour unless he is sure to enjoy the
fruit of his labour. This gives the Malthusian vis medicatrix.
But, stated absolutely, it implies pure self-interest. Robinson
Crusoe was responsible in the sense that if he did not work he
would starve. And, if we could, in fact, mark off each man's
separate sphere, or regard society as a collection of Robinson
Crusoes, the principle might be applied. Each man should have a
right to what he has himself 'created.' But when a man 'creates'
nothing; when his 'environment' is not a desert island but an
organised society, the principle must be differently stated.
'Responsibility,' indeed, always implies liberty -- the existence
of a sphere within which a man's fortunes depend upon his
personal character, and his character should determine his
fortune. But, as Mill can most clearly recognise, social
responsibility means something more. One most 'certain incident'
of social progress is the growth of co-operation, and that
involves, as he says, the 'subordination of individual caprice'
to a 'preconceived determination' and the performance of parts
allotted in a 'combined undertaking.'(25*) The individual, then,
is part of an organisation, in which every individual should play
his part. The over-centralisation which would crush him into an
automaton is not more fatal than the individual independence
which would be incompatible with organisation. The desirable
'responsibility' is not that of a Robinson Crusoe but that of the
soldier in an army. It should be enforced by other motives than
mere self-interest, for it affects the interests of the whole
body corporate. Now Mill, believing even to excess in the power
of education, included in education the whole discipline of life
due to the relations of the individual to his social environment;
and it is his essential principle that this force should be
directed to enforcing a sense of 'responsibility' in the widest
acceptation of the word.

 V. POLITICAL APPLICATION

    A similar doctrine is implied in his political writings, of
which the Representative Government is the most explicit. The
book is hardly on a level with his best work. Treatises of
'political philosophy' are generally disappointing. The
difficulty lies, I suppose, in combining the practical with the
general point of view. In some treatises, the 'philosophy' is
made up of such scraps about the social contract or mixture of
the three forms of government as excited Bentham's contempt in
Blackstone's treatise. They are a mere juggle of abstractions fit
only for schoolboys. Others, like James Mill's, are really party
pamphlets, masquerading as philosophy, and importing obvious
principles into the likeness of geometrical axioms. A good deal
of wisdom no doubt lurks in the speeches of statesmen; but it is
not often easy to extricate it from the mass of personal and
practical remarks. Mill's treatise might suggest some such
criticism; and yet it is interesting as an indication of his
leading principles. Some passages show how long experience in a
public office affects a philosophic thinker. Mill's exposition,
for example, of the defects of the House of Commons in
administrative legislation,(26*) his discussion of the fact (as
he takes it to be) that governments remarkable for sustained
vigour and ability have generally been aristocratic,(27*) and his
panegyric upon the East India Company,(28*) record the genuine
impressions of his long administrative career, and are refreshing
in the midst of more abstract discussions. I have, however, only
to notice a general principle which runs through the book.
    Mill starts by emphasising the distinction applied in the
Political Economy between the natural and the artificial.
Political institutions are the work of men and created by the
will. The doctrine that governments 'are not made, but grow,'
would lead to 'political fatalism' if it were regarded as true
exclusively of the other. In fact, we might reply, there is no
real opposition at all. 'Making' is but one kind of 'growing.'
Growing by conscious forethought is still growing, and the
antithesis put absolutely is deceptive. Mill is striving to
enlarge the sphere of voluntary action. He wishes to prove that
he can take the ground generally supposed to imply the doctrine
of 'freewill.' Institutions, he fully admits, presuppose certain
qualities in the people; but, given those qualities, they are 'a
matter of choice.'(29*) In politics, as in machinery, we are
turning existing powers to account; but we do not say that,
because rivers will not run uphill, 'water-mills are not made but
grow.' The political theorist can invent constitutions as the
engineer can invent machinery, which will materially alter the
results; and to inquire which is the best form of government 'in
the abstract' is 'not a chimerical but a highly practical
employment of the scientific intellect.' The illustration is
difficult to apply if the 'river' means the whole society, and
the 'water-mill' is itself, therefore, one part of the 'river.'
The legislator is not an external force but an integral part of
internal forces.
    In the next place, Mill rejects a distinction made by
Comte(30*) between order and progress. Comte had made a
distinction between 'statics' and 'dynamics' in sociology, which
are to each other like anatomy and physiology. The conditions of
existence, and the conditions of continuous movement of a society
correspond to 'order and progress.'(31*) Mill replies that
'progress' includes 'order,' and that the two conditions cannot
give independent criteria of the merits of the institutions.
Comte, in any case, regarding sociology as a science, considers
the dependence of political institutions upon social structure to
be much closer than Mill would admit. The power of the legislator
to alter society is strictly subordinate and dependent throughout
upon its relation to the existing organism. In his study of
Comte,(32*) Mill declares emphatically that Comte's work has made
it necessary for all later thinkers to start from a 'connected
view of the great facts of history.' He speaks with enthusiasm of
Comte's great survey of history, and fully accepts the principle.
Yet, in fact, he scarcely applies the method in his political
system, and accepts a doctrine really inconsistent with it. His
anxiety to give a far wider sphere to the possibilities of
modifying, leads him to regard institutions as the ultimate
causes of change, instead of factors themselves strictly
dependent upon deeper causes. Hence he substitutes a different
distinction. We are to judge of institutions by their efficiency
as educating agencies, on the one hand, and as the means of
carrying on 'public business' on the other. Institutions should
do their work well, and turn the workers into good citizens.(33*)
    The educative influence of government is thus his
characteristic point. The 'ideally best form of government,' as
Mill of course admits, is not one applicable 'at all stages of
civilisation.'(34*) We have to suppose certain conditions, and he
takes pain to show in what cases his ideal would be
inapplicable.(35*) But, given the stage reached in modern times
(as he practically assumes), there is 'no difficulty in showing'
the ideal form to be the representative system; that in which
'sovereignty is vested in the entire aggregate of the community,'
every citizen having a voice and taking at least an occasional
part in discharging the functions of government.(36*) This
applies the doctrine already expounded in the Liberty. Citizens
should be 'self-protecting and self-protective';(37*) the
'active,' not the 'passive' type of character should be
encouraged. The striving, go-ahead character of Anglo-Saxons is
only objectionable so far as it is directed to petty ends; the
Englishman says naturally, 'What a shame!' when the Frenchman
says, 'Il faut de la patience!' and the institutions which
encourage this energetic character by giving a vote to all, by
permitting freedom of speech, and by permitting all men to
discharge small duties (to act on juries for example) are the
best. I will only note that this tends to beg the important
question, Are the institutions really the cause or the effect?
Has the energy of the English race made their institutions free?
or have the free institutions made them energetic? or are the
institutions and the character collateral effects of a great
variety of causes? When so much stress is laid upon the
educational effect -- of serving upon a jury, for instance -- we
are impelled to ask what is the ultimate cause. Are people so
much morally improved by serving on juries? If the institution
like the 'water-mill' only directs certain instincts already
existing, we must not speak as if the mill made the water.power;
and Mill's arguments suggest a liability to this fallacy. It
becomes important at the next stage.
    The ideal form of government has its infirmities, as Mill
insists. Two are conspicuous: the difficulty of inducing a
democracy to intrust work which requires skill to those who
possess skill;(38*) and the old difficulty -- the 'tyranny of the
majority.' Mill's contention that the 'Demos' may be stupid,
mistake its own interests, and impress its mistaken views upon
the legislation, needs no exposition. We are thus brought to the
question how the ideal government is to be so constituted that
the interests of a section -- even if it be the majority -- may
not be so powerful as to overwhelm the other sections even when
backed by 'truth and justice.'(39*) Danger of popular stupidity
and danger of class legislation indicate two great evils to be
abated as far as possible by 'human contrivance.' (40*) A
sufficient 'contrivance' was in fact revealed at the right
moment. A discovery of surpassing value had been announced by one
of his friends. Hare's scheme of representation, says Mill with
characteristic enthusiasm, has the 'almost unparalleled merit' of
securing its special aim in almost 'ideal perfection,' while
incidentally attaining others of almost equal importance. He
places it among the very greatest 'improvements yet made in the
theory and practice of government.'(41*) It would, for example,
be almost a 'specific' against the tendency of republics to
ostracise their ablest men.(42*) And it would be the appropriate
organ of the great function of 'antagonism'(43*) which now takes
the place of contradiction in intellectual development. There
will always be some body to oppose the supreme power, and thus to
prevent the stagnation, followed by decay, which has always
resulted from a complete victory.
    Is not the 'water-mill' here expected to work the river? The
faith in a bit of mechanism of 'human contrivance' becomes
sublime. Hare's scheme may have great conveniences under many
circumstances. But that Hare's scheme or any scheme should
regenerate politics seems to be a visionary belief, unworthy of
Mill's higher moods. He seems to fall into the error too common
among legislative theorists, of assuming that an institution will
be worked for the ends of the contriver, instead of asking to
what ends it may be distorted by the ingenuity of all who can
turn it to account for their own purposes. There is a more vital
difficulty. If Hare's scheme worked as Mill expected it to work,
one result would be necessarily implied. The House of Commons
would reflect accurately all the opinions of the country.
Whatever opinion had a majority in the country would have a
majority in the House. Labourers, as he suggests when showing the
dangers of democracy, may be in favour of protection, or of
fixing the rate of wages. Now in this scheme the majority in the
country may enforce whatever laws approve themselves to the
ignorant. I do not say that this would actually be the result;
for I think that, in point of fact, the change of mere machinery
would be of comparatively little importance. The power of the
rich and the educated does not really depend upon the system of
voting, or the ostensible theory of the constitution, but upon
the countless ways in which wealth, education, and the whole
social system affect the working of institutions. Mill can fully
admit the fact at times. But here he is taking for granted that
the effect of the scheme will be to secure a perfectly correct
miniature of the opinions of all separate persons. The wise
minority will therefore be a minority in the land. It will be
able to make speeches. But the speeches, however able, are but an
insignificant trickle in the great current of talk which forms
what is called 'public opinion.' The necessary result upon his
showing would be, that legislation would follow the opinions of
the majority, or, in other words, facilitate the 'tyranny of the
majority.'
    This suggests one vital point. Mill, as I have said, has
endeavoured to enlarge as much as possible the sphere of
operation of the freewill -- of the power of individuals or of
deliberate conscious legislation. The result is to exaggerate the
influence of institutions and to neglect the forces, intellectual
and moral, which must always lie behind institutions. We can
admit to the full the importance of the educational influence of
political institutions, and the surpassing value of energy,
self-reliance, and individual responsibility. The sentiment is
altogether noble, and Mill expresses it with admirable vigour.
But the more decidedly we hold his view of the disease, the more
utterly inadequate and inappropriate appears his remedy. The
tendency to levelling and vulgarising, so far as it exists, can
certainly not be cured by ingenious arrangements of one part of
the political machinery. I take this to mark Mill's weakest side.
The truth was divined by the instinct of his democratic allies.
So long as he voted for extending the suffrage, they could leave
him to save his conscience by amusing himself with these harmless
fancies.

 VI. WOMEN'S RIGHTS

    Mill's Subjection of Women brings out more clearly some of
the fundamental Utilitarian tenets. None of his writings is more
emphatically marked by generosity and love of justice. A certain
shrillness of tone marks the recluse too little able to
appreciate the animal nature of mankind. Yet in any case, he made
a most effective protest against the prejudices which stunted the
development and limited the careers of women. Mill declares at
starting, that till recently the 'law of force' has been 'the
avowed rule of general conduct.' Only of late has there been even
a pretence of regulating 'the affairs of society in general
according to any moral law.' (44*) That moral considerations have
been too little regarded as between different societies or
different classes is painfully obvious. But 'force' in any
intelligible sense is itself only made applicable by the social
instincts, which bind men together. No society could ever be
welded into a whole by 'force' alone. This is the Utilitarian
fallacy of explaining law by 'sanctions,' and leaving the
'sanctions' to explain themselves. But the argument encourages
Mill to treat of all inequality as unjust because imposed by
force. The 'only school of genuine moral sentiment,' he says, 'is
society between equals.' Let us rather say that inequalities are
unjust which rest upon force alone. Every school of morality or
of thought implies subordination, but a subordination desirable
only when based upon real superiority. The question then becomes
whether the existing relations of the sexes correspond to some
essential difference or are created by sheer force.
    Here we have assumptions characteristic of Mill's whole
logical method; and, especially, the curious oscillation between
absolute laws and indefinite modifiability. His doctrine of
'natural kinds' supposed that two races were either divided by an
impassable gulf, or were divided only by accidental or
superficial differences. He protests against the explanation of
national differences by race characteristics. To say that the
Irish are naturally lazy, or the Negroes naturally stupid, is to
make a short apology for oppression and for slavery. Undoubtedly
it is wrong, as it is contrary to all empirical reasoning, to
assume a fundamental difference; and morally wrong to found upon
the assumption an apology for maintaining caste and privilege.
But neither is it legitimate to assume that the differences are
negligible. The 'accident of colour' has been made a pretext for
an abominable institution. But we have no right to the a priori
assumption that colour is a mere accident. It may upon Mill's own
method be an indication of radical and far-reaching differences.
How far the Negro differs from the white man, whether he is
intellectually equal or on a wholly lower plane, is a question of
fact to be decided by experience. Mill's refusal to accept one
doctrine passes imperceptibly into an equally unfounded
acceptance of its contradictory. The process is shown by the
doctrine to which, as we have seen, he attached so much
importance, that political science must be deductive, because the
effect of the conjoined causes is the sum of the effects of the
separate causes. When two men act together, the effect may be
inferred from putting together the motives of each. 'All
phenomena of society,' he infers, 'are phenomena of human nature
generated by the action of outward circumstances upon masses of
human beings.' (45*) We can therefore deduce scientific laws in
sociology as in astronomy. This tacitly assumes that man, like
molecule, represents a constant unit, and thus introduces the de
facto equality of human beings, from which it is an inevitable
step to the equality of rights. The sound doctrine that we can
only learn by experience what are the differences between men
becomes the doctrine that all differences are superficial, and
therefore the man always the same. The doctrine becomes audacious
when 'man' is taken to include 'woman.' He speaks of the
'accident of sex' and the 'accident of colour' as equally unjust
grounds for political distinctions.(46*) The difference between
men and women, Whites and Negroes, is 'accidental,' that is,
apparently removable by some change of 'outward circumstances.'
    Mill, indeed, does not admit that he is begging the question.
He guards himself carefully against begging the question either
way,(47*) though he thinks apparently that the burthen of proof
is upon those who assert a natural difference. Accordingly he
urges that the so-called 'nature of women' is 'an eminently
artificial thing'; a result of 'hothouse cultivation' carried on
for the benefit of their masters.(48*) He afterwards(49*)
endeavours to show that even the 'least contestable differences'
between the sexes are such as may 'very well have been produced
merely by circumstances without any differences of natural
capacity.' What, one asks, can the 'circumstances mean?
Psychology, as he truly says, can tell us little; but physiology
certainly seems to suggest a difference implied in the whole
organisation and affecting every mental and,physical
characteristic. It is not, apparently, a case of two otherwise
equal beings upon which different qualities have been
superimposed, but of a radical distinction, totally inconsistent
with any presumption of equality.(50*) When we are told that the
legal inequality is an 'isolated fact' -- a 'solitary breach of
what has become a fundamental law of human institutions'(51*) --
the reply is obvious. The distinction of the sexes is surely an
'isolated fact,' so radical or 'natural' that it is no wonder
that it should have unique recognition in all human institutions.
Mill has, indeed, a further answer. If nature disqualifies women
for certain functions, why disqualify them by law? Leave
everything to free competition, and each man or woman will go
where he or she is most fitted. Abolish, briefly, all political
and social distinctions, and things will right themselves. If
'inequality' is due to 'force,' and the difference between men
and women be 'artificial,' the argument is plausible. But if the
difference be, as surely it is, 'natural,' and 'force' in the
sense of mere muscular strength, only one factor in the growth of
institutions, the removal of inequalities may imply neglect of
essential facts. He is attacking the most fundamental condition
of the existing social order. The really vital point is the
bearing of Mill's argument upon marriage and the family. He
thinks (52*) that the full question of divorce is 'foreign to his
purpose'; and, in fact, seems to be a little shy of what is
really the critical point. He holds, indeed, that the family is a
'school of despotism,'(53*) or would be so, if men were not
generally better than their laws. Admitting that the law retains
traces of the barbarism which regarded wives as slaves, the
question remains whether the institution itself is to be
condemned as dependent upon 'force.' Would not the 'equality'
between persons naturally unequal lead to greater instead of less
despotism? If, as a matter of fact, women are weaker than men,
might not liberty mean more power to the strongest? Permission to
the husband to desert the wife at will might be to make her more
dependent in fact though freer in law. Whatever the origin of the
institution of marriage, it may now involve, not the bondage but
an essential protection of the weakest party. This is the side of
the argument to which Mill turns a deaf ear. We are to neglect
the most conspicuous of facts because it may be 'artificial' or
due to 'circumstances,' and assume that free competition will be
an infallible substitute for a system which affects the most
vital part of the whole social organism. To assume existing
differences to be incapable of modification is doubtless wrong;
but to treat them at once as non-existent is at least audacious.
Finally, the old difficulty recurs in a startling shape. If
differences are to disappear and the characteristics of men and
women to become indistinguishable, should we not be encouraging a
'levelling' more thoroughgoing than any which can result from
political democracy?

 VII. THE SELF-PROTECTION PRINCIPLE

    These special applications raise the question: What is the
interpretation of his general principle? 'Self-protection' is the
only justification for social interference. Where a man's conduct
affects himself alone society should not 'interfere'(54*) by
legislation. Does this imply that we must not interfere by the
pressure of public opinion? We may, as Mill replies, approve or
disapprove, but so long as a man does not infringe our rights, we
must leave him to the 'natural and, as it were, the spontaneous
consequences of his faults.' We may dislike and even abhor
anti-social 'dispositions' -- cruelty and treachery -- but
self-regarding faults and the corresponding dispositions are not
subjects of 'moral reprobation.' A man is not accountable to his
fellow creatures for prudence or 'self-respect.'(55*) Mill
anticipates the obvious objection. No conduct is simply
'self-regarding.' 'No one is an entirely isolated being'; and
injuries to myself disqualify me for service to others.
'Self-regarding' vices, as his opponent is supposed to urge, are
also socially mischievous; and we must surely be entitled to
assume that the experience of the race has established some moral
rules sufficiently to act upon them, however desirous we may be
to allow of 'new and original experiments in living.'(56*) Mill's
reply is that we should punish not the fault itself but the
injuries to others which result. We hang George Barnwell for
murdering his uncle, whether he did it to get money for his
mistress or to set up in business. We should not punish him, it
is implied, for keeping a mistress; but we should punish the
murder, whatever the motive. The criminal lawyer, no doubt,
treats Barnwell upon this principle. But can it be morally
applicable? Mill admits fully that self-regarding qualities may
be rightfully praised and blamed We may think a man a fool, a
lazy, useless, sensual wretch: we may, and are even bound to,
tell him so frankly, avoid his society, and warn others to avoid
him. My judgment of a man is not a judgment of his separate
qualities but of the whole human being. I disapprove of George
Barnwell himself, not simply his greediness or his vicious
propensities. I think a man bad in different degrees if he is
ready to murder his uncle, whether from lust or greed or even
with a view to a charitable use of the plunder. The hateful thing
is the character itself which, under certain conditions, leads to
murder. As including prudence, it may be simply neutral or
respectable; as implying vice, disgusting; and as implying
cruelty, hateful. Still, I do not condemn the abstract qualities
-- interest in oneself, or sexual passion or even antipathy --
each of which may be desirable in the right place -- but the way
in which they are combined in the concrete Barnwell. No quality,
therefore, can be taken as simply self-regarding, for it is
precisely the whole character which is the object of my moral
judgment of the individual. I have spoken of the inadequate
recognition of this truth by Bentham and James Mill. It makes J.
S. Mill's criterion inapplicable to the question of moral
interference. lf, as he argues, we are to impress our moral
standard upon others, we cannot make the distinction; for our
standard implies essentially an estimate of the balance of all
the man's qualities, those which primarily affect himself as much
as those which primarily affect others. Here is the vital
distinction between the legal and the moral question, and the
characteristic defect of the external view of morality. Keeping,
however, to the purely legal question, where the criterion is
comparatively plain, we have other difficulties. We are only to
punish Barnwell as an actual, not as a potential, murderer. We
should let a man try any 'experiment in living' so long as its
failure will affect himself only, or, rather, himself primarily,
for no action is really 'isolated.' We are, says Mill, to put up
with 'contingent' or 'constructive' injury for the sake of 'the
greater good of human freedom.'(57*) 'Society,' he urges, cannot
complain of errors for which it is responsible. It has 'absolute
power' over all its members in their infancy, and could always
make the next generation a little better than the last. Why,
then, interfere by the coarse methods of punishment to suppress
what is not directly injurious to itself? The strongest, however,
of all reasons against interference, according to him, is that it
generally interferes wrongly and in the wrong place. In proof of
this he refers to various cases of religious persecution: to
Puritanical laws against harmless recreation: to Socialist laws
against the freedom to labour: to laws against intemperance and
on behalf of Sunday observance: and, generally, to laws embodying
the 'tyranny of the majority.' We may admit the badness of such
legislation; but what is the criterion by which we are to decide
its badness or goodness? Is it that in such cases the legislator
is usurping the province of the moralist? that he is trying to
suppress symptoms when the causes are beyond his power, and
enforcing not virtue but hypocrisy? Or is it that he really ought
to be indifferent in regard to the moral rules which are
primarily self-regarding -- to leave prudence, for example, to
take care of itself or to be impressed by purely natural
penalties; and to be indifferent to vice, drunkenness, or sexual
irregularities, except by suppressing the crimes which
incidentally result? Mill endeavours to adhere to his criterion,
but has some difficulty in reconciling it to his practical
conclusions.
    Mill holds 'society' to be omnipotent over the young. It has
no right to complain of the characters which it has itself
concurred in producing. lf this be so, can it be indifferent to
morality? Indeed, Mill distinguishes himself from others of his
school precisely by emphasising the educational efficiency of the
state. Institutions, according to him, are the tools by which the
human will -- the will of the sovereign -- moulds the character
of the race. Mill's whole aim in economic questions is to
encourage prudence, self-reliance, and energy. He wishes the
state to interfere to strengthen and enlighten; and to promote an
equality of property which will raise the standard of life and
discourage wasteful luxury. What is this but to stimulate certain
moral creeds and to discourage certain 'experiments in living'?
How can so powerful an agency affect character without affecting
morals -- self-regarding or extra-regarding? The difficulty comes
out curiously in his last chapter. He has recourse to a dexterous
casuistry to justify measures which have an obvious moral
significance. Are we to legislate with a view to diminishing
drunkenness? No: but we may put drunkards under special
restrictions when they have once been led to violence. We should
not tax stimulants simply in order to suppress drunkenness; but,
as we have to tax in any case, we may so arrange taxation as to
discourage the consumption of injurious commodities. May we
suppress gambling or fornication? No: but we may perhaps see our
way to suppressing public gambling-houses or brothels, because we
may forbid solicitations to that which we think evil, though we
are not so clear of the evil as to suppress the conduct itself.
We may enforce universal education, though he makes the condition
that the state is only to pay for the children of the poor, not
to provide the schools. And, once more, we are not forbidden by
his principle to legislate against imprudent marriages; for the
marriage clearly affects the offspring, and, moreover, affects
all labourers in an over-populated country. Yet, what
interference with private conduct could be more stringent or more
directly affect morality?
    A principle requiring such delicate handling is not well
suited to guide practical legislation. This timid admission of
moral considerations by a back-door is the more curious because
Mill not only wishes to have a moral influence, but has the
special merit, in economical and in purely political questions,
of steadily and constantly insisting upon their moral aspect. He
holds, and is justified in holding, that the ultimate end of the
state should be to encourage energy, culture, and a strong sense
of responsibility. It is true that, though he exaggerates the
influence of institutions, he insists chiefly upon the negative
side, upon that kind of 'education' which consists in leaving a
man to teach himself. Yet his political theory implies a wider
educational influence. Every citizen is to have a share both in
the legislative and administrative functions of the government.
Such an education must have a strong influence upon the moral
characteristics. It may promote or discourage one morality or
another, but it cannot be indifferent. And this impresses itself
upon Mill himself. The principles of 'contradiction' in
speculation and of 'antagonism' in politics; the doctrines that
each man is to form his own opinions and regulate his own life,
imply a society of approximately equal and, as far as possible,
independent units. This, if it means 'liberty,' also means a most
effective 'educational' process. One lesson taught may be that
'any one man is as good as any other.' Mill sees this clearly,
and declares that this 'false creed' is held in America and
'nearly connected' with some American defects.(58*) He persuades
himself that it may be remedied by Hare's scheme, and by devices
for giving more votes to educated' persons. One can only reply,
sancta simplicitas! In fact, the 'educational' influence which
implies levelling and equalising is not less effective than that
which maintains ranks or a traditional order. It only acts in a
different direction. Here, once more, Mill's argument seems to
recoil upon his own position. When, in the Liberty, he sums up
the influences hostile to individuality, including all the social
and intellectual movements of the day, he is describing the
forces which will drive his political machinery. The political
changes which are to break up the old structure, to make society
an aggregate of units approximately equal in wealth and power,
will inevitably facilitate the deeper and wider influences of the
social changes. If, in fact, 'individuality' in a good sense is
being crushed by the whole democratic movement -- where democracy
means the whole social change -- it will certainly not be
protected by the political changes to be made in the name of
liberty. Each man is to have his own little sphere; but each man
will be so infinitesimal a power that he will be more than ever
moulded by the average opinions. In the Liberty (59*) Mill puts
his whole hope in the possibility that the 'intelligent part of
the public' may be led to feel the force of his argument. To
believe that a tendency fostered by every social change can be
checked by the judicious reasoning of Utilitarian theorists,
implies a touching faith in the power of philosophy.
    Mill's doctrines, I believe, aim at most important truths.
'Energy' is, let us agree, a cardinal virtue and essential
condition of progress. It requires, undoubtedly, a sphere of
individual freedom. Without freedom, a man is a tool --
transmitting force mechanically, not himself co-operating
intelligently or originating spontaneously. Every citizen should
be encouraged to be an active as well as a passive instrument.
Freedom of opinion is absolutely essential to progress, social as
well as intellectual, and therefore thought should be able to
play freely upon the sway of irrational custom. The tyranny of
the commonplace, of a mental atmosphere which stifles genius and
originality, is a danger to social welfare. That Mill held such
convictions strongly was the source of his power. That he held to
them, even when they condemned some party dogma, was honourable
to his sincerity. That he filed to make them into a satisfactory
or consistent whole was due to preconceptions imbibed from his
teachers. Perhaps it is truer to say that he could not accurately
formulate his beliefs in the old dialect than that his beliefs
were intrinsically erroneous.
    Upon his terms a clear demarcation of the sphere of free
action is impossible. Mill, as an 'individualist,' took society
to be an 'aggregate' instead of an, organism.' To Mill such
phrases as 'organic' savoured of 'mysticism'; they treated a
class name as meaning something more than the individuals, and
therefore meant mere abstractions parading as realities,(60*) and
encouraged the fallacies current among Intuitionists and
Transcendentalists. And yet they point at truths which are
anything but mystical. It is a plain fact that society is a
complex structure upon which every man is dependent in his whole
life; and that he is a product, moulded through and through by
instincts inherited or derived from his social position.
Conversely, it is true that the society is throughout dependent
upon the character or the convictions and instincts of its
constituent members. To overlook the reciprocal action and
reaction, and the structure which corresponds to them, is
necessarily to make arbitrary and inaccurate assumptions and to
regard factors in a single process as independent entities. The
tendency of the Utilitarian was to regard society as a number of
independent beings, simply bound together by the legal or
quasi-legal sanctions. Morality itself was treated as a case of
external 'law.' The individual, again, was a bundle of ideas,
bound together by 'associations which could be indefinitely
modified.' In both cases, the unity was imposed by a force in
some sense 'external,' and therefore the whole social structure
of individual character became in some sense 'artificial.' It is
the acceptance of such assumptions which hinders Mill in his
attempt to mark out the individual sphere.
    We have seen the difficulties. In morality, it is impossible
to divide the 'extra-regarding' from the 'self-regarding'
qualities, because morality is a function of the whole character
considered as a unit. Mill, therefore, has to concede a
considerable sphere to moral pressure. The fact that in positive
law it is not only possible but necessary to distinguish
'self-regarding' actions from 'extra-regarding' actions marks the
sphere within which legislation can work efficiently. But the
same fact proves also that the direct legal coercion is only a
subordinate element in the whole social process. Though it is
only called into play to suppress certain overt actions, it
indirectly affects the whole character: it may help to stimulate
all the qualities, 'self-regarding' or otherwise, which form a
good citizen; and to argue that it should be indifferent to these
broader results is to omit a reference to the wider 'utility'
which is identical with morality. Mill is thus driven to awkward
casuistry by trying to exclude the moral considerations where
they are obviously essential, or to admit them under some
ingenious pretext. In economic problems the difficulty is more
conspicuous; for we have there to do with the whole industrial
structure, which is affected throughout by institutions created
or confirmed by law. It is, again, impossible to distinguish the
spheres of the 'natural' and the 'artificial' -- or of individual
and state action. The industrial structure is a product of both.
Consider all state action to be bad because 'artificial,' and you
are led to such an isolation of the 'individual' as reduces all
responsibility to a name for selfishness. You are to teach men to
be prudent simply by leaving the imprudent to starvation. Mill,
revolted by this consequence, admits that the state must have
regard to the injustice for which it is, at least indirectly,
responsible. He then inclines to exaggerate the power of the
'artificial' factor because it embodies human 'volition' and
leans towards the crude Socialism which assumes that all
institutions can be arbitrarily reconstructed by legislative
interference. Hence when we come to the political problem, to the
organ by which the legal bond is constructed, Mill exaggerates
the power of 'making' as contradistinguished from the 'growing.'
He seems to assume that institutions can 'create' the instincts
by which they are worked: or to forget that they primarily
transmit instead of originating power, though indirectly they
foster or hinder the development of certain tendencies. Mill
would guard against the abuse of political power by dividing it
among the separate individuals. He then perceives that he is only
redistributing this tremendous power instead of diminishing its
intensity. By isolating the 'individual' he has condemned him to
narrow views and petty ideals, but has not prevented him from
impressing them upon the mass of homogeneous units. Hence, he is
alarmed by the inevitable 'tyranny of the majority.' He has put a
tremendous power into the hands of Demos, and can only suggest
that it should not be exercised.
    It is, if I am right, the acceptance of this antithesis, put
absolutely, the 'individual,' as something natural on one side,
and law, on the other side, as a bond imposed upon the society,
which at every step hampers Mill's statement of any vital truths.
He cannot upon these terms draw a satisfactory distinction
between the individual and the society. When man is taken for a
ready-made product, while his social relation can be 'made'
off-hand by the sovereign, it is impossible to give a
satisfactory account of the slow processes of evolution in which
making and growing are inextricably united, and the individual
and the society are slowly modified by the growth of instincts
and customs under constant action and reaction. The difficulty of
course is not solved by recognising its existence. No one has yet
laid down a satisfactory criterion of the proper limits of
individual responsibility. The problem is too vast and complex to
admit of any off-hand solution; and Mill's error lies chiefly in
under-estimating the difficulty.
    The contrast to Comte is significant. The inventor of
'sociology' had seen in the 'individualism' of the revolutionary
school a transitory and negative stage of thought, which was to
lead to a reconstruction of intellectual and social authority.
Mill could see in Comte's final Utopia nothing but the
restoration of a spiritual despotism in a form more crushing and
all-embracing than that of the medieval church. They went
together up to a certain point. Comte held that 'contradiction'
and 'antagonism' were not ultimate ends, though they may be
inseparable incidents of progress. In the intellectual sphere we
should hope for the emergence of a rational instead of an
arbitrary authority, and a settlement of first principles, not a
permanent conflict of opinion. The hope of achieving some
permanent conciliation is the justification of scepticism in
speculation and revolutions in politics. Comte supposed that such
a result might be achieved in sociology. If that science were
constituted, its professors might have such an authority as now
possessed by astronomers and teachers of physical sciences.
Society might then be reconstructed on sound principles which
would secure the responsibility of rulers to subjects, and the
confidence of the subjects in rulers. Mill in his early
enthusiasm had admitted the necessity of a 'spiritual power' to
be founded on free discussion.(61*) He had, with Comte, condemned
the merely critical attitude of the revolutionary school. When he
saw Comte devising an elaborate hierarchy to govern speculation,
and even depreciating the reason in comparison with the 'heart,'
he revolted. Comte was a great thinker, greater, even, he
thought, than Descartes or Leibniz,(62*) but had plunged into
absurdities suggestive of brain disease. The absurdities were,
indeed, flagrant, yet Mill still sympathises with much of Comte's
doctrine; with the positivist religion; and the general social
conceptions. Even a 'spiritual authority' is, he thinks,
desirable. But it must be developed through free discussion and
the gradual approximation of independent thinkers, not by
premature organisation and minute systematisation.(63*) The
regeneration of society requires a moral and intellectual
transformation, which can only be regarded as a distant ideal. We
may dream of a state of things in which even political authority
shall be founded upon reason: in which statesmanship shall really
mean an application of scientific principles, and rulers be
recognised as devoted servants of the state, Even an
approximation to such a Utopia would imply a change in moral
instincts, and in the corresponding social structure, to be
worked out slowly and tentatively. Yet Mill is equally
over-sanguine in his own way. He puts an excessive faith in human
'contrivances,' representation of minorities, and the forces of
'antagonism' and 'individuality.' If Comte's scheme really
amounts, as Mill thought, to a suppression of individual energy,
Mill's doctrine tends to let energy waste itself in mere
eccentricity. As originality of intellect is useful when it
accepts established results, so energy of character is fruitful
when it is backed by sympathy. The degree of both may be measured
by their power of meeting opposition; but the positive stimulus
comes from cooperation. The great patriots and founders of
religion have opposed tyrants and bigots because they felt
themselves to be the mouthpiece of a nation or a whole social
movement. And, therefore, superlative as. may be the value of
energy, it is not generated in a chaos where every man's hand is
against his neighbour, but in a social order, where vigorous
effort may be sure of a sufficient backing. When the individual
is regarded as an isolated being, and state action as necessarily
antagonistic, this side of the problem is insufficiently taken
into account, and the question made to lie between simple
antagonism and enforced unity.

 VIII. ETHICS

    The problem must be left to posterity. Mill's doctrine, if I
am right, is vitiated rather by an excessive emphasis upon one
aspect of facts than by positive error. He seems often to be
struggling to express half-recognised truths, and to be hampered
by an inadequate dialect. I have already touched upon the
morality more or less involved in his political and economic
views. His ethical doctrine shows the source of some of his
perplexities and apparent inconsistencies. His position is given
in the little book upon Utilitarianism, which is scarcely more,
however, than an occasional utterance.(64*) In a more systematic
treatise some difficulties would have been more carefully
treated, and assumptions more explicitly justified. The main
lines, however, of Mill's Utilitarianism are plain enough. The
book is substantially a protest against the assertion that
Utilitarian morality is inferior to its rivals. 'Utilitarians,'
he says, 'should never cease to claim the morality of
self-devotion as a possession which belongs by as good a right to
them as to the Stoic or to the Transcendentalist.'(65*) The
Utilitarian standard is 'not the agent's own happiness, but the
happiness of all concerned.' The Utilitarian must be 'as strictly
impartial as a disinterested and benevolent spectator' in
determining his course of action. The spirit of his ethics is
expressed in 'the golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth.' Mill insists
as strongly as possible upon the paramount importance of the
social aspect of morality. Society must be founded throughout
upon justice and sympathy. Every step in civilisation generates
in each individual 'a feeling of unity with all the rest.' (66*)
Characteristically he refers to Comte's Politique Positive in
illustration. Though he has the 'strongest objections' to the
system of morals and politics there set forth, he thinks that
Comte has 'superabundantly shown the possibility of giving to the
service of humanity, even without the aid of belief in a
Providence, both the psychical power and the social efficacy of a
religion.' Nay, it may 'colour all thought, feeling, and action,
in a manner of which the greatest ascendency ever exercised by
any religion may be but a type or foretaste.' The danger is that
the ascendency may be so marked as to suppress 'human freedom and
individuality.' The love of the right is to become an
all-absorbing passion, and selfish motives admitted only so far
as subordinated to desire for the welfare of the social body.
Clearly this is a loftier line than Bentham's attempt to evade
the difficulty by ignoring the possibility of a conflict between
private and public interest. The only question, then, is as to
the logic. Can Mill's conclusions be deduced from his premises?
    We must first observe that Mill's argument is governed by his
antipathy to the 'intuitionist.' The intuitionist was partly
represented by his old antagonist Whewell, who in a ponderous
treatise had set forth a theory of morality intended not only to
give first principles but to elaborate a complete moral code.
Mill attacked him with unusual severity in an article in the
Westminster Review.(67*) Whewell, in truth, appears at one time
to be founding morality upon positive law -- a doctrine which is
at best a strange perversion of a theory of experience; and yet
he denounces Utilitarians by the old arguments, and brings in
such an 'intuitionism' as always roused Mill's combative
propensities. Mill defends Bentham against Whewell, and his
Utilitarianism starts essentially from Bentham's famous saying,
'Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign
masters, pain and pleasure.' Happiness, says Mill, is the 'sole
end of human action'; to 'desire' is to find a thing pleasant; to
be averse from a thing is to think of it as painful; and, as
happiness gives the criterion of all conduct, it must give 'the
standard of morality.' (68*) To 'prove' the first principle may
be impossible; one can only appeal to self-consciousness in
general; but it seems to him so obvious that it will 'hardly be
disputed.' (69*) It still requires explicate statement in order
to exclude a doctrine held by many philosophers. Mill (70*)
refers to Kant, whose formula that you are to act so that the
rule on which you act may be law for all rational beings, is the
most famous version of the doctrine which would deduce morality
from reason. It really proves at most, as Mill says, the formal
truth that laws must be consistent, but it fails 'almost
grotesquely' in showing which consistent laws are right. Absolute
selfishness or absolute benevolence would equally satisfy the
formula. For Mill, then, all conduct depends on pain and
pleasure; every theory of conduct must therefore be based upon
psychology, or consequently upon experience, not upon abstract
logic. Every attempt to twist morality out of pure reason is
foredoomed to failure; logical contradiction corresponds to the
impossible, not to the immoral, which is only too possible. That
is a first principle, which seems to me, I confess, to be
unassailable.
    It follows, in the next place, that Mill's argument is
substantially an interpretation of facts, a sketch of a
scientific theory of certain social phenomena. We find that
certain rules of conduct are as a matter of fact generally
approved; and we have to show that those rules are deducible from
the assumed criterion. The rule, 'act for the greatest happiness
of the greatest number,' coincides with the conduct approved in
the recognised morality, and we need and can ask for no further
explanation of the 'criterion.' Mill answers the usual
objections. The criterion, it is said, can only justify the
'expedient' not the 'right.' The Utilitarian must act from a
calculation of 'consequences,' and consequences are so uncertain
that no general rule can be framed. To this, as urged by Whewell,
Mill replied that his adversary had proved too much.(71*) The
argument would destroy 'prudence' as well as morality. We can
make general rules about the interests of the greatest number as
easily as about our own personal interests. And, if it be urged
that such general rules always admit of exceptions, all moralists
have had to admit exceptions to moral rules. Exceptions, however,
as James Mill had said, can only be admitted in morality, when
the exception itself expresses a general rule. All moralists
admit of lying in some extreme cases, but only where the
obligation to speak truth conflicts with some higher obligation.
If something be wanting in this defence, it may perhaps be
supplied from Mill himself. The importance of cultivating a
sensitive love of truth is, he says, so great as to possess a
'transcendent expediency' (72*) not to be violated by temporary
considerations. When discussing the question of justice Mill
insists upon the importance of the confidence in our
fellow-creatures as corresponding to the 'very groundwork of our
existence.' The general rule, that is, corresponds to an
individual quality which is essential to the social union. A
strong sense of veracity is unconditionally good, though
circumstances may require exceptions to any rule when stated in
terms of outward conduct. Lying may be necessary, but should
always be painful. This is familiar ground on which it is
needless to dwell. But another criticism of the 'criterion' is
more important and leads to one of Mill's most characteristic
arguments. The greatest happiness criterion, it is often said,
will be interpreted differently as men form different judgments
of what constitutes happiness. The 'felicific calculus' will give
different results for the philosopher and the clown, the
sensualist and the ascetic, the savage and the civilised man; and
it is part of the empiricist contention that in fact the standard
has varied widely. Mill himself observes, and he is only
following Locke (73*) and Hume, 'that morality has varied widely;
has in some cases sanctioned practices the most revolting' to
others, and that the 'universal will of mankind is universal only
in its discordance.'(74*) It is indeed precisely for that reason
that the Utilitarian has defined to accept the authority of the
'moral sense' and appealed to facts. The belief that our feeling
is right, simply because it is ours, is the 'mental infirmity
which Bentham's philosophy tends to correct and Dr Whewell's to
perpetuate.' (75*) That is to say, Bentham can lay down an
'objective criterion' because he calculates actual pains and
pleasures. But will not this criterion be after all 'subjective'
because our estimate of pains and pleasures is so discordant?
Mill tries to meet this by a famous distinction between the
qualities of pleasures. Bentham had insisted that one pleasure
was as good as another. 'Quantity of pleasure being equal,
push-pin is as good as poetry.' (76*) Mill now declares that it
is quite compatible with the principle of utility to recognise
the fact that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more
valuable than others.' We must consider 'quality' as well as
'quantity.'(77*) The 'only competent judges,' he argues, are
those who have known both. Now, it is an 'unquestionable fact'
that those who have this advantage prefer the higher or
intellectual to the lower or sensual pleasures. It is better to
be a Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. If the fool or
the pig dissents it is because he only knows his own side of the
question.(78*)
    Answers are only too obvious. What is 'quantity' as
distinguished from 'quality' of pleasure? The statement, 'A cubic
foot of water weighs less than a cubic foot of lead' is
intelligible; but what is the corresponding proposition about
pleasure? Can we ask, How much benevolence is equal to how much
hunger? The 'how much' is strictly meaningless. Moreover, are not
both Socrates and the pig right in their judgment? Pig's-wash is
surely better for the pig than dialogue; and dialogue may be
better for Socrates than pig's-wash. If 'desirable' means that
pleasure which each desires, each may be right. If it means some
quality independent of the agent, we have the old fallacy which
in political economy makes 'value' something 'objective.' All
'value' must depend upon the man as well as upon the thing. And
this again suggests that neither Socrates nor a Christian saint
would really make the supposed assertion. It is not true
absolutely that 'intellectual' pleasures are simply 'better' than
sensual. Each is better in certain circumstances. There are times
when even the saint prefers a glass of water to religious
musings; and moments when even a fool may at times find such
intellectual pleasures as he can enjoy better than a glass of
wine. This seems to be so obvious that we must suspect Mill of
hastily stopping a gap in his argument without duly working out
the implications. Indeed, he seems to be making room for
something very like an intuition. He assumes the proposition,
doubtful in itself and apparently inconsistent with his own
position, that all competent people agree, and then makes this
agreement decisive of a disputable question.
    Bentham, from his own point of view, was, I think, perfectly
right in his statement. To calculate pleasures, the only question
must be which are the greatest pleasures, and the only answer,
those which, as a fact, attract people most. If a man is more
attracted by 'push-pin' than by poetry, the presumption is that
push-pin gives him most pleasure. We are simply investigating
facts; and cannot overlook the obvious fact that estimates of
pleasure vary indefinitely. Some things are pleasant to the
refined alone, while others are more or less pleasant to
everybody, and others, again, cease to be pleasant or become
disgusting as men advance. To introduce the moral valuation in an
estimate of facts to change the 'desirable' as 'that which is
desired' into the 'desirable' as 'that which ought to be desired'
is to beg the question or to argue in circle.
    Yet Mill was aiming at an obvious truth. As men advance
intellectually, intellectual pleasures will clearly fill a larger
space in their ideal of life. The purely sensual pleasures will
have their value as long as men have bodies and appetites; but
they will come to have a subordinate place in defining the whole
ends of human conduct. The morality of the higher being will
include higher aspirations. We have then to inquire, In what
sense is a 'felicific calculus' possible or required? The moral
rule is, as Mill holds, a statement of certain fundamental
conditions of social life, giving, as he puts it, the
'ground-work' upon which all social relations are built up. This
again supposes essentially a society made of the most varying
elements, poets and men of science, philosophers and fools, nay,
according to him, including both Socrates and the pig. In
criticising Whewell, for example, he quotes (79*) with most
emphatical approval that 'admirable passage' in which Bentham
includes animal happiness in his criterion. We are to promote the
pig's happiness so far as the pig is 'sentient,' little as he may
care for a Socratic dialogue. But if so, the 'greatest happiness'
rule must have for its end the conditions under which the most
varying types of happiness may be promoted and each kind of
happiness promoted according to the character of the subject. And
in point of fact, the actual moral rules, 'Love your neighbour as
yourself,' be truthful, honest, and so forth, do not as such
define any special type of happiness as good. They assume rather
that happiness, as happiness, is so far good; and that we ought
to promote the happiness of others if our action be not
objectionable upon some other ground. This indicates a really
weak point of the old Utilitarianism, which Mill was trying to
remedy. If, as Bentham would seem to imply, we are to form Our
estimate of happiness simply by accepting average estimates of
existing human beings, we shall be tempted to approve conduct
conducive to the lower kinds of happiness alone. I should reply
that this is to misunderstand the true nature of morality. If
morality, as Mill would admit, corresponds essentially to the
primary relations of social life, it is defined not by any
average estimates of happiness, but by a statement of the
conditions of the welfare of the social organism. It states the
fundamental terms upon which men can best associate. It gives the
fundamental 'social compact' (if we may accept the phrase without
its fallacious connotation) implied in an ordered system of
society. The happiness of each is good, so far as it does not
imply anti-social characteristics. But morality leaves room for
the existence of the most varied types of character from the
saint to the pig, and aims at producing happiness -- not by
taking the existing average man as an ultimate unalterable type,
but -- by leaving room for such a development of men themselves
as will alter their character and therefore their views of
happiness. As the society progresses the individual will himself
be altered, and the type which implies a greater development of
intellect, sympathy, and energy come to prevail over the lower,
more sensual, selfish, and feeble type. Though happiness is still
the ultimate base, the morality applies immediately to the social
bond, which contemplates a general development of the whole man
and a modification of the elements of happiness itself. Mill,
perceiving that something was wanted, makes the unfortunate
attempt at supplying the gap by his assumption of an imaginary
consensus of the better minds. What is true is that all men may
consent to conditions of society which leave a free play to the
higher influences: that is, are favourable to the more advanced
type with greater force of intellect and richness of emotional
power.
    Here we return to the old Utilitarian problem: What is the
'sanction' of morality? The 'sanction' can be nothing else than
the sum of all the motives which induce men to act morally. What,
then, are they? The Utilitarians, starting from the juridical
point of view, had a ready answer in the case of positive law.
The sanction, briefly, is the gallows. Law means coercion, and as
everybody (with very insignificant exceptions) objects to being
hanged, the gallows may be regarded as a sanction of universal
efficacy. If the moral law be taken in the same way as implying a
rule of conduct to be enforced by an external sanction, the
correlative to the gallows was hell-fire. This satisfied Paley,
but as the Utilitarians had abolished hell, they were at some
loss for a substitute.
    Here Mill accepts the principles laid down by his father. He
defends the Utilitarians upon the ground that they 'had gone
beyond all others in affirming that the motive has nothing to do
with the morality of the action, though much with the morality of
the agent.'(80*) They based morality upon 'consequences,' and the
consequences of an action are no doubt independent of the motive.
If I burn a man for heresy, the 'consequences' to him are the
same whether my motive be love of his soul or the hatred of a
bigot for a free-thinker. To estimate the goodness or badness of
an action, we must consider all that it implies. We must inquire
whether a society in which heretics are repressed by the stake is
better or worse than one in which they are left at liberty; and
that cannot be settled by simply asking whether the persecutor is
benevolent or malevolent. The purest benevolence may be misguided
if it is directed by erroneous belief. The 'sentimentalism,'
denounced by Utilitarians, implied refusal to look at
consequences, and the justification, for example, of corrupting
charity on the ground that it was pleasant to the sympathy of the
corrupter. Their especial function was to warn philanthropists
that misguided philanthropy might stimulate the greatest evils.
But to infer from this the general principle that the 'motive'
was indifferent involves the characteristic fallacy. The true
inference is that sound morality has an intellectual as well as
an emotional basis; it supposes a just foresight of consequences
as well as a desire for happiness. Conduct depends throughout
upon character; it cannot be altered without altering character,
though the alteration may imply enlightenment of the intellect
rather than development of the feelings. When we come to the
moral 'sanction' the motive becomes all important. The legislator
may be contented if he can induce a bad man to act like a good
man or to refrain from murder in the presence of the policeman.
He can take the policeman and the gallows for granted; and assume
the existence of the fundamental social instincts upon which the
judicial machinery depends. But it is precisely with those
instincts that the moralist is concerned. He has to ask what are
the forces which work the machinery and cannot be indifferent to
the question of 'motive.' Mill only half recognises the point
when he admits that the 'motive' has much to do with the
'morality of the agent.' If 'motive' be interpreted widely enough
it constitutes the agent's morality. An action is moral in so far
as it implies a character thoroughly 'moralised' or fitted to
play the right part in society. The distinction between the
morality of the conduct and the morality of the agent vanishes. A
good act is that which a good man would perform. If a bad man,
under compulsion, acts in the same way, he acts from fear, and
his act is therefore morally neutral, and to call him good on
account of his action is therefore a mistake. He simply shows
that he is a man, and dislikes hanging even more than he hates
his fellow-men.
    An 'external sanction' really means a motive for acting as
though you were good even if you are not good. That such
sanctions are essential to society, that they provide a shelter
under which true morality may or must grow up, is obvious. It is
true, also, that in early stages the distinction between the law
which rests upon force and that which rests upon the character is
not manifest. But ultimately morality means nothing but the
expression of the character itself. Hence to find a universal
'sanction' for morality is chimerical. Such a sanction would be
'a motive' which would apply to all men good or bad; that is, it
would not be a moral motive. Fear of hell or the gallows may
indirectly help (or hinder) the development of a moral character;
but in itself the fear is neither good nor bad. The very attempt,
therefore, to find such a 'sanction' implies the 'external' or
essentially inadequate view of morality, into which the
Utilitarians with their legal prepossessions were too apt to
fall. The law, resting upon external sanctions, may be useful or
prejudicial to morals, but must always be subordinate; for its
application depends upon instincts by which it is guided and
which it cannot create.
    Mill recognises this, virtually, though not explicitly, in
his discussion of the 'Utilitarian sanction.' He declares in
rather awkward phrase that the 'ultimate sanction of all morality
(external motives apart)' is 'a subjective feeling in our own
minds.' (Where else can such a feeling be, and what is 'an
objective feeling'?) These feelings exist, as he argues, equally
for the Utilitarian and the 'Transcendentalist,' though the
'Transcendentalists' think that their existence 'in the mind'
implies that they have a 'root out of the mind.'(81*) The
'conscience,' that is, pain in breaking the moral law, exists as
a fact, whatever its origin. If 'innate' it can still be opposed,
and the question, 'Why should I obey it?' is equally difficult to
answer. Even if innate, again, it may be an innate regard for
other men's pains and pleasures, and so coincide with the
Utilitarian view. He argues accordingly, that, in point of fact,
we may acquire that 'feeling of unity' with others which gives
the really 'ultimate sanction' to the 'Happiness morality.' (82*)
With this result I at least can have no quarrel. I hold it to be
perfectly correct and as good an account of morality as can be
given. The fault is in placing the 'external sanction ' on the
same level with the 'internal' and failing to see that it is not
properly 'moral' at all. But here, once more, it is necessary to
look at the difficulty of deriving his conclusion from the
premises inherited from his teachers. The essential difficulty
lies in the psychological analysis and the theory of association.
We are again at James Mill's point of view. Conduct is determined
by pain and pleasure. An action supposes an end, and that 'end'
must be a pleasure. If we ask, pleasure to whom? the answer must
be, pleasure to the agent. All conduct, it would seem, must be
directly or indirectly self-regarding, for the 'end ' must always
be my own pleasure. Mill maintains that 'virtue' may, for the
Utilitarian as well as for others, be a 'thing desirable in
itself.' (83*) That is a 'psychological fact,' independently of
the explanation. But at this point he lapses into the old
doctrine. Virtue, he admits, is not 'naturally and originally
part of the end.' Virtue was once-desired simply 'for its
conduciveness to pleasure' and especially 'to protection from
pain.' It becomes a good in itself. This is enforced by the
familiar illustration of the 'love of money' and of the love of
power or fame. Each passion aimed originally at a further end,
which has dropped out while the desire for means has become
original. The moral feelings, as he says in answer to
Whewell,(84*) are 'eminently artificial and the product of
culture.' We may grow corn, or we may as easily grow hemlocks or
thistles. Yet, as he declares in the Utilitarianism,(85*) 'moral
feelings' are not 'the less natural' because 'acquired.' The
'moral faculty' is a 'natural outgrowth' of our nature. The
antithesis of 'natural' and 'artificial' is generally ambiguous;
but Mill's view is clear enough upon the main point. Virtue is
the product of the great force 'indissoluble association.' Now
'artificial associations' are dissolved 'as intellectual culture
goes on.' But the association between virtue and utility is
indissoluble, because there is a 'natural basis of sentiment'
which strengthens it -- that basis being 'our desire to be in
unity with our fellow-creatures.'(86*) One further corollary
deserves notice. To become virtuous, it is necessary to acquire
virtuous habits. We 'will' at first simply because we desire.
Afterwards we come to desire a thing because we will it. 'Will is
the child of desire, and passes out of the dominion of its parent
only to come under that of habit.' (87*) Thus, as he had said in
the Logic,(88*) we learn to will a thing 'without reference to
its being pleasurable' -- a fact illustrated by the habit of
'hurtful excess' and equally by moral heroism. It would surely be
more consistent to say that habit is a modification of character
which alters our pains and pleasures but does not enable us to
act against our judgment of pains and pleasures. He is trying to
escape from an awkward consequence; but the mode of evasion will
hardly bear inspection.
    Mill's arguments imply his thorough adherence to the
'association psychology.' They really indicate, I think, an
attempt to reach a right conclusion from defective premises. The
error is implied in the analysis of 'ends' of action. When a man
acts with a view to an 'end' the true account is that his
immediate action is affected by all the consequences which he
foresees. This or that motive conquers because it includes a
perception of more or less remote results. But what determines
conduct is not a calculation of some future pains or pleasures,
but the actual painfulness or pleasurableness of the whole action
at the moment. I shrink from the pain of a wound or from the pain
of giving a wound to another person. Both are equally my
immediate feelings; and it is an error to analyse the sympathetic
pain into two different factors, one the immediate action and the
other the anticipated reaction. It is one indissoluble motive,
just as natural or original as the dislike to the unpleasant
sensation of my own wound. To distinguish it into two facts and
make one subordinate and a product of association is a fallacy.
We can hardy believe that 'association' accounts even for 'love
of money' or 'fame.' Avarice and vanity mean an exaggerated fear
of poverty or regard to other people's opinions. They do not
imply any forgetfulness of end for means, but an erroneous
estimate of the proportion of means to ends. The really
noticeable point, again, has already met us in James Mill's
ethics. When Mill speaks of 'virtue' as 'artificial' or
derivative, he is asserting a truth not to be denied by an
evolutionist. Undoubtedly the social sentiments have been slowly
developed; and undoubtedy they have grown up under the protection
of external 'sanctions.' The primitive society did not
distinguish between law and morality; the pressure of external
circumstances upon character and the influence of the character
itself upon the society. A difficulty arises from the defective
view which forces Mill to regard the whole process as taking
place within the life of the individual. The unit is then a being
without moral instincts at all, and they have to be inserted by
the help of the association machinery. Sympathy is not an
intrinsic part of human nature in its more advanced stages, but
something artificial stuck on by indissoluble association. Mill,
himself, when discussing the virtue of justice in his last
chapter, substantially adopts a line of argument which, if not
satisfactory in details, sufficiently recognises this point of
view. And, if he still fails to explain morality sufficiently, it
is in the main because he never freed himself from the
unsatisfactory assumptions of the old psychology. Here, as in so
many other cases, he sees the inadequacy of the old conclusions,
but persuades himself that a better result can be reached without
the thorough revision which was really necessary.

NOTES:

1. Autobiography, p. 50. the most elaborate attack upon the
Liberty is contained in Liberty, Equality and Fraternity (1873),
by my brother Sir James FitzJames Stephen, in whose I life I have
given an account of the book. I shall not here go into the
controversy. I am content to say that, though I cannot agree with
my brother, I think that he strikes very forcibly at some weak
points in Mill's scheme. The most remarkable point is that the
book is substantially a criticism of Mill's from the older
Utilitarian point of view. It shows, therefore, how Mill diverged
from Bentham.

2. I refer for the Liberty and the Representative Government to
the People's Editions of 1867.

3. Works, ii. 451.

4. Autobiography, p. 231.

5. Ibid., pp. 191-95.

6. Liberty (People's Edition, 1867), p. 3

7. Ibid., p. 5.

8. Liberty, 17 n. The Bradlaugh case showed that the old spirit
was not extinct twenty-five years later.

9. See Bain's James Mill, p. 304.

10. Liberty, pp. 30, 31.

11. Liberty, p. 21. The excellent Abraham Tucker remarks that if
he met 'a person of credit, candour, and understanding.' who
denied that two and two made four, he would give him a hearing.
-- Light of Nature (1834), p. 125.

12. Liberty, pp. 25, 26. 'To become properly acquainted with a
truth,' says Novalis (quoted in Carlyle's essay upon him), 'we
must first have disbelieved and disputed against it.' But Novalis
also observed that 'my faith gains infinitely the moment I see it
should by some one else.'

13. Liberty, p. 24.

14. Liberty, p. 22.

15. Liberty, p. 17.

16. Note in Liberty Mill's theory that the impulse given at
'three periods' -- the Reformation, the last half of the
eighteenth century, and the 'Goethean and Fichtean' period in
Germany -- have made Europe what it is. Yet each 'period' is only
the product of the preceding periods. Has Europe owed nothing to
the seventeenth century?

17. Subjection of Women, p. 6.

18. Dissertations, p. 351. So in Subjection of Women (second
edition, 1869, p. 129) he remarks that originality generally
presupposes 'elaborate discipline,' and agrees with F.D. Maurice
that the most original thinkers are those who know most
thoroughly what has been done by their predecessors.

19. Liberty, p. 32.

20. Ibid., p. 7.

21. Humboldt's Sphere and Duties of Government was translated by
Joseph Coulthard in 1854.  Though originally written in 1791 it
did not appear in a complete form till published in the collected
edition of his works by his brother Alexander in 1852. The book
shows the influence of Kant and Rousseau. Humboldt was at a time
a kind of philosophical antimonian objecting to all external law
as injurious to spontaneous spiritual development. Marriage
should be left to individual contract, because, 'where law has
imposed no fetters morality most surely binds.' In Bentham's
phrase 'external sanctions' weaken the internal. The state should
provide 'security,' and leave religion and morality to
themselves. Humboldt's philosophy is not Mill's, though on most
points the practical application coincides.

22. It would be curious to compare Mill's theory with the very
interesting books in which M. Tarde has shown the vast importance
of 'imitation' in sociology.

23. Mill, in his Representative Government (p. 17), argues that
the Hebrew prophets discharged the functions of modern liberty of
the press; and that the Jews were therefore the 'most progressive
people of antiquity' after the Greeks. Still, their 'culture' was
hardly so wide.

24. Liberty, p. 41.

25. Political Economy, bk. iv. ch. I,  section 2.

26. See chap. v.

27. Representative Government, p. 45.

28. Ibid., p. 104.

29. Representative Government, p. 5.

30. Coleridge, he observes, had also distinguished 'permanence'
and 'progression.' -- Representative Government. p. 8.

31. See Philosophie Positive, iv, 318, etc.

32. Auguste Comte and Positivism (reprinted from the Westminister
Review, 1865) p. 36.

33. Representative Government, p. 14.

34. Ibid., p. 22.

35. Representative Government, ch. iv.

36. Ibid., p. 21.

37. Ibid., p. 22.

38. Representative Government, p. 47.

39. ibid., p. 52.

40. ibid., p. 53

41. Ibid., p. 57.

42. Ibid., p. 59.

43. Representative Government, p. 60.

44. Subjection of Women (1869), p. 16.

45. Logic, p. 572 (bk. vi. ch. vi, section 2).

46. Representative Government p. 76. Cf. Political Economy, p.
493 (bk. iv. ch. vii. section 2).

47. Subjection of  Women, pp. 41, 104.

48. Subjection of Women, pp. 48-9.

49. Ibid., p. 105. In one of the letters to Carlyle Mill asks
whether the highest masculine, are not identical with the highest
feminine, qualities. I should like to see Carlyle's answer.

50. This argument is put by Comte in his correspondence with
Mill. So far, Comte seems to have the best of it; and Mill's
inability to appreciate the doctrine is characteristic. At this
time Mill seems to have been undecided upon the question of
divorce. See the discussion in the Letters, pp. 208-73.

51. Subjection of Women, p. 36.

52. Subjection of Women, p. 59. Cf. Liberty, p. 61.

53. Subjection of  Women, p. 81.

54. Liberty, p. 44.

55. Ibid. p. 46.

56. Liberty, p. 47.

57. Liberty, p. 48.

58. Representative Government, p. 74.

59. Liberty, p. 41.

60.  See in Representative Government, p. 62, his argument
against the objection to Hare's scheme that it would destroy the
local character of representation. The objectors think, he says,
that 'a nation does not consist of persons but of artificial
units, the creation of geography and statistics'; that 'Liverpool
and Exeter are the proper objects of a legislator's care in
contradistinction to the population of those places.' this, he
thinks, is 'a curious specimen of delusion produced by words.'
The local interests and affections which bind neighbours and
townsmen together may thus be simply set aside.

61. See Correspondence with Comte, p. 414.

62. August Comte, p. 200.

63. ibid. pp. 94-100.

64. I refer to the second edition (1864). Mill's Utilitarianism,
and some other parts of his writings referring to the same
subject, have been republished in 1897 by Mr Charles Douglas as
The Ethics of  John Stuart Mill. He has prefixed some interesting 
'Introductory Essays.' Mr Douglas had previously published John
Stuart Mill: a Study of his Philosophy, 1895. Both are valuable
studies of Mill.

65. Utilitarianism, p. 24.

66. Ibid. p. 48.

67. October 1852, reprinted in Dissertation, ii. 450, etc.

68. Utilitarianism, pp. 17, 58.

69. Ibid. p. 59.

70. Utilitarianism, p. 5.

71., Dissertations, ii, 474.

72. Utilitarianism, p. 33.

73. See Locke's Essay (bk. i, ch. iii, section 9) upon the
'Caribbees' and 'Tououpinambos'.

74. Dissertation, ii, 198.

75. Ibid. ii, 389.

76. ibid, ii, 389.

77. Utilitarianism, p. 12. It is rather odd to find Mr Ruskin
making the same remark. -- Fors Clavigera, xiv, 8.

78. Utilitarianism, p. 14. The argument is virtually Plato's. See
Republic, book ix, (581-83).

79. Dissertations, ii, 482.

80. Utilitarianism, p. 26. Mill is answering the criticism that
Utilitarianism puts the standard of morality too high if it
assumes that every man is to be prompted by desire for the
'greatest happiness of  the greatest number.' I have spoken of
this in considering James Mill's ethical position.

81. Utilitarianism, p. 42.

82. Ibid., p. 48.

83. Utilitarianism, p. 54.

84. Dissertations, ii, p. 472.

85. Utilitarianism, p. 45.

86. Ibid. p. 46.

87. Utilitarianism, p. 60.

88. Logic, bk. vi, ch. iii. section 4.

