An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy



by James Steuart







Book II







Of Trade and Industry







Introduction







    Before I enter upon this second book, I must premise a word



of connexion, in order to conduct the ideas of my reader by the



same way through which the chain of my own thoughts, and the



distribution of my plan have naturally led me.



    My principal view hitherto has been to prepare the way for an



examination of the principles of modern politics, by inquiring



into those which have, less or more, operated regular effects in



all the ages of the world.



    In doing this, I confess, it has been impossible for me not



to anticipate many things which, according to the plan I have



laid down, will in some measure involve me in repetitions.



    I propose to investigate principles which are all relative



and depending upon one another. It is impossible to treat of



these with distinctness, without applying them to the objects on



which they have an influence; and as the same principles extend



their influence to several branches of my subject, those of my



readers who keep them chiefly in their eye, will not find great



variety in the different applications of them.



    In all compositions of this kind, two things are principally



requisite. The first is, to represent such ideas as are abstract,



clearly, simply, and uncompounded. This part resembles the



forging out the links of a chain. The second is, to dispose those



ideas in a proper order; that is, according to their most



immediate relations. When such a composition is laid before a



good understanding, memory finishes the work, by cementing the



links together; and provided any one of them can be retained, the



rest will follow of course.



    Now the relations between the different principles of which I



treat, are indeed striking to such as are accustomed to abstract



reasoning, but not near so much as when the application of them



is made to different examples.



    The principle of self-interest will serve as a general key to



this inquiry; and it may, in one sense, be considered as the



ruling principle of my subject, and may therefore be traced



throughout the whole. This is the main spring, and only motive



which a statesman should make use of, to engage a free people to



concur in the plans which he lays down for their government.



    I beg I may not here be understood to mean, that



self-interest should conduct the statesman: by no means.



Self-interest, when considered with regard to him, is public



spirit; and it can only be called self-interest, when it is



applied to those who are to be governed by it.



    From this principle, men are engaged to act in a thousand



different ways, and every action draws after it certain necessary



consequences. The question therefore constantly under



consideration comes to be, what will mankind find it their



interest to do, under such and such circumstances?



    In order to exhaust the subject of political oeconomy, I have



proposed to treat the principles of it in relation to



circumstances; and as these are infinite, I have taken them by



the more general combinations, which modern policy has formed.



These, for the sake of order, I have represented as all hanging



in a chain of consequences, and depending on one another. See



Book I. Chap. ii.



    I found this the best method for distributing my plan, from



which it is natural to infer, that it will also prove the best



for enabling my readers to retain it.



    I shall do what I can to diversify, by various circumstances,



the repetitions which this disposition must lead me into. There



is no seeing a whole kingdom, without passing now and then



through a town which one has seen before. I shall therefore



imitate the traveller, who, upon such occasions, makes his stay



very short, unless some new curiosity should happen to engage his



attention.



    I have said, that self-interest is the ruling principle of my



subject, and I have so explained myself, as to prevent any one



from supposing, that I consider it as the universal spring of



human actions. Here is the light in which I want to represent



this matter.



    The best way to govern a society, and to engage every one to



conduct himself according to a plan, is for the statesman to form



a system of administration, the most consistent possible with the



interest of every individual, and never to flatter himself that



his people will be brought to act in general, and in matters



which purely regard the public, from any other principle than



private interest. This is the utmost length to which I pretend to



carry my position. As to what regards the merit and demerit of



actions in general, I think it fully as absurd to say, that no



action is truly virtuous, as to affirm, that none is really



vicious.



    It might perhaps be expected, that, in treating of politics,



I should have brought in public spirit also, as a principle of



action; whereas all I require with respect to this principle is



merely a restraint from it; and even this is, perhaps, too much



to be taken for granted. Were public spirit, instead of private



utility, to become the spring of action in the individuals of a



well-governed state, I apprehend, it would spoil all. Let me



explain myself.



    Public spirit, in my way of treating this subject, is as



superfluous in the governed, as it ought to be all-powerful in



the statesman; at least, if it is not altogether superfluous, it



is fully as much so, as miracles are in a religion once fully



established. Both are admirable at setting out, but would shake



every thing loose, were they to continue to be common and



familiar. Were miracles wrought every day, the laws of nature



would no longer be laws: and were every one to act for the



public, and neglect himself, the statesman would be bewildered,



and the supposition is ridiculous.



    I expect, therefore, that every man is to act for his own



interest in what regards the public; and, politically speaking,



every one ought to do so. It is the combination of every private



interest which forms the public good, and of this the public,



that is, the statesman only, can judge. You must love your



country. Why? Because it is yours. But you must not prefer your



own interest to that of your country. This, I agree, is perfectly



just and right: but this means no more, than that you are to



abstain from acting to its prejudice, even though your own



private interest should demand it; that is, you should abstain



from unlawful gain. Count Julian, for example, who, from private



resentment, it is said, brought the Moors into Spain, and ruined



his country, transgressed this maxim. A spy in an army, or in a



cabinet, who betrays the secrets of his country, and he who sells



his trust, are in the same case: defrauding the state is, among



many others, a notorious example of this. To suppose men, in



general, honest in such matters, would be absurd. The legislature



therefore ought to make good laws, and those who transgress them



ought to be speedily, severely, and most certainly punished. This



belongs to the coercive part of government, and, falling beyond



the limits of my subject, is ever taken for granted.



    Were the principle of public spirit carried farther; were a



people to become quite disinterested; there would be no



possibility of governing them. Every one might consider the



interest of his country in a different light, and many might join



in the ruin of it, by endeavouring to promote its advantages.



Were a rich merchant to begin and sell his goods without profit,



what would become of trade? Were another to defray the



extraordinary expence of some workmen in a hard year, in order to



enable them to carry on their industry, without raising their



price, what would become of others, who had not the like



advantages? Were a man of a large landed estate to sell his grain



at a low price in a year of scarcity, what would become of the



poor farmers? Were people to feed all who would ask charity, what



would become of industry? These operations of public spirit ought



to be left to the public, and all that is required of individuals



is, not to endeavour to defeat them.



    This is the regular distribution of things, and it is this



only which comes under my consideration.



    In ill-administered governments, I admire as much as any one



every act of public spirit, every sentiment of



disinterestediness, and nobody can have a higher esteem for every



person remarkable for them.



    The less attentive any government is to do their duty, the



more essential it is that every individual be animated by that



spirit, which then languishes in the very part where it ought to



flourish with the greatest strength and vigour; and on the other



hand, the more public spirit is shewn in the administration of



public affairs, the less occasion has the state for assistance



from individuals.



    Now as I suppose my statesman to do his duty in the most



minute particulars, so I allow every one of his subjects to



follow the dictates of his private interest. All I require is an



exact obedience to the laws. This also is the interest of every



one; for he who transgresses ought most undoubtedly to be



punished: and this is all the public spirit which any perfect



government has occasion for.







Chap. I







Of the reciprocal Connections between Trade and Industry







    I am now going to treat of trade and industry, two different



subjects, but which are as thoroughly blended together, as those



we have discussed in the first book. Similar to these in their



mutual operations, they are reciprocally aiding and assisting to



each other, and it is by the constant vibration of the balance



between them, that both are carried to their height of perfection



and refinement.



    TRADE is an operation, by which the wealth, or work, either



of individuals, or of societies, may, by a set of men called



merchants, be exchanged, for an equivalent, proper for supplying



every want, without any interruption to industry, or any check



upon consumption.



    INDUSTRY is the application to ingenious labour in a free



man, in order to procure, by the means of trade, an equivalent,



fit for the supplying every want.



    I must observe, that these definitions are only just,



relatively to my subject, and to one another: for trade may exist



without industry, because things produced partly by nature may be



exchanged between men; industry may be exercised without trade,



because a man may be very ingenious in working to supply his own



consumption, and where there is no exchange, there can be no



trade. Industry likewise implies something more than labour.



Industry, as I understand the term, must be voluntary; labour may



be forced: the one and the other may produce the same effect, but



the political consequences are vastly different.



    Industry, therefore, is applicable to free men only; labour



may be performed by slaves.



    Let me examine this last distinction a little more closely,



the better to try whether it be just, and to point out the



consequences which result from it.



    I have said, that without the assistance of one of the three



principles of multiplication, to wit, slavery, industry, or



charity, there was no possibility of making mankind subsist, so



as to be serviceable to one another, in greater numbers than



those proportioned to the spontaneous fruits of the earth.



Slavery and industry are quite compatible with the selfish nature



of man, and may therefore be generally established in any



society: charity, again, is a refinement upon humanity, and



therefore, I apprehend, it must ever be precarious.



    Now I take slavery and industry to be equally compatible with



great multiplication, but incompatible with one another, without



great restrictions laid upon the first. It is a very hard matter



to introduce industry into a country where slavery is



established; because of the unequal competition between the work



of slaves and that of free men, supposing both equally admitted



to market. Here is the reason:



    The slaves have all their particular masters, who can take



better care of them, than any statesman can take of the



industrious freemen; because their liberty is an obstacle to his



care. The slaves have all their wants supplied by the master, who



may keep them within the limits of sobriety. He may either



recruit their numbers from abroad, or take care of the children,



just as he finds it his advantage. If breeding from the slaves



should prove unprofitable, either their children will die for



want of care, or by promiscuous living few will be born, or by



keeping the sexes asunder, they will be prevented from breeding



at all. A troop of manufacturing slaves, considered in a



political light, will be found all employed, all provided for,



and their work, when brought to market by the master, may he



afforded much cheaper, than the like performed by freemen, who



must every one provide for himself, and who may perhaps have a



separate house, a wife, and children, to maintain, and all this



from an industry which produces no more, nay not so much, as that



of a single slave, who has no avocation from labour. Why do large



undertakings in the manufacturing way ruin private industry, but



by coming nearer to the simplicity of slaves? Could the



sugar-islands be cultivated to any advantage by hired labour?



Were not the expences of rearing children supposed to be great,



would slaves ever be imported? Certainly not: and yet it is still



a doubt with me, whether or not a proper regulation for bringing



up the children of slaves might not turn this expedient to a



better account, than the constant importation of them. But this



is foreign to the present purpose. All I intend here to observe



is the consequences of a competition between the work of slaves



and that of free men; from which competition I infer, that,



without judicious regulations, it must be impossible for industry



ever to get the better of the disadvantages to which it will



necessarily be exposed at first, in a state where slavery is



already introduced.



    These regulations ought to be made with a view to prevent the



competition between the industrious freemen and the masters of



slaves, by appropriating the occupation of each to different



objects: to confine slavery, for example, to the country, that



is, to set the slaves apart for agriculture, and to exclude them



from every other service of work. With such a regulation perhaps



industry might succeed. This was not the case of old; industry



did not succeed as at present: and to this I attribute the



simplicity of those times.



    It is not so difficult to introduce slavery into a state



where liberty is established; because such a revolution might be



brought about by force, and, for the reasons and violence, which



make every thing give way above-mentioned, I must conclude, that



the consequences of such a revolution would tend to extinguish,



or at least, without the greatest industry: but were such



precaution, greatly to check the progress of precautions properly



taken; were slavery reduced to a temporary and conditional



service, and put under proper regulations; it might prove, of all



others, the most excellent expedient for rendering the lower



classes of a people happy and flourishing; and for preventing



that abusive procreation, from which the great misery to which



they are exposed at present chiefly proceeds. But as every



modification of slavery is quite contrary to the spirit of modern



times, I shall carry such speculations no farther. Thus much I



have thought it necessary to observe, by the way, only for the



sake of some principles which I shall have occasion afterwards to



apply to our own oeconomy for where-ever any notable advantage is



found accompanying slavery, it is the duty of a modern statesman



to fall upon a method of profiting by it, without wounding the



spirit of European liberty. And this he may accomplish in a



thousand ways, by the aid of good laws, calculated for cutting



off from the lower classes of a people any interest they can have



in involving themselves in want and misery, opening to them at



the same time an easy progress towards ease and prosperity.



    Here follows an exposition of the principles, from which I



was led to say, in a former chapter, that the failure of the



slavish form of feudal government, and the extension thereby



given to civil and domestic liberty, were the source from which



the whole system of modern policy has sprung.



    Under the feudal form, the higher classes were perhaps more



free than at present, but the lower classes were either slaves,



or under a most servile dependence, which, as to the consequence



of interrupting the progress of private industry, is entirely the



same thing.



    I cannot pretend to advance, as a confirmation of this



doctrine, that the establishment of slavery in our colonies in



America was made with a view to promote agriculture, and to curb



manufactures in the new world, because I do not know much of the



sentiments of politicians at that time: but if it be true, that



slavery has the effect of advancing agriculture, and other



laborious operations which are of a simple nature, and at the



same time of discouraging invention and ingenuity; and if the



mother-country has occasion for the produce of the first, in



order to subsist or to employ those who are taken up at home in



the prosecution of the latter; then I must conclude, that slavery



has been very luckily, if not politically, established to compass



such an end: and therefore, if any colony, where slavery is not



common, shall ever begin to rival the industry of the



mother-country, a very good way of frustrating the attempt will



be, to encourage the introduction of slaves into such colonies



without any restrictions, and to allow it to work its natural



effect.



    Having given the definition of trade and industry, as



relative to my inquiry, I come now to examine their immediate



connections, the better to cement the subject of this book, with



the principles deduced in the former.



    In treating of the reciprocal wants of a society, and in



shewing how naturally their being supplied by labour and



ingenuity tends to increase population on one hand, and



agriculture on the other, the better to simplify our ideas, we



supposed the transition to be direct from the manufacturer to the



consumer, and both to be members of the same society. Matters now



become more complex, by the introduction of trade among different



nations, which is a method of collecting and distributing the



produce of industry, by the interposition of a third principle.



Trade receives from a thousand hands, and distributes to as many.



    To ask, whether trade owes its beginning to industry, or



industry to trade, is like asking, whether the motion of the



heart is owing to the blood, or the motion of the blood to the



heart. Both the one and the other, I suppose, are formed by such



insensible degrees, that it is impossible to determine where the



motion begins. But so soon as the body comes to be perfectly



formed, I have little doubt of the heart's being the principle of



circulation. Let me apply this to the present question.



    A man must first exist, before he can feel want; he must



want, that is, desire, before he will demand; and he must demand,



before he can receive. This is a natural chain, and from it we



have concluded in Book I, that population is the cause, and



agriculture the effect.



    By a parallel reason it may be alleged, that as wants excite



to industry, and are considered as the cause of it; and as the



produce of industry cannot be exchanged without trade; so trade



must be an effect of industry. To this I agree: but I must



observe, that this exchange does not convey my idea of trade,



although I admit, that it is the root from which the other



springs; it is the seed, but not the plant; and trade, as we have



defined it, conveys another idea. The workmen must not be



interrupted, in order to seek for an exchange, nor the consumer



put to the trouble of finding out the manufacturer. The object of



trade therefore is no more than a new want, which calls for a set



of men to supply it; and trade has a powerful effect in promoting



industry, by facilitating the consumption of its produce.



    While wants continue simple and few, a workman finds time



enough to distribute all his work: when wants become more



multiplied, men must work harder; time becomes precious; hence



trade is introduced. They who want to consume, send the merchant,



in a manner, to the workman for his labour, and do not go



themselves; the workman sells to this interposed person, and does



not look out for a consumer. Let me now take a familiar instance



of infant trade, in order to shew how it grows and refines: this



will illustrate what I have been saying.



    I walk out of the gates of a city in a morning, and meet with



five hundred persons, men and women, every one bringing to market



a small parcel of herbs, chickens, eggs, fruits, &c. It occurs to



me immediately that these people must have little to do at home,



since they come to market for so small a value. Some years



afterwards, I find nothing but horses, carts, and waggons,



carrying the same provisions. I must then conclude, that either



those I used to meet before are no more in the country, but



purged off, as being found useless, after a method has been found



of collecting all their burdens into a few carts; or that they



have found out a more profitable employment than carrying eggs



and greens to market. Whichever happens to be the case, this



change will point out the introduction of what I call trade; to



wit, this collecting of eggs, fruit, fowl, &c. from twenty hands,



in order to distribute it to as many more within the walls. The



consequence is, that a great deal of labour is saved; that is to



say, the cart gives time to twenty people to labour, if they are



disposed to it; and when wants increase, they will be ready to



supply them.



    We cannot therefore say, that trade will force industry, or



that industry will force trade; but we may say, that trade will



facilitate industry, and that industry will support trade. Both



the one and the other however depend upon a third principle; to



wit, a taste for superfluity, in those who have an equivalent to



give for it. This taste will produce demand, and this again will



become the main spring of the whole operation.







Chap. II







Of Demand







    This is no new subject; it is only going over what has been



treated of very extensively in the first book, under another



name, and relatively to other circumstances. These ideas were



there kept as simple as possible; here they take a more complex



form, and appear in a new dress.



    The wants of mankind were said to promote their



multiplication, by augmenting the demand for the food of the free



hands, who, by supplying these wants, are enabled to offer an



equivalent for their food, to the farmers who produced it; and as



this way of bartering is a representation of trade in its



infancy, it is no wonder that trade, when grown up, should still



preserve a resemblance to it.



    Demand, considered as a term appropriated to trade, will now



be used instead of wants; the term used in the first book



relatively to bartering; we must therefore expect, that the



operations of the same principle, under different appellations,



will constantly appear similar, in every application we can make



of it to different circumstances.



    Whether this term be applied to bartering or to trade, it



must constantly appear reciprocal. If I demand a pair of shoes,



the shoemaker either demands money, or something else for his own



use. To prevent therefore the ambiguity of a term, which, from



the sterility of language, is taken in different acceptations,



according to the circumstances which are supposed to accompany



it, I shall endeavour shortly to analyze it.



    First, Demand is ever understood to be relative to



merchandize. A demand for money, except in bills of exchange, is



never called demand. When those who have merchandize upon hand,



are desirous of converting them into money, they are said to



offer to sale; and if, in order to find a buyer, they lower their



price, then, instead of saying the demand for money is high, we



say the demand for goods is low.



    Secondly, Suppose a ship to arrive at a port loaded with



goods, with an intention to purchase others in return, the



operation becomes only double. The ship offers to sale, and the



demand of the port is said to be high or low, according to the



height of the price offered, not according to the quantity



demanded, or number of demanders. When all is sold, then the ship



becomes demander. and if his demand be proportionally higher than



the former, we say upon the whole, that the demand is for the



commodities of the port; that is, the port offers, and the ship



demands. This I call reciprocal demand.



    Thirdly, Demand is either simple or compound. Simple, when



the demander is but one, compound, when they are more. But this



is not so much relative to persons as to interests. Twenty people



demanding from the same determinate interest form but a simple



demand; it becomes compound or high, when different interests



produce a competition. It may therefore be said, that when there



is no competition among buyers, demand is simple, let the



quantity demanded be great or small, let the buyers be few or



many. When therefore in the contract of barter, the demand upon



one side is simple, upon the other compound, that which is



compound is constantly called the demand, the other not.



    Fourthly, Demand is either great or small: great, when the



quantity demanded is great; small, when the quantity demanded is



small.



    Fifthly, Demand is either high or low. high, when the



competition among the buyers is great; low, when the competition



among the sellers is great. From these definitions it follows,



that the consequence of a great demand, is a great sale; the



consequence of a high demand, is a great price. The consequence



of a small demand, is a small sale; the consequence of a low



demand, is a small price.



    Sixthly, The nature of demand is to encourage industry. and



when, it is regularly made, the effect of it is, that the supply



for the most part is found to be in proportion to it, and then



the demand is commonly simple. It becomes compound from other



circumstances. As when it is irregular, that is, unexpected, or



when the usual supply fails; the consequence of which is, that



the provision made for the demand, falling short of the just



proportion, occasions a competition among the buyers, and raises



the current, that is, the ordinary prices. From this it is, that



we commonly say, demand raises prices. Prices are high or low



according to demand. These expressions are just; because the



sterility of language obliges us there to attend to circumstances



which are only implied.



    Demand is understood to be high or low, relatively to the



common rate of it, or to the competition between buyers, to



obtain the provision made for it. When demand is understood to be



relative to the quantity demanded, it must be called great or



small, as has been said.



    Seventhly, Demand has not always the same effect in raising



prices. we must therefore carefully attend to the difference



between a demand for things of the first necessity for life, and



for things indifferent; also between a demand made by the



immediate consumers, and one made by merchants, who buy in order



to sell again. In both cases the competition will have different



effects. Things of absolute necessity must be procured, let the



price be ever so great: consumers who have no view to profit, but



to satisfy their desires, will enter into a stronger competition



than merchants, who are animated by no passion, and who are



regulated in what they offer by their prospect of gain alone.



Hence the great difference in the price of grain in different



years; hence the uniform standard of the price of merchandize, at



the India sales and in fairs of distribution, such as Franckfort,



Beaucaire, &c., hence, also, the advantage which consumers find



in making their provision at the same time that merchants make



theirs; hence the sudden rise and fall in the price of labouring



cattle in country markets, where every one provides for himself.



    Let what has been said suffice at setting out: this principle



will be much better explained by its application as we advance,



than by all the abstract distinctions I am capable to give of it.







Chap. III







Of the first Principles of bartering, and how this grows into



Trade







    I must now begin by tracing trade to its source, in order to



reduce it to its first principles.



    The most simple of all trade, is that which is carried on by



bartering the necessary articles of subsistence. If we suppose



the earth free to the first possessor, this person who cultivates



it will first draw from it his own food, and the surplus will be



the object of barter: he will give this in exchange to any one



who will supply his other wants. This (as has been said) supposes



naturally both a surplus quantity of food produced by labour, and



also free hands; for he who makes a trade of agriculture cannot



supply himself with all other necessaries, as well as food; and



he who makes a trade of supplying the farmers with such



necessaries in exchange for his surplus of food, cannot be



employed in producing that food. The more the necessities of man



increase, cateris paribus, the more free hands are required to



supply them; and the more free hands are required, the more



surplus food must be produced by additional labour, to supply



their demand.



    This is the least complex kind of trade, and may be carried



on to a greater or less extent, in different countries, according



to the different degrees of the wants to be supplied. In a



country where there is no money, nor any thing equivalent to it,



I imagine the wants of mankind will be confined to few objects;



to wit, the removing the inconveniences of hunger, thirst, cold,



heat, danger, and the like. A free man who by his industry can



procure all the comforts of a simple life, will enjoy his rest,



and work no more: And, in general, all increase of work will



cease, so soon as the demand for the purposes mentioned comes to



be satisfied. There is a plain reason for this. When the free



hands have procured, by their labour, wherewithal to supply their



wants, their ambition is satisfied; so soon as the husbandmen



have produced the necessary surplus for relieving theirs, they



work no more. Here then is a natural stop put to industry,



consequently to bartering. This, in the first book we have called



the moral impossibility of augmenting numbers.



    The next thing to be examined, is, how bartering grows into



trade, properly so called and understood, according to the



definition given of it above; how trade comes to be extended



among men; how manufactures, more ornamental than useful, come to



be established; and how men come to submit to labour, in order to



acquire what is not absolutely necessary for them.



    This, in a free society, I take to be chiefly owing to the



introduction of money, and a taste for superfluities in those who



possess it.



    In ancient times, money was not wanting; but the taste for



superfluities not being in proportion to it, the specie was



locked up. This was the case in Europe four hundred years ago. A



new taste for superfluity has drawn, perhaps, more money into



circulation, from our own treasures, than from the mines of the



new world. The poor opinion we entertain of the riches of our



forefathers, is founded upon the modern way of estimating wealth,



by the quantity of coin in circulation, from which we conclude,



that the greatest part of the specie now in our hands must have



come from America.



    It is more, therefore, through the taste for superfluity,



than in consequence of the quantity of coin, that trade comes to



be established; and it is in consequence of trade only that we



see industry carry things in our days to so high a pitch of



refinement and delicacy. Let me illustrate this by comparing



together the different operations of barter, sale, and commerce.



    When reciprocal wants are supplied by barter, there is not



the smallest occasion for money: this is the most simple of all



combinations.



    When wants are multiplied, bartering becomes (for obvious



reasons) more difficult; upon this money is introduced. This is



the common price of all things: it is a proper equivalent in the



hands of those who feel a want, perfectly calculated to supply



the occasions of those who, by industry, can relieve it. This



operation of buying and selling is a little more complex than the



former, but still we have here no idea of trade, because we have



not introduced the merchant, by whose industry it is carried on.



    Let this third person be brought into play, and the whole



operation becomes clear. What before we called wants, is here



represented by the consumer; what we called industry, by the



manufacturer; what we called money, by the merchant. The merchant



here represents the money, by substituting credit in its place;



and as the money was invented to facilitate barter, so the



merchant with his credit, is a new refinement upon the use of



money. The merchant, I say, renders money still more effectual in



performing the operations of buying and selling. This operation



is trade: it relieves both parties of the whole trouble of



transportation, and adjusting wants to wants, or wants to money.



the merchant represents by turns both the consumer, the



manufacturer, and the money. To the consumer he appears as the



whole body of manufacturers; to the manufacturers, as the whole



body of consumers; and to the one and the other class his credit



supplies the use of money. This is sufficient at present for an



illustration. I must now return to the simple operations of money



in the hands of the two contracting parties, the buyer and the



seller, in order to show how men come to submit to labour in



order to acquire superfluities.



    So soon as money is introduced into a country it becomes, as



we have said above, an universal object of want to all the



inhabitants. The consequence is, that the free hands of the



state, who before stopped working, because all their wants were



provided for, having this new object of ambition before their



eyes, endeavour, by refinements upon their labour, to remove the



smaller inconveniences which result from a simplicity of manners.



People, I shall suppose, who formerly knew but one sort of



clothing for all seasons, willingly part with a little money to



procure for themselves different sorts of apparel properly



adapted to summer and inter, which the ingenuity of



manufacturers, and their desire of getting money, may have



suggested to their invention.



    I shall not here pursue the gradual progress of industry, in



bringing manufactures to perfection; nor interrupt my subject



with any farther observations upon the advantages resulting to



industry, from the establishment of civil and domestic liberty;



but shall only suggest, that these refinements seem more



generally owing to the industry and invention of the



manufacturers (who by their ingenuity daily contrive means of



softening or relieving inconveniences, which mankind seldom



perceive to be such, till the way of removing them be contrived)



than to the taste for luxury in the rich, who, to indulge their



ease, engage the poor to become industrious.



    Let any man make an experiment of this nature upon himself,



by entering into the first shop. He will nowhere so quickly



discover his wants as there. Every thing he sees appears either



necessary, or at least highly convenient; and he begins to wonder



(especially if he be rich) how he could have been so long without



that which the ingenuity of the workman alone had invented, in



order that from the novelty it might excite his desire; for when



it is bought, he ill never once think more of it perhaps, nor



ever apply it to the use for which it at first appeared so



necessary.



    Here then is a reason why mankind labour though not in want.



They become desirous of possessing the very instruments of



luxury, which their avarice or ambition prompted them to invent



for the use of others.



    What has been said represents trade in its infancy, or rather



the materials with which this great fabric is built.



    We have formed an idea of the wants of mankind multiplied



even to luxury, and abundantly supplied by the employment of all



the free hands set apart for that purpose. But if we suppose the



workman himself disposing of his work, and purchasing with it



food from the farmer, cloths from the clothier, and in general



seeking for the supply of every want from the hands of the person



directly employed for the purpose of relieving it; this will not



convey an idea of trade, according to our definition.



    Trade and commerce are an abbreviation of this long process;



a scheme invented and set on foot by merchants, from a principle



of gain, supported and extended among men, from a principle of



general utility to every individual, rich or poor, to every



society, great or small.



    Instead of a pin-maker exchanging his pins with fifty



different persons, for whose labour he has occasion, he sells all



to the merchant for money or for credit; and, as occasion offers,



he purchases all his wants, either directly from those who supply



them, or from other merchants who deal with manufacturers in the



same way his merchant dealt with him.



    Another advantage of trade is, that industrious people in one



part of the country, may supply customers in another, though



distant. They may establish themselves in the most commodious



places for their respective business, and help one another



reciprocally, without making the distant parts of the country



suffer for want of their labour. They are likewise exposed to no



avocation from their work, by seeking for customers.



    Trade produces many excellent advantages; it marks out to the



manufacturers when their branch is under or overstocked with



hands. If it be understocked, they will find more demand than



they can answer: if it be overstocked, the sale will be slow.



    Intelligent men, in every profession, will easily discover



when these appearances are accidental, and when they proceed from



the real principles of trade. which are here the object of our



inquiry.



    Posts, and correspondence by letters, are a consequence of



trade, by the means of which merchants are regularly informed of



every augmentation or diminution of industry in every branch, in



every part of the country. From this knowledge they regulate the



prices they offer; and as they are many, they, from the



principles of competition which we shall hereafter examine, serve



as a check upon one another.



    From the current prices, the manufacturers are as well



informed as if they kept the correspondence themselves: the



statesman feels perfectly where hands are wanting, and young



people destined to industry, obey, in a manner, the call of the



public, and fall naturally in to supply the demand.



    Two great assistances to merchants, especially in the infancy



of trade, are public markets for collecting the work of small



dealers, and large undertakings in the manufacturing way by



private hands. By these means the merchants come at the knowledge



of the quantity of work in the market, as on the other hand the



manufacturers learn, by the sale of the goods, the extent of the



demand for them. These two things being justly known, the price



of goods is easily fixed, as we shall presently see.



    Public sales serve to correct the small inconveniences which



proceed from the operations of trade. A set of manufacturers got



all together into one town, and entirely taken up with their



industry, are thereby as well informed of the rate of the market,



as if every one of them carried thither his work; and upon the



arrival of the merchant, who readily takes it off their hands, he



has not the least advantage over them from his knowledge of the



state of demand. This man both buys and sells in what is called



wholesale (that is by large parcels) and from him retailers



purchase, who distribute the goods to every consumer throughout



the country. These last buy from wholesale merchants in every



branch, that proportion of every kind of merchandize which is



suitable to the demand of their borough, city, or province.



    Thus, all inconveniences are prevented, at some additional



cost to the consumer, who, for reasons we shall afterwards point



out, must naturally reimburse the whole expence. The distance of



the manufacturer, the obscurity of his dwelling, the caprice in



selling his work, are quite removed; the retailer has all in his



shop, and the public buys at a current price.







Chap. IV







How the Prices of Goods are determined by Trade







    In the price of goods, I consider two things as really



existing, and quite different from one another; to wit; the real



value of the commodity, and the profit upon alienation. The



intention of this chapter is to establish this distinction, and



to shew how the operation of trade severally influences the



standard of the one and the other; that is to say, how trade has



the effect of rendering fixed and determinate, two things which



would otherwise be quite vague and uncertain.



    I. The first thing to be known of any manufacture when it



comes to be sold, is, how much of it a person can perform in a



day, a week, a month, according to the nature of the work, which



may require more or less time to bring it to perfection. In



making such estimates, regard is to be had to what, upon an



average only, a workman of the country in general may perform,



without supposing him the best or the worst in his profession; or



having any peculiar advantage or disadvantage as to the place



where he works.



    Hence the reason why some people thrive by their industry,



and others not; why some manufactures flourish in one place and



not in another.



    II. The second thing to be known, is the value of the



workman's subsistence and necessary expence, both for supplying



his personal wants, and providing the instruments belonging to



his profession, which must be taken upon an average as above;



except when the nature of the work requires the presence of the



workman in the place of consumption; for although some trades,



and almost every manufacture, may be carried on in places at a



distance, and therefore may fall under one general regulation as



to prices, yet others there are which, by their nature, require



the presence of the workman in the place of consumption; and in



this case the prices must be regulated by circumstances relative



to every particular place.



    III. The third and last thing to be known, is the value of



the materials, that is the first matter employed by the workman;



and if the object of his industry be the manufacture of another,



the same process of inquiry must be gone through with regard to



the first, as with regard to the second: and thus the most



complex manufactures may be at last reduced to the greatest



simplicity. I have been more particular in this analysis of



manufactures than was absolutely necessary in this place, that I



might afterwards with the greater ease, point out the methods of



diminishing the prices of them.



    These three articles being known, the price of manufacture is



determined. It cannot be lower than the amount of all the three,



that is, than the real value; whatever it is higher, is the



manufacturer's profit. This will ever be in proportion to demand,



and therefore will fluctuate according to circumstances.



    Hence appears the necessity of a great demand, in order to



promote flourishiug manufactures.



    By the extensive dealings of merchants, and their constant



application to the study of the balance of work and demand, all



the above circumstances are known to them, and are made known to



the industrious, who regulate their living and expence according



to their certain profit. I call it certain, because under these



circumstances they seldom overvalue their work, and by not



overvaluing it, they are sure of a sale: a proof of this may be



had from daily experience.



    Employ a workman in a country where there is little trade or



industry, he proportions his price always to the urgency of your



want, or your capacity to pay; but seldom to his own labour.



Employ another in a country of trade, he will not impose upon



you, unless perhaps you be a stranger, which supposes your being



ignorant of the value; but employ the same workman in a work not



usual in the country, consequently not demanded, consequently not



regulated as to the value, he will proportion his price as in the



first supposition.



    We may therefore conclude from what has been said, that in a



country where trade is established, manufactures must flourish,



from the ready sale, the regulated price of work, and certain



profit resulting from industry. Let us next inquire into the



consequences of such a situation.







Chap. V







How foreign Trade opens to an industrious People, and the



Consequences of it to the Merchants who set it on foot







    The first consequence of the situation described in the



preceding chapter, is, that wants are easily supplied, for the



adequate value of the thing wanted.



    The next consequence is, the opening of foreign trade under



its two denominations of passive and active. Strangers and people



of distant countries finding the difficulty of having their wants



supplied at home, and the ease of having them supplied from this



country, immediately have recourse to it. This is passive trade.



The active is when merchants, who have executed this plan at home



with success, begin to transport the labour of their countrymen



into other regions, which either produce, or are capable of



producing such articles of consumption, proper to be



manufactured, as are most demanded at home; and consequently will



meet with the readiest sale, and fetch the largest profits. Here



then is the opening of foreign trade, under its two denominations



of active and passive: but as we are at present considering the



consequences of this new state of things with respect to the



merchants, we shall take no farther notice, in this place, of



that division: it will naturally come in afterwards.



    What then are the consequences of this new commerce to our



merchants, who have left their homes in quest of gain abroad?



    The first is, that arriving in any new country, they find



themselves in the same situation, with regard to the inhabitants,



as the workmen in the country of no trade, with regard to those



who employed him; that is, they proportion the price of their



goods to the eagerness of acquiring, or the capacity of paying,



in the inhabitants, but never to their real value.



    The first profits then, upon this trade, must be very



considerable; and the demand from such a country will be high or



low, great or small, according to the spirit, not the real wants



of the people: for these in all countries, as has been said, must



first be supplied by the inhabitants themselves, before they



cease to labour.



    If the people of this not-trading country (as we shall now



call it) be abundantly furnished with commodities useful to the



traders, they will easily part with them, at first, for the



instruments of luxury and ease; but the great profit of the



traders will insensibly increase the demand for the productions



of their new correspondents; this will have the effect of



producing a competition between themselves, and thereby of



throwing the demand on their side, from the principles I shall



afterwards explain. This is perpetually a disadvantage in



traffic: the most it; and unpolished nations in the world quickly



perceive the effects of are taught to profit of the discovery, in



spite of the address of those who are the most expert in



commerce.



    The traders will, therefore, be very fond of falling upon



every method and contrivance to inspire this people with a taste



of refinement and delicacy. Abundance of fine presents,



consisting of every instrument of luxury and superfluity, the



best adapted to the genius of the people, will be given to the



prince and leading men among them. Workmen will even be employed



at home to study the taste of the strangers, and to captivate



their desires by every possible means. The more eager they are of



presents, the more lavish the traders will be in bestowing and



diversifying them. It is an animal put up to fatten, the more he



eats the sooner he is fit for slaughter. When their taste for



superfluity is fully formed, when the relish for their former



simplicity is sophisticated, poisoned, and obliterated, then they



are surely in the fetters of the traders, and the deeper they go,



the less possibility there is of their getting out. The presents



then will die away, having served their purpose; and if,



afterwards, they are found to be continued, it will probably be



to support the competition against other nations, who will



incline to share of the profits.



    If, on the contrary, this not-trading nation does not abound



with commodities useful to the traders, these will make little



account of trading with them, whatever their turn may be; but if



we suppose this country inhabited by a laborious people, who,



having taken a taste for refinement from the traders, apply



themselves to agriculture, in order to produce articles of



subsistence, they will solicit the merchants to give them part of



their manufactures in exchange for these; and this trade will



undoubtedly have the effect of multiplying numbers in the trading



nation. But if food cannot be furnished, nor any other branch of



production found out to support the correspondence, the taste for



refinement will soon die away, and trade will stop in this



quarter.



    Had it not been for the furs in those countries adjacent to



Hudson's Bay, and in Canada, the Europeans never would have



thought of supplying instruments of luxury to those nations; and



if the inhabitants of those regions had not taken a taste for the



instruments of luxury furnished to them by the Europeans, they



never would have become so indefatigable nor so dexterous



hunters. At the same time we are not to suppose, that ever these



Americans would have come to Europe in quest of our manufactures.



It is therefore owing to our merchants, that those nations are



become in any degree fond of refinement; and this taste, in all



probability, will not soon exceed the proportion of the



productions of their country. From these beginnings of foreign



trade it is easy to trace its increase.



    One step towards this, is the establishing correspondences in



foreign countries; and these are more or less necessary in



proportion as the country where they are established is more or



less polished or acquainted with trade. They supply the want of



posts, and point out to the merchants what proportion the



productions of the country bear to the demand of the inhabitants



for manufactures. This communicates an idea of commerce to the



not-trading nation, and they insensibly begin to fix a



determinate value upon their own productions, which perhaps bore



no determinate value at all before.



    Let me trace a little the progress of this refinement in the



savages, in order to shew how it has the effect of throwing the



demand upon the traders, and of creating a competition among



them, for the productions of the new country.



    Experience shews, that in a new-discovered country, merchants



constantly find some article or other of its productions, which



turns out to a great account in commerce; and we see that the



longer such a trade subsists, and the more the inhabitants take a



taste for European manufactures, the more their own productions



rise in their value, and the less profit is made by trading with



them, even in cases where the trade is carried on by companies;



which is a very wise institution for one reason, that it cuts off



a competition between our merchants.



    This we shall shew, in its proper place, to be the best means



of keeping prices low in favour of the nation; however it may



work a contrary effect with respect to individuals who must buy



from these monopolies.



    When companies are not established, and when trade is open,



our merchants, by their eagerness to profit of the new trade,



betray the secrets of it, they enter into competition for the



purchase of the foreign produce, and this raises prices and



favours the commerce of the most ignorant savages.



    Some account for this in a different manner. They allege that



it is not this competition which raises prices; because there is



also a competition among the savages, which of them shall get the



merchandise; and this may be sufficient to counter-balance the



other, but in proportion as the quantity of goods demanded by the



savages, as an exchange for the produce of their country, becomes



greater, a less quantity of this produce must be given for every



parcel of the goods.



    To this I answer, That I cannot admit this apparent reason to



be consistent with the principles of trade, however ingenious the



conceit may be.



    The merchant constantly considers his own profit in parting



with his goods, and is not influenced by the reasons of



expediency which the savages may find, to offer him less than



formerly; for were this principle of proportion admitted



generally, the price of merchandise would always be at the



discretion of the buyers.



    The objection here stated is abundantly plain; but it must be



resolved in a very different manner. Here are two solutions:



    First, Prices, I have said, are made to rise, according as



demand is high, not according as it is great. Now, in the



objection, it is said, that, in proportion as the demand is



great, a less proportion of the equivalent must go to every



parcel of the merchandise; which I apprehend to be false; and



this shews the necessity of making a distinction between the high



and the great demand, things entirely different in trade, and



which communicate quite different ideas.



    Secondly, In all trade there is an exchange, and in all



exchange, we have said, there is a reciprocal demand implied: it



must therefore be exactly inquired into, on which hand the



competition between the demanders is found; that is to say, on



which hand it is strongest; according to the distinction in the



second chapter.



    If the inhabitants of the country be in competition for the



manufactures, goods will rise in their price most undoubtedly,



let the quantity of the produce they have to offer be large or



small; but so soon as these prices rise above the faculties, or



desire of buying, in certain individuals, their demand will stop,



and their equivalent will be prevented from coming into commerce.



This will disappoint the traders; and therefore, as their gains



are supposed to be great, either a competition will take place



among themselves, who shall carry off the quantity remaining,



supposing them to have separate interests; or, if they are



united, they may, from a view of expediency, voluntarily sink



their price, in order to bring it within the compass of the



faculties, or intention, to buy in those who are still possessed



of a portion of what they want.



    It is from the effects of competition among sellers that I



apprehend prices are brought down, not from any imaginary



proportion of quantity to quantity in the market. But of this



more afterwards, in its proper place.



    So soon as the price of manufactures is brought as low as



possible, in the new nation; if the surplus of their commodities



does not suffice to purchase a quantity of manufactures



proportioned to their wants, this people must begin to labour:



for labour is the necessary consequence of want, real or



imaginary; and by labour it will be supplied.



    When this comes to be the case, we immediately find two



trading nations instead of one; the balance of which trade will



always be in favour of the most industrious and frugal; as shall



be fully explained in another place.



    Let me now direct my inquiry more particularly towards the



consequences of this new state of things produced by commerce,



relative to the not-trading nation, in order to shew the effect



of a passive foreign trade. I shall spare no pains in



illustrating, upon every occasion, as I go along, the fundamental



principles of commerce, demand, and competition, even perhaps at



the expence of appearing tiresome to some of my readers.







Chap. VI







Consequences of the Introduction of a passive Foreign Trade among



a People who live in Simplicity and Idleness







    We now suppose the arrival of traders, all in one interest,



with instruments of luxury and refinement, at a port in a country



of great simplicity of manners, abundantly provided by nature



with great advantages for commerce, and peopled by a nation



capable of adopting a taste for superfluities.



    The first thing the merchants do, is to expose their goods,



and point out the advantages of many things, either agreeable or



useful to mankind in general, such as wines, spirits, instruments



of agriculture, arms, and ammunition for hunting, nets for



fishing, manufactures for clothing, and the like. The advantages



of these are presently perceived, and such commodities are



eagerly sought after. The natives on their side produce what they



most esteem, generally something superfluous or ornamental. The



traders, after examining all circumstances, determine the object



of their demand, giving the least quantity possible in return for



this superfluity, in order to impress the inhabitants with a high



notion of the value of their own commodities; but as this



parsimony may do more hurt than good to their interest, they are



very generous in making presents, from the principles mentioned



above.



    When the exchange is completed, and the traders depart,



regret is commonly mutual; the one and the other are sorry that



the superfluities of the country fall short. A return is promised



by the traders, and assurances are given by the natives of a



better provision another time.



    What are the first consequences of this revolution? Is it not



evident, that, in order to supply an equivalent for this new



want, more hands must be set to work than formerly? And it is



evident also, that this augmentation of industry will not



essentially increase numbers; as was supposed to be the effect of



it through the whole train of our reasoning in the first book.



Why? Because there the produce of the industry was supposed to be



consumed at home; and here it is intended to be exported. But if



we can find out any additional consumption at home even implied



by this new trade, I think it will have the effect of augmenting



numbers. An example will make this plain.



    Let me suppose the superfluity of this country to be the



skins of wild beasts, not proper for food; the manufacture sought



for, brandy. The brandy is sold for furs. He who has furs, or he



who can spare time to hunt for them, will drink brandy in



proportion: but I cannot find out any reason to conclude, from



this simple operation, that one man more in the country must



necessarily be fed, (for I have taken care to suppose, that the



flesh of the animals is not proper for food) or that any



augmentation of agriculture must of consequence ensue from this



new traffic.



    But let me throw in a circumstance which may imply an



additional consumption at home, and then examine the



consequences.



    A poor creature, who has no equivalent to offer for food, who



is miserable, and ready to perish for want of subsistence, goes a



hunting, and kills a wolf; he comes to a farmer with the skin,



and says; you are well fed, but you have no brandy; if you will



give me a loaf I will give you this skin, which the strangers are



so fond of, and they will give you brandy. But, says the farmer,



I have no more bread than what is sufficient for my own family.



As for that, replies the other, I will come and dig in your



ground, and you and I will settle our account as to the small



quantity I desire of you. The bargain is made; the poor fellow



gets his loaf, and lives at least; perhaps he marries, and the



farmer gets a dram. But had it not been for this dram, (that is,



this new want,) which was purchased by the industry of this poor



fellow, by what argument could he have induced the farmer to part



with a loaf?



    I here exclude the sentiment of charity. This alone, as I



have often observed, is a principle of multiplication, and if it



was admitted here it would ruin all my supposition; but as true



it is, on the other hand, that could the poor fellow have got



bread by begging, he would not probably have gone a-hunting.



    Here then it appears, that the very dawning of trade, in the



most unpolished countries, implies a multiplication. This is



enough to point out the first step, and to connect the subject of



our present inquiries with what has been already discussed in



relation to other circumstances. I proceed.



    So soon as all the furs are disposed of, and a taste for



superfluity introduced, both the traders and the natives will be



equally interested in the advancement of industry in this



country. Many new objects of profit for the first will be



discovered, which the proper employment of the inhabitants, in



reaping the natural advantages of their soil and climate, will



make effectual. The traders will therefore endeavour to set on



foot many branches of industry among the savages, and the



allurements of brandy, arms, and clothing, will animate these in



the pursuit of them. Let me here digress for a few lines.



    If we suppose slavery to be established in this country, then



all the slaves will be set to work, in order to provide furs and



other things demanded by the traders, that the masters may



thereby be enabled to indulge themselves in the superfluities



brought to them by the merchants. When liberty is the system,



every one, according to his disposition, becomes industrious, in



order to procure such enjoyments for himself.



    In the first supposition, it is the head of the master which



conducts the labour of the slave, and turns it towards ingenuity:



in the second, every head is at work, and every hand is improving



in dexterity. Where hands therefore are principally necessary,



the slaves have the advantage; where heads are principally



necessary, the advantage lies in favour of the free. Set a man to



labour at so much a day, he will go on at a regular rate, and



never seek to improve his method: let him be hired by the piece,



he will find a thousand expedients to extend his industry. This



is exactly the difference between the slave and the free man.



From this I account for the difference between the progress of



industry in ancient and modern times. Why was a peculium given to



slaves, but to engage them to become dextrous? Had there been no



peculium and no libertini, or free men, who had been trained to



labour, there would have been little more industry any where,



than there was in the republic of Lycurgus, where, I apprehend,



neither the one or the other was to be found. I return.



    When once this revolution is brought about; when those who



formerly lived in simplicity become industrious. Matters put on a



new face. Is not this operation quite similar to that represented



in the fifth chapter of the first book? There I found the



greatest difficulty, in shewing how the mutual operations of



supplying food and other wants could have the effect of promoting



population and agriculture, among a people who were supposed to



have no idea of the system proposed to be put in execution. Here



the plan appears familiar and easy. The difference between them



seems to resemble that of a child's learning a language by



grammar, or learning it by the ear in the country where it is



spoken. In the first case, many throw the book aside, but in the



other none ever fail of success.



    I have said, that matters put on a new face; that is to say,



we now find two trading nations instead of one, with this



difference, however, that as hitherto we have supposed the



merchants all in one interest, the compound demand, that is, the



competition of the buyers, has been, and must still continue on



the side of the natives. This is a great prejudice to their



interest, but as it is not supposed sufficient to check their



industry, nor to restrain their consumption of the manufactures,



let me here examine a little more particularly the consequences



of the principle of demand in such a situation; for although I



allow, that it can never change sides, yet it may admit of



different modifications, and produce different effects, as we



shall presently perceive.



    The merchants we suppose all in one interest, consequently



there can he no competition among them; consequently no check can



be put upon their raising their prices, as long as the prices



they demand are complied with. So soon as they are raised to the



full extent of the abilities of the natives, or of their



inclination to buy, the merchants have the choice of three



things, which are all perfectly in their option, and the



preference to be given to the one or the other depends entirely



upon themselves, and upon the circumstances I am going to point



out.



    First, they may support the high demand; that is, not lower



their price; which will preserve a high estimation of the



manufactures in the opinion of the inhabitants, and render the



profits upon their trade the greatest possible. This part they



may possibly take, if they perceive the natives doubling their



diligence, in order to become able, in time, to purchase



considerable cargoes at a high value; from which supposition is



implied a strong disposition in the people to become luxurious,



since nothing but want of ability prevents them from complying



with the highest demand: but still another circumstance must



concur, to engage the merchants not to lower their price. The



great proportion of the goods they seek for, in return, must be



found in the hands of a few. This will be the case if slavery be



established; for then there must be many poor, and few rich: and



they are commonly the rich consumers who proportion the price



they offer, rather to their desires, than to the value of the



thing.



    The second thing which may be done is, to open the door to a



great demand; that is, to lower their prices. This will sink the



value of the manufactures in the opinion of the inhabitants, and



render profits less in proportion, although indeed, upon the



voyage, the profits may be greater.



    This part they will take, if they perceive the inhabitants do



not incline to consume great quantities of the merchandize at a



high value, either from want of abilities or inclination; and



also, if the profits upon the trade depend upon a large



consumption, as is the case in merchandize of a low value, and



suited chiefly to the occasions of the lower sort. Such motives



of expediency will be sufficient to make them neglect a high



demand, and prefer a great one; and the more, when there is a



likelihood that the consumption of low-priced goods in the



beginning may beget a taste for others of a higher value, and



thus extend in general the taste of superfluity.



    A third part to be taken, is the least politic, and perhaps



the most familiar. It is to profit by the competition between the



buyers, and encourage the rising of demand as long as possible;



when this comes to a stop, to make a kind of auction, by first



bringing down the prices to the level of the highest bidders, and



so to descend by degrees, in proportion as demand sinks. Thus we



may say with propriety, according to our definitions of demand,



that it commonly becomes great, in proportion as prices sink. By



this operation, the traders will profit as much as possible, and



sell off as much of their goods as the profits will permit.



    I say, this plan, in a new discovered country, is not



politic, as it both discovers a covetousness and a want of faith



in the merchants, and also throws open the secrets of their trade



to those who ought to be kept ignorant of them.



    Let me next suppose, that the large profits of our merchants



shall be discovered by others, who arrive at the same ports in a



separate interest, and who enter into no combination with the



first, which might prevent the natural effects of competition.



    Let the state of demand among the natives be supposed the



same as formerly, both as to height and greatness, in consequence



of the operation of the different principles, which might have



induced our merchants to follow one or other of the plans we have



been describing; we must however still suppose, that they have



been careful to preserve considerable profits upon every branch.



    If we suppose the inhabitants to have increased in numbers,



wealth, and taste for superfluity, since the last voyage, demand



will be found rather on the rising hand. Upon the arrival of the



merchants in competition with the former, both will offer to



sale; but if both stand to the same prices, it is very natural to



suppose, that the former dealers will obtain a preference; as,



cateris paribus, it is always an advantage to know and to be



known. The last comers, therefore, have no other way left to



counterbalance this advantage, but to lower their prices.



    This is a new phaenomenon: here the fall of prices is not



voluntary as formerly; not consented to from expediency; not



owing to a failure of demand, but to the influence of a new



principle of commerce, to wit, a double competition. This I shall



now examine with all the care I am capable of.











Chap. VII







Of double Competition







    When competition is much stronger on one side of the contract



than on the other, I call it simple, and then it is a term



synonimous with what I have called compound demand. This is the



species of competition which is implied in the term high demand,



or when it is said, that demand raises prices.



    Double competition is, when, in a certain degree, it takes



place on both sides of the contract at once, or vibrates



alternately from one to the other. This is what restrains prices



to the adequate value of the merchandize.



    I frankly confess I feel a great want of language to express



my ideas, and it is for this reason I employ so many examples,



the better to communicate certain combinations of them, which



otherwise would be inexplicable.



    The great difficulty is to distinguish clearly between the



principles of demand, and those of competition; here then follows



the principal differences between the two, relatively to the



effects they severely produce in the mercantile contract of



buying and selling, which I here express shortly by the word



contract.



    Simple demand is what brings the quantity of a commodity to



market. Many demand, who do not buy; many offer, who do not sell.



This demand is called great or small; it is said to increase, to



augment to swell; and is expressed by these and other synonimous



terms, which mark an augmentation or diminution of quantity. In



this species, two people never demand the same thing, but a part



of the same thing, or things quite alike.



    Compound demand is the principle which raises prices, and



never can make them sink; because in this case more than one



demands the very same thing. It is solely applicable to the



buyers, in relation to the price they offer. This demand is



called high or low, and is said to rise, to fall, to mount, to



sink, and is expressed by these and other synonimous terms.



    Simple competition, when between buyers, is the same as



compound or high demand, but differs from it so far, as this may



equally take place among sellers, which compound demand cannot,



and then it works a contrary effect: it makes prices sink, and is



synonimous with low demand: it is this competition which



overturns the balance of work and demand; of which afterwards.



    Double competition is what is understood to take place in



almost every operation of trade; it is this which prevents the



excessive rise of prices; it is this which prevents their



excessive fall. While double competition prevails, the balance is



perfect, trade and industry flourish.



    The capital distinction, therefore, between the terms demand



and competition is, that demand is constantly relative to the



buyers, and when money is not the price, as in barter, then it is



relative to that side upon which the greatest competition is



found.



    We therefore say, with regard to prices, demand is high or



low. With regard to the quantity of merchandize, demand is great



or small. With regard to competition, it is always called great



or small, strong or weak.



    Competition, I have said, is, with equal propriety,



applicable to both parties in the contract. A competition among



buyers is a proper expression: a competition among sellers, who



have the merchandize, is full as easily understood, though it be



not quite so striking, for reasons which an example will make



plain.



    You come to a fair where you find a great variety of every



kind of merchandize, in the possession of different merchants.



These, by offering their goods to sale, constitute a tacit



competition; every one of them wishes to sell in preference to



another, and at the same time with the best advantage to himself.



    The buyers begin, by cheapning at every shop. The first price



asked marks the covetousness of the seller; the first price



offered, that of the buyer. From this operation, I say,



competition begins to work its effects on both sides, and so



becomes double. The principles which influence this operation are



now to be deduced.



    It is impossible to suppose the same degree of eagerness,



either to buy or to sell, among several merchants; because the



degree of eagerness I take to be exactly in proportion to their



view of profit; and as this must necessarily be influenced and



regulated by different circumstances, that buyer, who has the



best prospect of selling again with profit, obliges him, whose



prospect is not so good, to content himself with less; and that



seller, who has bought to the best advantage, obliges him, who



has paid dearer for the merchandize, to moderate his desire of



gain.



    It is from these principles, that competition among buyers



and sellers must take place. This is what confines the



fluctuation of prices within limits which are compatible with the



reasonable profits of both buyers and sellers; for, as has been



said, in treating of trade, we must constantly suppose the whole



operation of buying and selling to be performed by merchants; the



buyer cannot be supposed to give so high a price as that which he



expects to receive, when he distributes to the consumers, nor can



the seller be supposed to accept of one so low as that which he



paid to the manufacturer. This competition is properly called



double, because of the difficulty to determine upon which side it



stands; the same merchant may have it in his favour upon certain



articles, and against him upon others; it is continually in



vibration, and the arrival of every post may less or more pull



down the heavy scale.



    In every transaction between merchants, the profit resulting



from the sale must be exactly distinguished from the value of the



merchandize. The first may vary, the last never can. It is this



profit alone which can be influenced by competition; and it is



for this reason we find such uniformity every where in the prices



of goods of the same quality.



    The competition between sellers does not appear so striking,



as that between buyers; because he who offers to sale, appears



passive only in the first operation; whereas the buyers present



themselves one after another; they make a demand, and when the



merchandize is refused to one at a certain price, a second either



offers more, or does not offer at all: but so soon as another



seller finds his account in accepting the price the first had



refused, then the first enters into competition, provided his



profits will admit his lowering the first price; and thus



competition takes place among the sellers, until the profits upon



their trade prevent prices from falling lower.



    In all markets, I have said, this competition is varying,



though insensibly, on many occasions; but in others, the



vibrations are very perceptible. Sometimes it is found strongest



on the side of the buyers, and in proportion as this grows, the



competition between the sellers diminishes. When the competition



between the former has raised prices to a certain standard, it



comes to a stop; then the competition changes sides, and takes



place among the sellers, eager to profit of the highest price.



This makes prices fall, and according as they fall, the



competition among the buyers diminishes. They still wait for the



lowest period. At last it comes; and then perhaps some new



circumstance, by giving the balance a kick, disappoints their



hopes. If therefore it ever happens, that there is but one



interest upon one side of the contract, as in the example in the



former chapter, where we supposed the sellers united, you



perceive, that the rise of the price, occasioned by the



competition of the buyers, and even its coming to a stop, could



not possibly have the effect of producing any competition on the



other side; and therefore, if prices come afterwards to sink, the



fall must have proceeded from the prudential considerations of



adapting the price to the faculties of those, who, from the



height of it, had withdrawn their demand.



    From these principles of competition, the forestalling of



markets is made a crime, because it diminishes the competition



which ought to take place between different people, who have the



same merchandize to offer to sale. The forestaller buys all up,



with an intention to sell with more profit, as he has by that



means taken other competitors out of the way, and appears with a



single interest on one side of the contract, in the face of many



competitors on the other. This person is punished by the state,



because he has prevented the price of the merchandize from



becoming justly proportioned to the real value; he has robbed the



public, and enriched himself; and in the punishment, he makes



restitution. Here occur two questions to be resolved, for the



sake of illustration.



    Can competition among buyers possibly take place, when the



provision made is more than sufficient to supply the quantity



demanded? On the other hand, can competition take place among the



sellers, when the quantity demanded exceeds the total provision



made for it?



    I think it may in both cases; because in the one and the



other, there is a competition implied on one side of the



contract, and the very nature of this competition implies a



possibility of its coming on the other, provided separate



interests be found upon both sides. But, to be more particular:



    First, Experience shews, that however justly the proportion



between the demand and the supply may be determined in fact, it



is still next to impossible to discover it exactly, and therefore



buyers can only regulate the prices they offer, by what they may



reasonably expect to sell for again. The sellers, on the other



hand, can only regulate the prices they expect, by what the



merchandize has cost them when brought to market. We have already



shewn, how, under such circumstances, the several interests of



individuals affect each other, and make the balance vibrate.



    Secondly, The proportion between the supply and the demand is



seldom other than relative among merchants, who are supposed to



buy and sell, not from necessity, but from a view to profit. What



I mean by relative is, that their demand is great or small,



according to prices: there may be a great demand for grain at 35



shillings per quarter, and no demand at all for it at 40



shillings, I say, among merchants.



    Here I must observe, how essential it is, to attend to the



smallest circumstance in matters of this kind. The circumstance I



here have in my eye, is the difference I find in the effect of



competition, when it takes place purely among merchants on both



sides of the contract, and when it happens, that either the



consumers mingle themselves with the merchant-buyers, or the



manufacturers, that is, the furnishers mingle themselves with the



merchant-sellers. This combination I shall illustrate, by the



solution of another question, and then conclude my chapter with a



few reflections upon the whole.



    Can there be no case formed, where the competition upon one



side may subsist, without a possibility of its taking place on



the other, although there should be separate interests upon both?



    I answer. The case is hardly supposable among merchants who



buy and sell with a view to profit; but it is absolutely



supposable, and that is all, when the direct consumers are the



buyers; when the circumstances of one of the parties is perfectly



known; and when the competition is so strong upon one side, as to



prevent a possibility of its becoming double, before the whole



provision is sold off, or the demand satisfied. Let me have



recourse to examples.



    Grain arriving in a small quantity, at a port where the



inhabitants are starving, produces so great a competition among



the consumers, who are the buyers, that their necessity becomes



evident; all the grain is generally bought up before prices can



rise so high as to come to a stop; because nothing but want of



money, that is, an impossibility of complying with the prices



demanded by the merchants, can restrain them: but if you suppose,



even here, that prices come naturally to a stop; or that, after



some time, they fall lower, from prudential considerations, then



there is a possibility of a competition taking place among the



sellers, from the principles above deduced. If, on the contrary,



the stop is not natural, but occasioned by the interposition of



the magistrate, from humanity, or the like, there will be no



competition, because then the principles of commerce are



suspended; the sellers are restrained on one side, and they



restrain the buyers on the other. Or rather, indeed, it is the



magistrate, or compassion, who in a manner fixes the price, and



performs the office of both buyer and seller.



    A better example still may be found, in a competition among



sellers; where it may be so strong, as to render a commodity in a



manner of no value at all, as in the case of an uncommon and



unexpected draught of fish, in a place of small consumption, when



no preparations have been made for salting them. There can then



be no competition among the buyers; because the market cannot



last, and they find themselves entirely masters, to give what



price they please, being sure the sellers must accept of it, or



lose their merchandize. In the first example, humanity commonly



stops the activity of the principle of competition; in the other



it is stopt by a certain degree of fair-dealing, which forbids



the accepting of a merchandize for nothing.



    In proportion therefore as the rising of prices can stop



demand, or the sinking of prices can increase it, in the same



proportion will competition prevent either the rise or the fall



from being carried beyond a certain length: and if such a case



can be put, where the rising of prices cannot stop demand, nor



the lowering of prices augment it, in such cases double



competition does not subsist; because these circumstances unite



the most separate interests of buyers and sellers in the



mercantile contract, and when upon one side there is no separate



interest, there can then be no competition.



    From what has been said, we may form a judgment of the



various degrees of competition. A book not worth a shilling, a



fish of a few pounds weight, are often sold for considerable



sums. The buyers here are not merchants. When an ambassador



leaves a court in a hurry, his effects are sold for less than the



half of their value: he is no merchant, and his situation is



known. When, at a public market, there are found consumers, who



buy their provision, or manufacturers, who dispose of their goods



for present subsistence; the merchants, who are respectively upon



the opposite side of the contract to these, profit of their



competition; and those who are respectively upon the same side



with them, stand by with patience, until they have finished their



business. Then matters come to be carried on between merchant and



merchant, and then, I allow, that profits may rise and fall, in



the proportion of quantity to demand; that is to say, if the



provision is less than the demand, the competition among the



demanders, or the rise of the price, will be in the compound



proportion of the falling short of the commodity, and of the



prospect of selling again with profit. It is this proportion



which regulates the competition, and keeps it within bounds. It



can affect the profits only upon the transaction; the intrinsic



value of the commodity stands immoveable: nothing is ever sold



below the real value; nothing is ever bought for more than it may



probably bring. I mean in general. Whereas so soon as consumers



and needy manufacturers mingle in the operation, all proportion



is lost. The competition between them is too strong for the



merchants; the balance vibrates by jerks. In such markets



merchants seldom appear: the principal objects there, are the



fruits and productions of the earth, and articles of the first



necessity for life, not manufactures strictly so called. A poor



fellow often sells, to purchase bread to eat; not to pay what he



did eat, while he was employed in the work he disposes of. The



consumer often measures the value of what he is about to



purchase, by the weight of his purse, and his desire to consume.



    As these distinctions cannot be conveyed in the terms by



which we are obliged to express them, and as they must frequently



be implied, in treating of matters relating to trade and



industry, I thought the best way was, to clear up my own ideas



concerning them, and to lay them in order before my reader,



before I entered farther into my subject.



    All difference of opinion upon matters of this nature



proceeds, as I believe, from our language being inadequate to



express our ideas; from our inattention in using terms, which



appear synonimous, and are not so; and from our natural



propensity to include, under general rules, things which upon



some occasions, common reason requires to be set asunder.











Chap. VIII







Of what is called Expence, Profit, and Loss







    As we have been employed in explaining of terms, it will not



be amiss to say a word concerning those which stand in the title



of this chapter.



    The term expence, when simply expressed, without any



particular relation, is always understood to be relative to



money. This kind I distinguish under the three heads, of private,



public, and national.



    1. Private expence is, what a private person, or private



society, lays out, either to provide articles of consumption, or



something more permanent, which may be conducive to their ease,



convenience, or advantage. Thus we say, a large domestic expence,



relatively to one who spends a great income. We say, a merchant



has been at great expence for magazines, for living, for clerks,



&c. but never that he has been at any in buying goods. In the



same way a manufacturer may expend for building, machines,



horses, and carriages, but never for the matter he manufactures.



When a thing is bought, in order to be sold again, the sum



employed is called money advanced; when it is bought not to be



sold, it may be said to be expended.



    2. Public expence is, the employment of that money, which has



been contributed by individuals, for the current service of the



state. The contribution, or gathering it together, represents the



effects of many articles of private expence; the laying it out



when collected, is public expence.



    3. National expence, is what is expended out of the country:



this is what diminishes national wealth. The principal



distinction to be here attended to, is between public expence, or



the laying out of public money, and national expence, which is



the alienating the nation's wealth in favour of strangers. Thus



the greatest public expence imaginable, may be no national



expence; because the money may remain at home. On the other hand,



the smallest public, or even private expence, may be a national



expence, because the money may go abroad.



    Profit, and loss, I divide into positive, relative, and



compound. Positive profit, implies no loss to any body; it



results from an augmentation of labour, industry, or ingenuity,



and has the effect of swelling or augmenting the public good.



    Positive loss, implies no profit to any body; it is what



results from the cessation of the former, or of the effects



resulting from it, and may be said to diminish the public good.



    Relative profit, is what implies a loss to somebody, it marks



a vibration of the balance of wealth between parties, but implies



no addition to the general stock.



    Relative loss, is what, on the contrary, implies a profit to



somebody; it also marks a vibration of the balance, but takes



nothing from the general stock.



    The compound is easily understood; it is that species of



profit and loss which is partly relative, and partly positive. I



call it compound, because both kinds may subsist inseparably in



the same transaction.







Chap. IX







The general Consequences resulting to a trading Nation, upon the



opening of an active foreign Commerce







    Did I not intend to give myself to very general topics in



this chapter I might in a manner exhaust the whole subject of



modern oeconomy under this title; for I apprehend that the whole



system of modern politics is founded upon the basis of an active



foreign trade.



    A nation which remains passive in her commerce, is at the



mercy of those who are active, and must be greatly favoured,



indeed, by natural advantages, or by a constant flux of gold and



silver from her mines, to be able to support a correspondence,



not entirely hurtful to the augmentation of her wealth.



    These things shall be more enlarged upon as we go along: the



point in hand, is to consider the consequences of this trade,



relatively to those who are actors in the operation.



    When I look upon the wide field which here opens to my view,



I am perplexed with too great a variety of objects. In one part,



I see a decent and comely beginning of industry, wealth flowing



gently in, to recompence ingenuity; numbers augmenting, and every



one becoming daily more useful to another; agriculture



proportionally extending itself; no violent revolutions; no



exorbitant profits; no insolence among the rich; no excessive



misery among the poor; multitudes employed in producing; great



oeconomy upon consumption; and all the instruments of luxury,



daily produced by the hands of the diligent, going out of the



country for the service of strangers; not remaining at home for



the gratification of sensuality. At last augmentations come



insensibly to a stop. Then these rivers of wealth, which were in



brisk circulation through the whole world, and which returned to



this trading nation as blood returns to the heart, to be thrown



out again only by new pulsations, begin to be obstructed in their



course; and flowing abroad more slowly than before, come to form



stagnations at home. These, impatient of restraint, soon burst



out into domestic circulation. Upon this cities swell in



magnificence of buildings; the face of the country is adorned



with palaces, and becomes covered with groves; luxury shines



triumphant in every part; inequality becomes more striking to the



eye; and want and misery appear more deformed, from the contrast;



even fortune grows more whimsical in her inconstancy. the beggar



of the other day, now rides in his coach; and he who was born in



a bed of state, is seen to die in an alms-house. Such are the



effects of great domestic circulation.



    The statesman looks about with amazement; he, who was wont to



consider himself as the first man in the society in every



respect, perceives himself eclipsed by the lustre of private



wealth, which avoids his grasp when he attempts to seize it. This



makes his government more complex and more difficult to be



carried on; he must now avail himself of art and address as well



as of power and authority. By the help of cajoling and intrigues,



he gets a little into debt; this lays a foundation for public



credit, which, growing by degrees, and in its progress assuming



many new forms, becomes, from the most tender beginnings, a most



formidable monster, striking terror into those who cherished it



in its infancy. Upon this, as upon a triumphant war-horse, the



statesman gets a-stride, he then appears formidable anew; his



head turns giddy; he is choaked with the dust he has raised; and



at the moment he is ready to fall, he finds, to his utter



astonishment and surprise, a strong monied interest, of his own



creating, which, instead of swallowing him up as he apprehended,



flies to his support. Through this he gets the better of all



opposition, he establishes taxes, multiplies them, mortgages his



fund of subsistence, either becomes a bankrupt, and rises again



from his ashes; or if he be less audacious, he stands trembling



and tottering for a while on the brink of the political



precipice. From one or the other of these perilous situations, he



begins to discover an endless path which, after a multitude of



windings, still returns into itself, and continues an equal



course through this vast labyrinth: but of this last part, more



in the fourth book.



    It is now full time to leave off rhapsody, and return to



reasoning and cool inquiry, concerning the more immediate and



more general effects and revolutions produced by the opening of a



foreign trade in a nation of industry.



    The first and most sensible alteration will be an increase of



demand for manufacturers, because by supplying the wants of



strangers, the number of consumers will now be considerably



augmented. What again will follow upon this, must depend upon



circumstances.



    If this revolution in the state of demand should prove too



violent, the consequence of it will be to raise demand; if it



should prove gradual, it will increase it. I hope this



distinction is well understood, and that the consequence appears



just: for, if the supply do not increase in proportion to the



demand, a competition will ensue among the demanders; which is



the common effect of such sudden revolutions. If, on the other



hand, a gentle increase of demand should be accompanied with a



proportional supply, the whole industrious society will grow in



vigour, and in wholesome stature, without being sensible of any



great advantage or inconvenience; the change of their



circumstances will even be imperceptible.



    The immediate effects of the violent revolution will, in this



example, be flattering to some, and disagreeable to others.



Wealth will be found daily to augment, from the rising of prices,



in many branches of industry. This will encourage the industrious



classes, and the idle consumers at home will complain. I have



already dwelt abundantly long upon the effects resulting from



this to the lower classes of the people, in providing them with a



certain means of subsistence. Let me now examine in what respect



the higher classes will be likewise made to feel the good effects



of this general change, although at first they may suffer a



temporary inconvenience from it.



    Farmers, as has been observed, will have a greater difficulty



in finding servants, who, instead of labouring the ground, will



choose to turn themselves to manufactures. This we have



considered in the light of purging the lands of superfluous



mouths; but every consequence in this great chain of politics



draws other consequences after it, and as they follow one



another, things put on different faces, which affect classes



differently. The purging of the land is but one of the first;



here follows another.



    The desertion of the hands employed in a trifling agriculture



will at first, no doubt, embarrass the farmers, and raise the



price of wages; but in a little time every thing becomes balanced



in a trading nation, because here every industrious man must



advance prosperity, in spite of all combinations of



circumstances.



    In the case before us, the relative profits upon farming must



soon become greater than formerly, because of the additional



expence of servants which must affect the whole class of farmers;



consequently, this additional expence, instead of turning out to



be a loss to either landlord or farmer, will, after some little



time, turn out to the advantage of both: because the produce of



the ground, being indispensably necessary to every body, must in



every article increase in its value, in proportion to the expence



of raising it. Thus in a short time accounts will be nearly



balanced on all hands; that is to say, the same proportion of



wealth will, cateris paribus, continue the same among the



industrious. I say among the industrious; for those who are



either idle, or negligent, will be great losers.



    A proprietor of land, inattentive to the causes of his



farmer's additional expence, may very imprudently suffer his



rents to fall, instead of assisting him on a proper occasion, in



order to make them afterwards rise the higher.



    Those who live upon a determinate income in money, and who



are nowise employed in traffic, nor in any scheme of industry,



will, by the augmentation of prices, be found in worse



circumstances than before.



    In a trading nation every man must turn his talents to



account, or he will undoubtedly be left behind in this universal



emulation, in which the most industrious, the most ingenious, and



the most frugal will constantly carry off the prize.



    This consideration ought to be a spur to every body. The



richest men in a trading nation have no security against poverty,



I mean proportional poverty; for though they diminish nothing of



their income, yet by not increasing it in proportion to others,



they lose their rank in wealth, and from the first class in which



they stood, they will slide insensibly down to a lower.



    This is one consequence of an additional beneficial trade,



that it raises demand and increases wealth; but if we suppose no



proportional augmentation of supply, it will prove at best but an



airy dream which lasts for a moment, and when the gilded scene is



passed away, numberless are the inconveniences which are seen to



follow.



    I shall now point out the natural consequences of this



augmentation of wealth drawn from foreign nations, when, in



proportion to the augmentation of mouths, and of the demand for



the produce of industry, the statesman remains inattentive to



increase the supply both of food and manufactures.



    In such a situation profits will daily swell, and every



scheme for reducing them within the bounds of moderation, will be



looked upon as a hurtful and unpopular measure: be it so; but let



us examine the consequences.



    We have said, that the rise of demand for manufactures



naturally increases the value of work: now I must add, that under



such circumstances, the augmentation of riches, in a country,



either not capable of improvement as to the soil, or where



precautions have not been taken for facilitating a multiplication



of inhabitants, by the importation of subsistence, will be



productive of the most calamitous consequences.



    On one side, this wealth will effectually diminish the mass



of the food before produced; and on the other, will increase the



number of useless consumers. The first of these circumstances



will raise the demand for food; and the second will diminish the



number of useful free hands, and consequently raise the price of



manufactures: here are shortly the outlines of this progress.



    The more rich and luxurious a people are, the more delicate



they become in their manner of living; if they fed on bread



formerly, they will now feed on meat; if they fed on meat, they



will now feed on fowl. The same ground which feeds a hundred with



bread, and a proportional quantity of animal food, will not



maintain an equal number of delicate livers. Food must then



become more scarce; demand for it rises; the rich are always the



strongest in the market; they consume the food, and the poor are



forced to starve. Here the wide door to modern distress opens, to



wit, a hurtful competition for subsistence. Farther, when a



people become rich, they think less of oeconomy; a number of



useless servants are hired, to become an additional dead weight



on consumption; and when their starving countrymen cannot supply



the extravagance of the rich so cheaply as other nations, they



either import instruments of foreign luxury, or seek to enjoy



them out of their own country, and thereby make restitution of



their gains.



    Is it not therefore evident, that if, before things come to



this pass, additional subsistence be not provided by one method



or other, the number of inhabitants must diminish; although



riches may daily increase by a balance of additional matter,



supposed to be brought into the country in consequence of the



hitherto beneficial foreign trade. This is not all. I say



farther, that the beneficial trade will last for a time only. For



the infallible consequence of the rise of prices at home will be,



that those nations which at first consumed your manufactures,



perceiving the gradual increase of their price, will begin to



work for themselves; or finding out your rivals who can supply



them cheaper, will open their doors to them. These again,



perceiving the great advantages gained by your traders, will



begin to supply the market; and since every thing must be cheaper



in countries where we do not suppose the concurrence of all the



circumstances mentioned above, these nations will supplant you,



and be enriched in their turn.



    Here comes a new revolution. Trade is come to a stop: what



then becomes of all the hands which were formerly employed in



supplying the foreign demands?



    Were revolutions as sudden as we are obliged to represent



them, all would go to wreck; in proportion as they happen by



quicker or slower degrees, the inconveniences are greater or



smaller.



    Prices, we have said, are made to rise by competition. If the



competition of the strangers was what raised them, the distress



upon the manufacturers will be in proportion to the suddenness of



their deserting the market. If the competition was divided



between the strangers and the home consumers, the inconveniences



which ensue will be less; because the desertion of the strangers



will be in some measure made up by an increase of home



consumption which will follow upon the fall of prices. And if, in



the third case, the natives have been so imprudent as not only to



support a competition with the strangers, and thereby disgust



them from coming any more to market, but even to continue the



competition between themselves, the whole loss sustained by the



revolution will be national. Wealth will cease to augment, but



the inconveniences, instead of being felt by the manufacturers,



will affect the state only; these manufacturers will continue in



affluence, extolling the generosity of their countrymen, and



despising the poverty of the strangers who had enriched them.



    Domestic luxury will here prove an expedient for preserving



from ruin the industrious part of a people, who, in subsisting



themselves, had enriched their country. No change will follow in



their condition; they will go on with a painful assiduity to



labour, and if the consequences of it become now hurtful to one



part of the state, they must, at least, be allowed to be



essentially necessary for the support of the other.



    But that luxury is no necessary concomitant of foreign trade,



in a nation where the true principles of it are understood, will



appear very plain, from a contrast I am now going to point out,



in the example of a modern state, renowned for its commerce and



frugality. The country I mean, is Holland.



    A set of industrious and frugal people were assembled in a



country, by nature subject to many inconveniences, the removing



of which necessarily employed abundance of hands. Their situation



upon the continent, the power of their former masters, and the



ambition of their neighbours, obliged them to keep great bodies



of troops. These troops added to the numbers of the community,



without either enriching the state by their labour exported, or



producing food for themselves or countrymen.



    The scheme of a commonwealth was calculated to draw together



the industrious; but it has been still more useful in subsisting



them: the republican form of government, being there greatly



subdivided, vests authority sufficient in every part of it, to



make suitable provision for their own subsistence; and the tye



which unites them, regards matters of public concern only. Had



the whole been governed by one sovereign, or by one council, this



important matter never could have been effectuated.



    I imagine it would be impossible for the most able minister



that ever lived, to provide nourishment for a country so extended



as France, or even as England, supposing these as fully peopled



as Holland is: even although it should be admitted that a



sufficient quantity of food might be found in other countries for



their subsistence. The enterprise would be too great, abuses



would multiply; the consequence would be, that the inhabitants



would die for want. But in Holland the case is different, every



little town takes care of its own inhabitants; and this care,



being the object of application and profit to so many persons, is



accomplished with success.



    When once it is laid down as a maxim in a country, that food



must of necessity be got from abroad, in order to feed the



inhabitants at home, the corn trade becomes considerable, and at



the same time certain, regular, and permanent. This was the case



in Holland: as the inhabitants were industrious, the necessary



consequence has been, a very extraordinary multiplication; and at



the same time such an abundance of grain, that instead of being



in want themselves, they often supply their neighbours. There are



many examples of England's being supplied with grain from thence,



and, which is still more extraordinary, from the re-exportation



of the very produce of its own fruitful soil.



    It is therefore evident, that the only way to support



industry, is to provide a supply of subsistence, constantly



proportional to the demand that may be made for it. This is a



precaution indispensably necessary for preventing hurtful



competition. This is the particular care of the Dutch: so long as



it can be effectual, their state can fear no decline; but



whenever they come to be distressed in the markets, upon which



they depend for subsistence, they will sink into ruin. It is by



mere dint of frugality, cheap and parsimonious living, that the



navigation of this industrious people is supported. Constant



employment, and an accumulation of almost imperceptible gains,



fills their coffers with wealth, in spite of the large outgoings



to which their own proper nourishment yearly forces them. The



large profits upon industry in other countries, which are no



proof of the generosity of the consumers, but a fatal effect of



the unsteady price of subsistence, is far from dazzling their



eyes. They seldom are found in the list of competitors at any



foreign port; if they have their cargo to make, they wait with



pleasure in their own vessels, consuming their own provisions,



and at last accept of what others have left. It may be said, that



many other circumstances concur in favour of the Dutch, besides



the article of subsistence. I shall not dispute this matter; but



only remind my reader of what was said in the first book; to wit,



that if a computation be made of the hands employed in providing



subsistence, and of those who are severally taken up in supplying



every other want, their numbers will be found nearly to balance



one another in the most luxurious countries. From this I



conclude, that the article of food, among the lower classes, must



bear a very high proportion to all the other articles of their



consumption; and therefore a diminution upon the price of



subsistence, it at all times, must be of and still more an



uniformity in the value of infinite consequence to manufacturers,



who are obliged to buy it. From this consideration, let us judge



of the consequence of such sudden augmentations upon the price of



grain, as are familiar to us; 30 or 40 per cent seems nothing.



Now this augmentation operates upon one-half of the whole expence



of a labouring man: let any one who lives in tolerable affluence



make the application of this to himself, and examine how he would



manage his affairs if, by accidents of rains or winds, one-half



of his expences were to rise 30 per cent without a possibility of



restraining them; for this is unfortunately the case with all the



lower classes. From whence I conclude, that the keeping food



cheap, and still more the preserving it at all times at an equal



standard, is the fountain of the wealth of Holland; and that any



hurtful competition in this article must beget a disorder which



will affect the whole of the manufacturers of a state.







Chap. X







Of the Balance of Work and Demand







    It is quite impossible to go methodically through the subject



of political oeconomy, without being led into anticipations. We



have frequently mentioned this balance of work and demand, and



shewed how important a matter it is for a statesman to attend to



it. The thing, therefore, in general is well understood; and all



that remains to be done, is to render our ideas more determinate



concerning it, and more adequate, if possible, to the principles



we have been laying down.



    We have treated fully of demand, and likewise of competition.



We have observed how different circumstances influence these



terms, so as to make them represent ideas entirely different; and



we have said that double competition supports the balance we are



now to speak of, and that single competition overturns it.



    The word demand in this chapter is taken in the most simple



acceptation; and when we say that the balance between work and



demand is to be sustained in equilibrio, as far as possible, we



mean that the quantity supplied should be in proportion to the



quantity demanded, that is, wanted. While the balance stands



justly poised, prices are found in the adequate proportion of the



real expence of making the goods, with a small addition for



profit to the manufacturer and merchant.



    I have, in the fourth chapter, observed how necessary a thing



it is to distinguish the two constituent parts of every price;



the value, and the profit. Let the number of persons be ever so



great, who, upon the sale of a piece of goods, share in the



profits; it is still essential, in such enquiries as these, to



suppose them distinctly separate from the real value of the



commodity. and the best way possible to discover exactly the



proportion between the one and the other, is by a scrupulous



watchfulness over the balance we are now treating of, as we shall



presently see.



    The value and profits, combined in the price of a manufacture



produced by one man, are easily distinguished by means of the



analysis we have laid down in the fourth chapter. As long as any



market is fully supplied with this sort of work, and no more;



those who are employed in it live by their trade, and gain no



unreasonable profit: because there is then no violent competition



upon one side only, neither between the workmen, nor between



those who buy from them, and the balance gently vibrates under



the influence of a double competition. This is the representation



of a perfect balance.



    This balance is overturned in four different ways.



    Either the demand diminishes, and the work remains the same:



    Or the work diminishes, and the demand remains:



    Or the demand increases, and the work remains:



    Or the work increases, and the demand remains.



    Now each of these four relations between demand and work may,



or may not, produce a competition upon one side of the contract



only.



    This must be explained.



    If demand diminishes, and work remains the same, which is the



first case, either those who furnish the work will enter into



competition, in which case they will hurt each other, and prices



will fall below the reasonable standard of the even balance; or



they will not enter into competition, and then prices continuing



as formerly, the whole demand will be supplied, and the remainder



of the work will lie upon hand.



    This is a symptom of decaying trade.



    Let us now, on the other hand, suppose demand to increase,



and work to remain as before.



    This example points out no diminution on either side, as was



the case before, but an augmentation upon one; and is either a



symptom of growing luxury at home, or of an increase in foreign



trade.



    Here the same alternation of circumstances occurs. The



demanders will either enter into competition and raise the price



of work, or they will enter into no competition; but being



determined not to exceed the ordinary standard of the perfect



balance, will defer making their provision till another time, or



supply themselves in another market; that is to say, the new



demand will cease as soon as it is made, for want of a supply.



    Whenever, therefore, this perfect balance of work and demand



is overturned by the force of a simple competition, or by one of



the scale preponderating, one of two things must happen; either a



part of the demand is not answered, or a part of the goods is not



sold.



    These are the immediate effects of the overturning of the



balance.



    Let me next point out the object of the statesman's care,



relatively to such effects, and shew the consequences of their



being neglected.



    We may now simplify our ideas, and instead of the former,



make use of other expressions which may convey them.



    Let us therefore say, that the fall or rise upon either side



of the balance, is positive, or relative. Positive, when the side



we talk of really augments beyond, or diminishes below the usual



standard. Relative, when there is no alteration upon the side we



speak of, and that the subversion of the balance is owing to an



alteration on the other side.



    As for example:



    Instead of saying demand diminishes, and work remains the



same, let us say, demand diminishes positively, or work increases



relatively; according as the subject may lead us to speak either



of the one or of the other. This being premised.



    If the scale of work shall preponderate positively, it should



be inquired, whether the quantity furnished has really swelled,



in all respects, beyond the proportion of the consumption, (in



which case the statesman should diminish the number of hands, by



throwing a part of them into a new channel) or whether the



imprudence only of the workmen has made them produce their work



unseasonably; in which case proper information and even



assistance should be given them, to prevent merchants from taking



advantage of their want of experience: but these last precautions



are necessary in the infancy of industry only.



    If a statesman should be negligent on this occasion; if he



should allow natural consequences to follow upon one another,



just as circumstances shall determine; then it may happen, that



workmen will keep upon hand that part of their goods which



exceeds the demand, until necessity forces them to enter into



competition with one another, and sell for what they can get. Now



this competition is hurtful, because it is all on one side, and



because we have supposed the prepondering of the scale of work to



be an overturning of a perfect balance, which can by no means be



set right, consistently with a scheme of thriving, but by the



scale of demand becoming heavier, and re-establishing a double



competition. Were this to happen before the workmen come to sell



in competition, then the balance would again be even, after what



I call a short vibration, which is no subversion; but when the



scale of work remains too long in the same position, and



occasions a strong, hurtful, and lasting competition, upon one



side only, then, I say, the balance is overturned; because this



diminishes the reasonable profits, or perhaps, indeed, obliges



the workmen to sell below prime cost. The effect of this is, that



the workmen fall into distress, and that industry suffers a



discouragement; and this effect is certain.



    But it may be asked, Whether, by this fall of prices, demand



will not be increased? That is to say, will not the whole of the



goods be sold off?



    I answer, That this may, or may not, be the effect of the



fall, according to circumstances: it is a contingent consequence



of the simple, but not the certain effect of the double



competition: but the distress of the workmen is a certain and



unavoidable consequence of the simple competition.



    But supposing this contingent consequence to happen, will it



not set the balance even, by increasing the demand? I answer, the



balance is then made even by a violent shock given to industry,



but it is not set even from any principle which can support it,



or make it flourish. Here is the criterion of a perfect balance:



A positive moderate profit must balance a positive moderate



profit; the balance must vibrate, and no loss must befound on



either side. In the example before us, the balance stands even,



it is true; the work and the demand are equally poised as to



quantity; but it is a relative profit, which hangs in the scale,



opposite to a relative loss. I wish this may be well understood;



farther illustrations will make it clear.



    Next, let me suppose the scale of demand to preponderate



positively. In this case, the statesman should be still more upon



his guard, to provide a proportional supply; because the danger



here may at first put on a shew of profit, and deceive him.



    The consequences of this subversion of the balance are



either,



    First, That a competition will take place among the demanders



only, which will raise profits. Now if, after a short vibration,



the supply comes to be increased by the statesman's care, no harm



will ensue; competition will change sides, and profits will come



down again to the perfect standard. But if the scale of demand



remains preponderating, and so keeps profits high, the



consequence will be, that, in a little time, not only the



immediate seller of the goods, but also every one who has



contributed to the manufacture, will insist upon sharing these



new profits. Now the evil is not, that every one should share, or



that the profits should swell, as long as they are supported by



demand, and as long as they can truly be considered as



precarious; but the mischief is, that, in consequence of this



wide repartition, and by such profits subsisting for a long time,



they insensibly become consolidated, or, as it were, transformed



into the intrinsic value of the goods. This, I say, is brought



about by time; because the habitual extraordinary gains of every



one employed induce the more luxurious among them to change their



way of life insensibly, and fall into the habit of making greater



consumptions, and engage the more slothful to remain idle, till



they are exhausted. When therefore it happens, that large profits



have been made for a considerable time, and that they have had



the effect of forming a taste for a more expensive way of living



among the industrious, it will not be the cessation of the



demand, nor the swelling of the supply, which will engage them to



part with their gains. Nothing will produce this effect but sharp



necessity; and the bringing down of their profits, and the



throwing the workmen into distress, are then simultaneous; which



proves the truth of what I have said, that these profits become,



by long habit, virtually consolidated with the real value of the



merchandize. These are the consequences of a neglected simple



competition, which raises the profits upon industry, and keeps



the balance overturned for a considerable time.



    Secondly, Let me examine the consequences of this overturn in



the actual preponderancy of demand, when it does not occasion a



competition among the demanders, and consequently, when it does



not increase the profits upon industry.



    This case can only happen, when the commodity is not a matter



of great necessity, or even of great use; since the desire of



procuring it is not sufficient to engage the buyers to raise



their price; unless, indeed, this difference should proceed from



the ease of providing the same, in other markets, as cheap as



formerly. This last is a dangerous circumstance, and loudly calls



for the attention of the statesman. He must prevent the desertion



of the market, by a speedy supply for all the demand, and must



even perhaps give encouragement to manufacturers, to enable them



to diminish the prices fixed by the regular standard. This is the



situation of a nation which is in the way of losing branches of



her foreign trade; of which afterwards.



    Whatever therefore be the consequences of the actual



preponderancy of the scale of demand; that is, whether it tend to



raise profits, or to discredit the market; the statesman's care



should be directed immediately towards making the balance come



even of itself, without any shock, and that as soon as possible,



by increasing the supply. For if it be allowed to stand long in



this overturned state, natural consequences will operate a forced



restitution; that is, the rise in the price, or the call of a



foreign market, will effectually cut off a proportional part of



the demand, and leave the balance in an equilibrium,



disadvantageous to trade and industry.



    In the former case, the manufacturers were forced to starve,



by an natural restitution, when the relative profits and loss of



individuals balanced one another. Here the manufacturers are



enriched for a little time, by a rise of profits, relative to the



loss the nation sustains, by not supplying the whole demand. This



results from the competition of their customers; but so soon as



these profits become consolidated with the intrinsic value, they



will cease to have the advantage of profits, and, becoming in a



manner necessary to the existence of the goods, will cease to be



considered as advantageous. These forced restitutions then,



brought about, as we have said, by selling goods below their



value, by cutting off a part of the demand, or by sending it to



another market, resembles the operation of a carrier, who sets



his ass's burden even, by laying a stone upon the lightest end of



it. He however loses none of his merchandise; but the absurdity



of the statesman is still greater, for he appears willingly to



open the heavy end of the load, and to throw part of his



merchandise into the highway.



    I hope, by this time, I have sufficiently shewn the



difference in effect between the simple and the double



competition; between the vibrations of this balance of work and



demand, and the overturning of it. When it vibrates in



moderation, and by short alternate risings and sinkings, then



industry and trade go on prosperously, and are in harmony with



each other; because both parties gain. The industrious man is



recompenced in proportion to his ingenuity; the intrinsic value



of goods does not vary, nor deceive the merchant; profits on both



sides fluctuate according to demand, but never get time to



consolidate with, and swell the real value, and never altogether



disappear, and starve the workman.



    This happy state cannot be supported but by the care of the



statesman; and when he is found negligent in the discharge of



this part of his duty, the consequence is, that either the spirit



of industry, which, it is supposed, has cost him much pains to



cultivate, is extinguished, or the produce of it rises to so high



a value, as to be out of the reach of a multitude of purchasers.



    The progress towards the one or the other of these extremes



is easily perceived, by attending to the successive overturnings



of the balance. When these are often repeated on the same side,



and the balance set right, by a succession of forced restitutions



only, the same scale preponderating a-new, then is the last



period soon accomplished. When, on the contrary, the overturnings



are alternate, sometimes the scale of demand overturning the



balance, sometimes the scale of work, the last period is more



distant. Trade and industry subsist longer, but they remain in a



state of perpetual convulsion. On the other hand, when the



balance gently vibrates, then work and demand, that is, trade and



industry, like agriculture and population, prove mutually



assisting to each other, in promoting their reciprocal



augmentation.



    In order therefore to preserve a trading state from decline,



the greatest care must be taken, to support a perfect balance



between the hands employed in work and the demand for their



labour. That is to say, according to former definitions, to



prevent demand from ever standing long at an immoderate height,



by providing at all times a supply, sufficient to answer the



greatest that ever can be made: or, in other words, still, in



order to accustom my readers to certain expressions, to encourage



the great, and to discourage the high demand. In this case,



competition will never be found too strong on either side of the



contract, and profits will be moderate, but sure, on both.



    If, on the contrary, there be found too many hands for the



demand, work will fall too low for workmen to be able to live;



or, if there be too few, work will rise, and manufactures will



not be exported.



    For want of this just balance, no trading state has ever been



of long duration, after arriving at a certain height of



prosperity. We perceive in history the rise, progress, grandeur,



and decline of Sydon, Tyre, Carthage, Alexandria, and Venice, not



to come nearer home. While these states were on the growing hand,



they were powerful; when once they came to their height, they



immediately found themselves labouring under their own greatness.



The reason of this appears from what has been said.



    While there is a demand for the trade of any country,



inhabitants are always on the increasing hand. This is evident



from what has been so often repeated in the first book, and



confirmed by thousands of examples. There never was any branch of



trade established in any kingdom, province, city, or even



village; but such kingdoms, province, &c. increased in



inhabitants. While this gradual increase of people is in



proportion to the growing demand for hands, the balance between



work and demand is exactly kept up: but as all augmentations must



at last come to a stop, when this happens, inconveniences must



ensue, greater or less, according to the negligence or attention



of the statesman, and the violence or suddenness of the



revolution.







Chap. XI







Why in Time this Balance is destroyed







    Let us now examine what may be the reason why, in a trading



and industrious nation, time necessarily destroys the perfect



balance between work and demand.



    We have already pointed out one general cause, to wit, the



natural stop which must at last be put to augmentations of every



kind.



    Let us now apply this to circumstances, in order to discover



in what manner natural causes operate this stop, either by



preventing the increase of work, on one side of the balance, or



the increase of demand, on the other. When once we discover how



the stop is put to augmentations, we may safely conclude, that



the continuation of the same, or similar causes, will soon



produce a diminution, and operate a decline.



    We have traced the progress of industry, and shewn how it



goes hand in hand with the augmentation of subsistence, which is



the principal allurement to labour. Now the augmentation of food



is relative to the soil, and as long as this can be brought to



produce, at an expence proportioned to the value of the returns,



agriculture, without any doubt, will go forward in every country



of industry. But so soon as the progress of agriculture demands



an additional expence, which the natural return, at the stated



prices of subsistence, will not defray, agriculture comes to a



stop, and so would numbers, did not the consequences of industry



push them forward, in spite of small difficulties. The



industrious then, I say, continue to multiply, and the



consequence is, that food becomes scarce, and that the



inhabitants enter into competition for it.



    This is no contingent consequence, it is an infallible one;



because food is an article of the first necessity, and here the



provision is supposed to fall short of demand. This raises the



profits of those who have food ready to sell; and as the balance



upon this article must remain overturned for some time, without



the interposition of the statesman, these profits will be



consolidated with the price, and give encouragement to a more



expensive improvement of the soil. I shall here interrupt the



examination of the consequences of this revolution as to



agriculture, until I have examined the effects which the rise of



the price of food produces on industry, and on the demand for it.



    This augmentation on the value of subsistence must



necessarily raise the price of all work, because we are here



speaking of an industrious people fully employed, and because



subsistence is one of the three articles which compose the



intrinsic value of their work, as has been said.



    The rise therefore, upon the price of work, not being any



augmentation of that part of the price which we call profits, as



happens to be the case when a rise in demand has produced a



competition among the buyers, cannot be brought down but by



increasing the supply of subsistence; and were a statesman to



mistake the real cause of the rise, and apply the remedy of



increasing the quantity of work, in order to bring down the



market, instead of augmenting the subsistence, he would occasion



a great disorder; he would introduce the hurtful simple



competition between people who labour for moderate profits,



mentioned in the last chapter, and would throw such a



discouragement upon their industry, as would quickly extinguish



it altogether. On the other hand, did he imprudently augment the



subsistence, by large importations, he would put an end to the



expensive improvements of the soil, and this whole enterprise



would fall to nothing. Here then is a dilemma, out of which he



can extricate himself by a right application of public money,



only.



    Such a necessary rise in the price of labour may either



affect foreign exportation, or it may not, according to



circumstances. If it does, the price of subsistence, at any rate,



must be brought down at least to those who supply the foreign



demand; if it does not affect foreign exportation, matters may be



allowed to go on; but still the remedy must be ready at hand, to



be applied the moment it becomes expedient.



    There is one necessary augmentation upon the prices of



industry, brought about by a very natural cause, viz. the



increase of population, which may imply a more expensive



improvement of the soil; that is, an extension of agriculture.



This augmentation may very probably put a stop to the



augmentation of demand for many branches of manufactures,



consequently may stop the progress of industry; and if the same



causes continue to operate in a greater degree, it may also cut



off a part of the former demand, may discredit the market, open a



door to foreign consumption, and produce the inconveniences of



poverty and distress, in proportion to the degree of negligence



in the statesman.



    I shall now give another example, of a very natural



augmentation upon the intrinsic value of work, which does not



proceed from the increase of population, but from the progress of



industry itself; which implies no internal vice in a state, but



which is the necessary consequence of the reformation of a very



great one. This augmentation must be felt less or more in every



country, in proportion as industry becomes extended.



    We have said, that the introduction of manufactures naturally



tends. to purge the lands of superfluous mouths: now this is a



very slow and gradual operation. A consequence of it was said to



be (Book I. Chap. xx.) an augmentation of the price of labour,



because those who have been purged off, must begin to gain their



whole subsistence at the expence of those who employ them.



    If therefore, in the infancy of industry, any branch of it



shall find itself assisted in a particular province, by the cheap



labour of those mouths superfluously fed by the land, examples of



which are very frequent, this advantage must diminish, in



proportion as the cause of it ceases; that is, in proportion as



industry is extended, and as the superfluous mouths are of



consequence purged off.



    This circumstance is of the last importance to be attended to



by a statesman. Perhaps it was entirely owing to it, that



industry was enabled to set up its head in this corner. How many



examples could I give, of this assistance given to manufactures



in different provinces, where I have found the value of a day's



work, of spinning, for example, not equal to half the nourishment



of the person. This is a great encouragement to the making of



cloths; and accordingly we see some infant manufactures dispute



the market with the produce of the greatest dexterity; the



distaff dispute prices with the wheel. But when these provinces



come to be purged of their superfluous mouths, spinning becomes a



trade, and the spinners must live by it. Must not then prices



naturally rise? And if these are not supported by the statesman,



or if assistance is not given to these poor manufacturers, to



enable them to increase their dexterity, in order to compensate



what they are losing in cheapness, will not their industry fail?



Will not the poor spinners be extinguished? For it is not to be



expected, that the landlord will receive them back again from a



principle of charity, after he has discovered their former



uselessness.



    A third cause of a necessary augmentation upon the intrinsic



value of goods proceeds from taxes. A statesman must be very



negligent indeed, if he does not attend to the immediate



consequences of his own proper operations. I shall not enlarge on



this at present, as it would be an necessary anticipation; but I



shall return, to resume the part of my reasoning which I broke



off abruptly.



    I have observed, how the same cause which stops the progress



of industry, gives an encouragement to agriculture: how the rise



in the price of subsistence necessarily increases the price of



work to an industrious and well-employed people: how this cuts



off a part of the demand for work, or sends it to a foreign



market.



    Now all these consequences are entirely just, and yet they



seem Contradictory to another part of my reasoning, (Book I,



Chap. xvi.) where I set forth the advantages of a prodigal



consumption of the earth's produce as advantageous to



agriculture, by increasing the price of subsistence, without



taking notice, on the other hand, of the hurt thereby done to



industry, which supports the consumption of that produce.



    The one and the other chain of consequences is equally just,



and they appear contradictory upon the supposition only, that



there is no statesman at the helm. These contradictions represent



the alternate overturn of the balance. The duty of the statesman



is, to support the double competition every where, and to permit



the gentle alternate vibrations only of the two scales.



    When the progress of industry has augmented numbers, and made



subsistence scarce, he must estimate to what height it is



expedient that the price of subsistence should rise. If he finds,



that, in order to encourage the breaking up of new lands, the



price of it must rise too high and stand high too long, to



preserve the intrinsic value of goods at the same standard as



formerly; then he must assist agriculture with his purse, in



order that exportation may not be discouraged. This will have the



effect of increasing subsistence, according to the true



proportion of the augmentation required, without raising the



price of it too high. And if this operation be the work of time,



and the demand for the augmentation be pressing, he must continue



to assist his agriculture and have subsistence imported, or



brought from abroad, during that interval. This supply he may cut



off whenever he pleases, that is, whenever it ceases to be



necessary.



    If the supply comes from a sister country, it must be so



taken, as to occasion no violent revolution when it comes to be



interrupted a-new. As for example: One province demands a supply



of grain from another, for a few years only, until their own soil



can be improved, so as to provide them sufficiently. The



statesman should encourage agriculture, no doubt, in the province



furnishing, and let the farmers know the extent of the demand,



and the time it may probably last, as near as possible; but he



must discourage the plucking up of vineyards, and even perhaps



the breaking up of great quantities of old pasture; because, upon



the ceasing of the demand, such changes upon the agriculture of



the province furnishing, may occasion a hurtful revolution.



    While this foreign supply is allowed to come in, the



statesman should be closely employed in giving such encouragement



to agriculture at home, according to the principles hereafter to



be deduced, as may nearly balance the discouragement given to it



by this newly permitted importation. If this step be neglected,



the consequence may be, that the foreign supply will go on



increasing every year, and will extinguish the agriculture



already established in the country, instead of supplying a



temporary exigency, which is within the power of the country



itself to furnish. These, I suppose, were the principles attended



to by the government of England, upon opening their ports for the



importation of provisions from Ireland.



    The principle, therefore, being to support a gentle increase



of food, inhabitants, work, and demand, the statesman must suffer



small vibrations in the balance, which, by alternate competition,



may favour both sides of the contract; but whenever the



competition stands too long upon either side, and threatens a



subversion of the balance, then, with an artful hand, he must



endeavour to load the lighter scale, and never, but in cases of



the greatest necessity, have recourse to the expedient of taking



any thing from the heavier.



    In treating of the present state of France, we observed, in



the chapter above-cited, how the vibration of the balance of



agriculture and population may carry food and numbers to their



height; but as foreign trade was not there the direct object of



inquiry, I did not care to introduce this second balance of work



and demand, for fear of perplexing my subject. I hope I have now



abundantly shewn the force of the different principles, and it



must depend upon the judgment of the statesman to combine them



together, and adapt them to his plan: a thing impossible to be



even chalked out by any person who is not immediately at the head



of the affairs of a nation. My work resembles the formation of



the pure colours for painting, it is the artist's business to mix



them: all I can pretend to, is to reason consequentially from



suppositions. If at any time I go farther, I exceed my plan, and



I confess the fault.



    I shall now conclude my chapter by introducing a new subject.



I have been at pains to shew how the continued neglect of a



statesman, in watching over the vibrations of the balance of work



and demand, naturally produces a total subversion of it; but this



is not, of itself, sufficient to undo an industrious people.



Other nations must be taught to profit of the disorder; and this



is what I call the competition between nations.







Chap. XII







Of the Competition between Nations







    Mankind daily profit by experience, and acquire knowledge at



their own cost.



    We have said that what lays the foundation of foreign trade,



is the ease and convenience which strangers find in having their



wants supplied by those who have set industry on foot. The



natural consequence of this foreign demand is to bring in wealth,



and to promote augmentations of every kind. As long as these go



on, it will be impossible for other nations to rival the traders,



because their situation is every day growing better: dexterity



increasing diminishes the price of work; every circumstance, in



short, becomes more favourable; the balance never vibrates, but



by one of the scales growing positively heavier, and it is



constantly coming even by an increase of weight on the other



side. We have seen how these revolutions never can raise the



intrinsic value of goods, and have observed that this is the road



to greatness.



    The slower any man travels, the longer he is in coming to his



journey's end; and when his health requires travelling, and that



he cannot go far from home, he rides out in a morning and comes



home to dinner.



    This represents another kind of vibration of the balance, and



when things are come to such a height as to render a train of



augmentations impossible, the next best expedient is, to permit



alternate vibrations of diminution and augmentation.



    Work augments, I shall suppose, and no more demand can be



procured; it may then be a good expedient to diminish hands, by



making soldiers of them; by employing them in public works; or by



sending them out of the country to become useful in its colonies.



These operations give a relative weight to the scale of demand,



and revive a competition on that side. Then the industrious hands



must be gently increased a-new, and the balance kept in vibration



as long as possible. By these alternate augmentations and



diminutions, hurtful revolutions, and the subversion of the



balance, may be prevented. This is an expedient for standing



still without harm, when one cannot go forward to advantage.



    If such a plan be followed, an industrious nation will



continue in a situation to profit of the smallest advantage from



revolutions in other countries, occasioned by the subversion of



their balance; which may present an opportunity of new vibrations



by alternate augmentations.



    On such occasions, the abilities of a statesman are



discovered, in directing and conducting what I call the delicacy



of national competition. We shall then observe him imitating the



mariners, who do not take in their sails when the wind falls



calm, but keep them trimmed and ready to profit of the least



breath of a favourable gale. Let me follow my comparison: The



trading nations of Europe represent a fleet of ships, every one



striving who shall get first to a certain port. The statesman of



each is the master. The same wind blows upon all; and this wind



is the principle of self-interest, which engages every consumer



to seek the cheapest and the best market. No trade wind can be



more general, or more constant than this; the natural advantages



of each country represent the degree of goodness of each vessel;



but the master who sails his ship with the greatest dexterity,



and he who can lay his rivals under the lee of his sails, will,



caeteris paribus, undoubtedly get before them, and maintain his



advantage.



    While a trading nation, which has got an established



advantage over her rivals, can be kept from declining, it will be



very difficult, if not impossible, for any other to enter into



competition with her: but when the balance begins to vibrate by



alternate diminutions; when a decrease of demand operates a



failure of supply; when this again is kept low, in order to raise



the competition of consumers; and when, instead of restoring the



balance by a gentle augmentation, a people are engaged, from the



allurements of high profits, to discourage every attempt to bring



down the market; then the scissors of foreign rivalship will



fairly trim off the superfluity of demand; prices will fall, and



a return of the same circumstances will prepare the way for



another vibration downwards.



    Such operations as these, are just what is requisite for



facilitating the competition of rival nations; and are the only



means possible to engage those who did not formerly work, to



begin and supply themselves.



    Did matters stand so, the evil would be supportable;



strangers would supply the superfluities only of demand, and the



balance would still be found in a kind of equilibrium at home.



But, alas ! even this happy state can be of short duration only.



The beginnings of trade with the strangers will prove just as



favourable to the vibration of their balance, by augmentations,



as it was formerly to the home-traders; and now every



augmentation to those, must imply a diminution to the others.



What will then become of such hands, in the trading nation, as



subsist by supplying the foreign market only? Will not this



revolution work the same effect, as to these, as if an additional



number of hands had been employed to supply the same consumption?



And will not this utterly destroy the balance among the traders,



by throwing an unsurmountable competition on the side of the



supply? It will however have a different effect from what might



have happened, if the same number of hands had been thrown into



the trading nation; for, in this case, they might destroy the



consolidated profits only upon labour, and perhaps restore the



balance: the inconvenience would be equally felt by every



workman, but profit would result to the public. But in the other



case, the old traders will find no foreign sale for their work;



these branches of industry will fall below the price of



subsistence, and the new beginners will have reasonable profits



in supplying their own wants, I say reasonable, because this



transition of trade from one nation to another, never can be



sudden or easy; and can take place in proportion only to the rise



in the intrinsic value of goods in that which is upon the



decline, not in proportion to the rise in their profits upon the



sale of them: for as long as the most extravagant profits do not



become consolidated, as we have said, with the value of the work,



a diminution of competition among the consumers, which may be



occasioned by a beginning of foreign industry, will quickly make



them disappear; and this will prove a fatal blow to the first



undertakings of the rival nations. But when once they are fairly



so consolidated, that prices can no more come down of themselves,



and that the statesman will not lend his helping hand, then the



new beginners pluck up courage, and set out by making small



profits: because in all new undertakings there is mismanagement



and considerable loss; and nothing discourages mankind from new



undertakings more than difficult beginnings.



    As long, therefore, as a trading state is upon the rising



hand, or even not upon the decline, and while the balance is kept



right without the expedient of alternate diminutions, work will



always be supplied from this quarter, cheaper than it possibly



can be furnished from any other, where the same dexterity does



not prevail. But when a nation begins to lose ground, then the



very columns which supported her grandeur, begin, by their



weight, to precipitate her decline. The wealth of her citizens



will support and augment the home demand, and encourage that



blind fondness for high profits, which it is impossible to



preserve. The moment these consolidate to a certain degree, they



have the effect of banishing from the market the demand of



strangers, who only can enrich her. It is in vain to look for



their return after the nation has discovered her mistake,



although she should be able to correct it; because, before this



can happen, her rivals will have profited of the golden



opportunity, and during the infatuation of the traders, will,



even by their assistance, have got fairly over the painful



struggle against their superior dexterity.



    Thus it happens, that so soon as matters begin to go backward



in a trading nation, and that by the increase of their riches,



luxury and extravagance take place of oeconomy and frugality



among the industrious; when the inhabitants themselves foolishly



enter into competition with strangers for their own commodities;



and when a statesman looks coolly on, with his arms across, or



takes it into his head, that it is not his business to interpose,



the prices of the dextrous workman will rise above the amount of



the mismanagement, loss, and reasonable profits, of the new



beginners; and when this comes to be the case, trade will decay



where it flourished most, and take root in a new soil. This I



call a competition between nations.







Chap. XIII







How far the Form of Government of a particular Country may be



favourable or unfavourable to a Competition with other Nations,



in matters of Commerce







    The question before us, though relative to another science,



is not altogether foreign to this. I introduce it in this place,



not so much for the sake of connexion, as by way of an



illustration, which at the same time that it may serve as an



exercise upon general principles, may also prove a relaxation to



the mind, after so long a chain of close reasoning.



    In setting out, I informed my readers that I intended to



treat of the political oeconomy of free nations only; and upon



every occasion where I have mentioned slavery, I have pointed out



how far the nature of it is contrary to the advancement of



private industry, the inseparable concomitant of foreign and



domestic trade.



    No term is less understood than that of liberty, and it is



not my intention, at present, to enter into a particular inquiry



into all the different acceptations of it.



    By a people's being free, I understand no more than their



being governed by general laws, well known, not depending upon



the ambulatory will of any man, or any set of men, and



established so as not to be changed, but in a regular and uniform



way; for reasons which regard the body of the society, and not



through favour or prejudice to particular persons, or particular



classes. So far as a power of dispensing with, restraining or



extending general laws, is left in the hands of any governor, so



far I consider public liberty as precarious. I do not say it is



hereby hurt; this will depend upon the use made of such



prerogatives. According to this definition of liberty, a people



may be found to enjoy freedom under the most despotic forms of



government; and perpetual service itself, where the master's



power is limited according to natural equity, is not altogether



incompatible with liberty in the servant.



    Here new ideas present themselves concerning the general



principles of subordination and dependence among mankind; which I



shall lay before my reader before I proceed, submitting the



justness of them to his decision.



    As these terms are both relative, it is proper to observe,



that by subordination is implied an authority which superiors



have over inferiors; and by dependence, is implied certain



advantages which the inferiors draw from their subordination: a



servant is under subordination to his master, and depends upon



him for his subsistence.



    Dependence is the only bond of society and I have observed,



in the fourth chapter of the first book, that the dependence of



one man upon another for food, is a very natural introduction to



slavery. This was the first contrivance mankind fell upon, in



order to become useful to one another.



    Upon the abolishing of slavery, from a principle of



christianity, the next step taken was the establishment of an



extraordinary subordination between the different classes of the



people; this was the principle of the feudal government.



    The last refinement, and that which has brought liberty to be



generally extended to the lowest denominations of a people,



without destroying that dependence necessary to serve as a band



of society, was the introduction of industry.. by this is



implied, the circulation of an adequate equivalent for every



service, which procures to the rich every advantage they could



expect to reap, either from the servitude or dependence of the



poor'; and to these again, every comfort they could wish to enjoy



under the mildest slavery, or most gentle subordination.



    From this exposition, I divide dependence into three kinds.



The first natural, between parents and children; the second



political between masters and servants, lords and vassals,



Princes and subjects; the third commercial, between the rich and



the industrious.



    May I be allowed to transgress the limits of my subject for a



few lines, and to dip so far into the principles of the law of



nature, as to enquire, how far subordination among men is thereby



authorized? I think I may decide, that so far as the



subordination is in proportion to the dependence, sofar it is



reasonable and just. This represents an even balance. If the



scale of subordination is found too weighty, tyranny ensues; and



licentiousness is implied, in proportion as it rises above the



level. From this let me draw some conclusions.



    First, He who depended upon another, for the preservation of



a life justly forfeited, and at all times in the power of him who



spared it, was, by the civil law, called a slave. This surely is



the highest degree of dependence.



    Secondly, He who depends upon another for every thing



necessary for his subsistence, seems to be in the second degree;



this is the dependence of children upon their parents.



    Thirdly, He who depends upon another for the means of



procuring subsistence to himself by his own labour, stands in the



third degree: this I take to have been the case between the



feudal lords, and the lowest classes of their vassals, the



labourers of the ground.



    Fourthly, He who depends totally upon the sale of his own



industry, stands in the fourth degree: this is the case of



tradesmen and manufacturers, with respect to those who employ



them.



    These I take to be the different degrees of subordination



between man and man, considered as members of the same society.



    In proportion, therefore, as certain classes, or certain



individuals become more dependent than formerly, in the same



proportion ought their just subordination to increase: and in



proportion as they become less dependent than formerly, in the



same proportion ought this just subordination to diminish. This



seems to be a rational principle: next for the application.



    I deduce the origin of the great subordination under the



feudal government, from the necessary dependence of the lower



classes for their subsistence. They consumed the produce of the



land, as the price of their subordination, not as the reward of



their industry in making it produce.



    I deduce modern liberty from the independence of the same



classes, by the introduction of industry, and circulation of an



adequate equivalent for every service.



    If this doctrine be applied in order to resolve the famous



question so much debated, concerning the origin of supreme



authority, so far as it is a question of the law of nature, I do



not find the decision so very difficult: All authority is in



proportion to dependence, and must vary according to



circumstances.



    I think it is as rational to say, that the fatherly power



proceeded originally from the act of the children, as to say,



that the great body of the people who were fed, and protected by



a few great lords, was the fountain of power, and creator of



subordination. Those who have no other equivalent to give for



their food and protection, must pay in personal service, respect,



and submission; and so soon as they come to be a situation to pay



a proper equivalent for these dependences, so far they acquire a



title to liberty and independence. The feudal lords, therefore,



who, with reason, had an entire authority over many of their



vassals, being subdued by their King; the usurpation was upon



their rights, not upon the rights of the lower classes: but when



a King came to extend the power he had over the vassals of the



lords, to the inhabitants of cities, who had been independent of



this subordination, his usurpation became evident.



    The rights of Kings, therefore, are to be sought for in



history; and not founded upon the supposition of tacit contracts



between them and their people, inferred from the principles of an



imaginary law of nature, which makes all mankind equal: nature



can never be in opposition to common reason.



    The general principle I have laid down, appears, in my humble



opinion, more rational than this imaginary contract; and as



consonant to the full with the spirit of free government. If the



original tacit contract of government between Prince and people



is admitted universally, then all governments ought to be



similar; and every subordination, which appears contrary to the



entire liberty and independence of the lowest classes, ought to



be construed as tyrannical: whereas, according to my principle,



the subordination of classes may, in different countries, be



vastly different; the prerogative of one sovereign may, from



different circumstances, be far more extended than that of



another.



    May not one have attained the sovereignty (by the free



election of the people, I suppose) because of the great extent of



his possessions, number of his vassals and dependents, quantity



of wealth, alliances and connexions with neighbouring sovereigns?



Had not, for example, such a person as Hugh Capet, the greatest



feudal lord of his time, a right to a much more extensive



jurisdiction over his subjects, than could reasonably be aspired



to by a King of Poland, sent from France, or from Germany, and



set at the head of a republic, where he has not one person



depending upon him for any thing?



    The power of Princes, as Princes, must then be distinguished



from the power they derive from other circumstances, which do not



necessarily follow in consequence of their elevation to the



throne. It would, I think, be the greatest absurdity to advance,



that the title of King abolishes, of itself, the subordination



due to the person who exercises the office of that high



magistracy.



    Matter of fact, which is stronger than all reasoning,



demonstrates the force of the principle here laid down. Do we not



see how subordination rises and falls under different reigns,



under a rich Elizabeth, and a necessitous Charles, under a



powerful Austrian, and a distressed Bavarian Emperor? I proceed



no farther in the examination of this matter: perhaps my reader



has decided that I have gone too far already.



    From these principles may be deduced the boundaries of



subordination. A people who depend upon nothing but their own



industry for their subsistence, ought to be under no farther



subordination than what is necessary for their protection. And as



the protection of the whole body of such a people implies the



protection of every individual, so every political subordination



should there be general and equal: no person, no class should be



under a greater subordination than another. This is the



subordination of the laws; and whenever laws establish a



subordination more than what is proportionate to the dependence



of those who are subordinate, so far such laws may be considered



as contrary to natural equity, and arbitrary.



    These things premised, I come to the question proposed,



namely, How far particular forms of government are favourable or



unfavourable to a competition with other nations, in point of



commerce?



    If we reason from facts, and from experience, we shall find,



that trade and industry have been found to flourish best under



the republican form, and under those which have come the nearest



to it. May I be allowed to say, that, perhaps, one principal



reason for this has been, that under these forms the



administration of the laws has been the most uniform, and



consequently, that most liberty has actually been there enjoyed..



I say actually, because I have said above, that in my acceptation



of the term, liberty is equally compatible with monarchy as with



democracy; I do not say the enjoyment of it is equally secure



under both; because under the first it is much more liable to be



destroyed. The life of the democratical system is equality.



Monarchy conveys the idea of the greatest inequality possible.



Now, if, on one side, the equality of the democracy secures



liberty; on the other, the moderation in expence discourages



industry; and if, on one side, the inequality of the monarchy



endangers liberty, the progress of luxury encourages industry on



the other. From whence we may conclude, that the democratical



system is naturally the best for giving birth to foreign trade;



the monarchical, for the refinement of the luxurious arts, and



for promoting a rapid circulation of inland commerce.



    The danger which liberty is exposed to under monarchy, and



the discouragement to industry, from the frugality of the



democracy, are only the natural and immediate effects of the two



forms of government; and these inconveniences will take place



only, while statesmen neglect the interest of commerce, so far as



not to make it an object of administration.



    The disadvantage, therefore, of the monarchical form, in



point of trade and industry, does not proceed from the inequality



it establishes among the citizens, but from the consequence of



this inequality, which is very often accompanied with an



arbitrary and undeterminate subordination between the individuals



of the higher classes, and those of the lower; or between those



vested with the execution of the laws, and the body of the



people. The moment it is found that any subordination within the



monarchy, between subject and subject, is left without proper



bounds prescribed, liberty is so far at an end. Nay monarchy



itself is hereby hurt, as this undeterminate subordination



implies an arbitrary power in the state, not vested in the



monarch. Arbitrary power never can be delegated; for if it be



arbitrary, it may be turned against the monarch, as well as



against the subject.



    I might therefore say, that when such a power in individuals



is constitutional in the monarchy, such monarchy is not a



government, but a tyranny, and therefore falls without the limits



of our subject; and when such a power is anti-constitutional, and



yet is exercised, that it is an abuse, and should be overlooked.



But as the plan of this inquiry engages me to investigate the



operations of general principles, and the consequences they



produce, I cannot omit, in this place, to point out those which



flow from an indeterminate subordination, from whatever cause it



may proceed.



    Whether this indeterminate subordination between individuals,



be a vice in the constitution of the government, or an abuse, it



is the same thing as to the consequences which result from it. It



is this which checks and destroys industry, and which in a great



measure prevents its progress from being equal in all countries.



This difference in the form or administration of governments, is



the only one which it is essentially necessary to examine in this



inquiry. and, so essential it is, in my opinion, that I imagine



it would be less hurtful, in a plan for the establishment of



commerce, fairly, and at once to enslave the lower classes of the



inhabitants, and to make them vendible like other commodities,



than to leave them nominally free, burthened with their own



maintenance, charged with the education of their children, and at



the same time under an irregular subordination; that is, liable



at every moment to be loaded with new prestations or impositions,



either in work or otherwise, and to be fined or imprisoned at



will by their superiors.



    It produces no difference, whether these irregularities be



exercised by those of the superior classes, or by the statesman



and his substitutes. It is the irregularity of the exactions more



than the extent of them which ruins industry. It renders living



precarious, and the very idea of industry should carry along with



it, not only an assured livelihood, but a certain profit over and



above.



    Let impositions be ever so high, provided they be



proportional, general, gradually augmented, and permanent, they



may have indeed the effect of stopping foreign trade, and of



starving the idle, but they never will ruin the industrious; as



we shall have occasion to shew in treating of taxation. Whereas,



when they are arbitrary, falling unequally upon individuals of



the same condition, sudden, and frequently changing their object,



it is impossible for industry to stand its ground. Such a system



of oeconomy introduces an unequal competition among those of the



same class, it stops industrious people in the middle of their



career, discourages others from exposing to the eyes of the



public the ease of their circumstances, consequently encourages



hoarding; this again excites rapaciousness upon the side of the



statesman, who sees himself frustrated in his schemes of laying



hold of private wealth.



    From this a new set of inconveniences follow. He turns his



views upon solid property. This inspires the landlords with



indignation against him who can load them at will; and with envy



against the monied interest, who can baffle his attempts. This



class again is constantly upon the catch to profit of the public



distress for want of money. What is the consequence of all this?



It is that the lowest classes of the people, who ought by



industry to enrich the state, find on one hand the monied



interest constantly amassing, in order to lend to the state,



instead of distributing among them, by seasonable loans, their



superfluous income, with a view to share the reasonable profits



of their ingenuity; and on the other hand, they find the



emissaries of taxation robbing them of the seed before it is



sown, instead of waiting for a share in the harvest.



    Under the feudal form of government, liberty and independence



were confined to the nobility. Birth opened the door of



preferment to some, and birth as effectually shut it against



others. I have often observed how, by reason and from experience,



such a form of government must be unfavourable both to trade and



industry.



    From reason it is plain, that industry must give wealth, and



wealth will give power, if he who possesses it be left the master



to employ it as he pleases. A government could not therefore



encourage a system which tended to throw power into the hands of



those who were made to obey only. It was consequently very



natural for the nobility to be jealous of wealthy merchants, and



of every one who became easy and independent by means of his own



industry; experience proved how exactly this principle regulated



their administration.



    A statesman ought, therefore, to consider attentively every



circumstance of the constitution of his country, before he sets



on foot the modern system of trade and industry. I am far from



being of opinion that this is the only road to happiness,



security, and ease; though, from the general taste of the times I



live in, it be the system I am principally employed to examine. A



country may be abundantly happy, and sufficiently formidable to



those who come to attack it, without being extremely rich. Riches



indeed are forbid to all who have neither mines, or foreign



trade.



    If a country be found labouring under many natural



disadvantages from inland situation, barren soil, distant



carriage, it would be in vain to attempt a competition with other



nations in foreign markets. All that can be then undertaken is a



passive trade, and that so far only as it can bring in additional



wealth. When little money can be acquired, the statesman's



application must be, to make that already acquired to circulate



as much as possible, in order to give bread to every one in the



society.



    In countries where the government is vested in the hands of



the great lords, as is the case in all aristocracies, as was the



case under the feudal government, and as it still is the case in



many countries in Europe, where trade, however, and industry are



daily gaining ground; the statesman who sets the new system of



political oeconomy on foot, may depend upon it, that either his



attempt will fail, or the constitution of the government will



change. If he destroys all arbitrary dependence between



individuals, the wealth of the industrious will share, if not



totally root out the power of the grandees. If he allows such a



dependence to subsist, his project will fail.



    While Venice and Genoa flourished, they were obliged to open



the doors of their senate to the wealthy citizens, in order to



prevent their being broken down. What is venal nobility? The



child of commerce, the indispensible consequence of industry, and



a middle term, which our Gothic ancestors found themselves



obliged to adopt, in order not entirely to lose their own rank in



the state. Money, they found, must carry off the fasces, (sic),



so they chose rather to adopt the wealthy plebeians, and to



clothe ignoble shoulders with their purple mantle, than to allow



these to wrest all authority out of the hands of the higher



class. By this expedient, a sudden revolution has often been



prevented. Some kingdoms have been quit for a bloody rebellion or



a long civil war. Other countries have likewise demonstrated the



force of the principles here laid down: a wealthy populace has



broken their chains to pieces, and overturned the very



foundations of the feudal system.



    All these violent convulsions have been owing to the



short-sightedness of statesmen; who, inattentive to the



consequences of growing wealth and industry, foolishly imagined



that hereditary subordination was to subsist among classes, whose



situation, with respect to each other, was entirely changed.



    The pretorian cohorts were at first subordinate to the orders



of the Emperors, and were the guards of the city of Rome. The



Janissaries are understood to be under the command of the



principal officers of the Port. So soon as the leading men of



Rome and Constantinople, who naturally were entitled to govern



the state, applied to these tumultuous bodies for their



protection and assistance, they in their turn, made sensible of



their own importance, changed the constitution, and shared in the



government.



    A milder revolution, entirely similar, is taking place in



modern times; and an attentive spectator may find amusement in



viewing the progress of it in many states of Europe. Trade and



industry are in vogue; and their establishment is occasioning a



wonderful fermentation with the remaining fierceness of the



feudal constitution.



    Trade and industry owed their establishment to war and to



ambition; and perhaps mankind may hope to see the day when this



establishment will put an end to the first, by exposing the



expensive folly of the latter.



    Trade and industry, I say, owed their establishment to the



ambition of princes who supported and favoured the plan in the



beginning, principally with a view to enrich themselves, and



thereby to become formidable to their neighbours. But they did



not discover, until experience taught them, that the wealth they



drew from such fountains was but the overflowing of the spring;



and that an opulent, bold, and spirited people, having the fund



of the prince's wealth in their own hands, have it also in their



own power, when it becomes strongly their inclination, to shake



off his authority. The consequence of this change has been the



introduction of a more mild, and a more regular plan of



administration. The money gatherers are become more useful to



princes, than the great lords; and those who are fertile in



expedients for establishing public credit, and for drawing money



from the coffers of the rich, by the imposition of taxes, have



been preferred to the most wise and most learned counsellors.



    As this system is new, no wonder if it has produced phenomena



both new and surprising. Formerly, the power of Princes was



employed to destroy liberty, and to establish arbitrary



subordination; but in our days, we have seen those who have best



comprehended the true principles of the new plan of politics,



arbitrarily limiting the power of the higher classes, and thereby



applying their authority towards the extension of public liberty,



by extinguishing every subordination, but that due to the



established laws.



    The fundamental maxim of some of the greatest ministers, has



been to restrain the power of the great lords. The natural



inference that people drew from such a step, was, that the



minister thereby intended to make every thing depend on the



prince's will only. This I do not deny. But what use have we seen



made of this new acquisition of power? Those who look into events



with a political eye, may perceive several acts of the most



arbitrary authority exercised by some late European sovereigns,



with no other view than to establish public liberty upon a more



extensive bottom.



    And although the prerogative of some princes be increased



considerably beyond the bounds of the ancient constitution, even



to such a degree as perhaps justly to deserve the name of



usurpation; yet the consequences resulting from the revolution,



cannot every where be said, upon the whole, to have impaired what



I call public liberty. I should be at no loss to prove this



assertion from matters of fact, and by examples, did I think it



proper: it seems better to prove it from reason.



    When once a state begins to subsist by the consequences of



industry, there is less danger to be apprehended from the power



of the sovereign. The mechanism of his administration becomes



more complex, and, as was observed in the introduction to the



first book, he finds himself so bound up by the laws of his



political oeconomy, that every transgression of them runs him



into new difficulties.



    I speak of governments only which are conducted



systematically, constitutionally, and by general laws; and when I



mention princes, I mean their councils. The principles I am



enquiring into, regard the cool administration of their



government; it belongs to another branch of politics, to contrive



bulwarks against their passions, vices and weaknesses, as men.



    I say, therefore, that from the time states have begun to be



supported by the consequences of industry, the plan of



administration has become more moderate; has been changing and



refining by degrees; and every change, as has been often



observed, must be accompanied with inconveniences.



    It is of governments as of machines, the more they are



simple, the more they are solid and lasting; the more they are



artfully composed, the more they become useful; but the more apt



they are to be out of order.



    The Lacedemonian form may be compared to the wedge, the most



solid and compact of all the mechanical powers. Those of modern



states to watches, which are continually going wrong; sometimes



the spring is found too weak, at other times too strong for the



machine: and when the wheels are not made according to a



determinate proportion, by the able hands of a Graham, or a



Julien le Roy, they do not tally well with one another; then the



machine stops, and if it be forced, some part gives way; and the



workman's hand becomes necessary to set it right.







Chap. XIV







Security, Ease and Happiness, no inseparable Concomitants of



Trade and Industry







    The republic of Lycurgus represents the most perfect plan of



political oeconomy, in my humble opinion, anywhere to be met



with, either in ancient or modern times. That it existed cannot



be called in question, any more than that it proved the most



durable of all those established among the Greeks; and if at last



it came to fail, it was more from the abuses which gradually were



introduced into it, than from any vice in the form.



    The simplicity of the institution made the solidity of it;



and had the Lacedemonians at all times adhered to the principles



of their government, and spirit of their constitution, they might



have perhaps subsisted to this very day.



    My intention, in this chapter, is not to enter into a



critical disquisition concerning the mechanism of every part of



the Spartan republic; but to compare the general plan of



Lycurgus's political oeconomy with the principles we have been



laying down.



    Of this plan we have a description in the life of this



legislator written by Plutarch, one of the most judicious authors



to be met with in any age.



    This historian flourished at least 800 years after the



institution of the plan he describes. A plan never reduced into a



system of written laws, but stamped at first upon the minds of



the Spartans by the immediate authority of the gods, which made



them submit to the most violent revolution that perhaps ever took



place in any nation, and which they supported for so many ages by



the force of education alone.



    As the whole of Lycurgus's laws was transmitted by tradition



only, it is not to be supposed, that the description Plutarch, or



indeed any of the ancients, have given us of this republic, can



be depended on with certainty as a just representation of every



part of the system laid down by that great statesman. But on the



other hand, we may be very sure, that as to the outlines of the



institution, we have them transmitted to us in all their purity'.



and, in what relates to my subject, I have no occasion to touch



on any particulars which may admit of the smAllest controversy,



as to the matter of fact.



    Property among the Lacedemonians, at the time when Lycurgus



planned his institution, was very unequally divided: the



consequence of which, says our historian, was to draw many poor



people into the city, where the wealth was gathered into few



hands; that is according to our language, the luxury of the rich,



who lived in the city, had purged the lands of useless mouths,



and the instability of the government had rendered industry



precarious, which must have opened the door to general distress



among all the lower classes.



    The first step our legislator took, was to prepare the spirit



of the people, so as to engage them to submit to a total reform,



which could not fail of being attended with innumerable



inconveniences.



    For this purpose he went to Delphi, without having



communicated his design to any body. The Pythia declared him to



be the darling of the gods, and rather a god than a man; and



publicly gave out, that Apollo had delivered to him alone the



plan of a republic which far exceeded every other in perfection.



    What a powerful engine was this in the hands of a profound



politician, who had travelled over the world with a previous



intention to explore the mysteries of the science of government!



and what advantages did such an authentic recommendation, coming



directly (as was believed) from the voice of the Divinity, give



him over a superstitious people, in establishing whatever form of



government he thought most proper!



    The sagacious Lacedemonian did not, however, entirely depend



upon the blind submission of his countrymen to the dictates of



the oracle; but wisely judged that some preparatory steps might



still be necessary. He communicated, therefore, his plan, first



to his friends, and then by degrees to the principal people of



the state, who certainly never could have been brought to relish



an innovation so prejudicial to their interest, had it not been



from the deepest reverence and submission to the will of the



gods. Assured of their assistance, he appeared in the market



place, accompanied by his party, all in arms; and having imposed



respect, he laid the foundation of his government by the



nomination of a senate.



    Whatever regards any other object than his plan of political



oeconomy, shall be here passed over in silence. It is of no



consequence to my inquiry, where the supreme power was vested: it



is sufficient to know that there was an authority enough in the



state to support the execution of his plan.



    He destroyed all inequality at one stroke. The property of



all the lands of the state was thrown together, and became at the



disposal of the legislator. Every branch of industry was



proscribed to the citizens. And a monied interest was made to



disappear, by the introduction of iron coin. The lands he divided



into equal lots, according to the number of citizens.



    Thus all were rendered entirely equal in point of fortune, as



neither wealth, industry, or lands, could give a superiority to



any body. From this part of the plan I conclude, that Lycurgus



discovered the utter insufficiency of an agrarian law for



establishing equality among the individuals of a state, without



proscribing, at the same time, both wealth and industry. A



circumstance which seems to have escaped every other statesman in



ancient times, as well as the modern patrons of equality and



simplicity of manners. The lands were cultivated by the Helotes,



who were nourished from them, and who were obliged to deliver the



surplus, that is, a determinate quantity of fruits, to the



proprietor of the lot. Every necessary mechanic art was likewise



exercised by this body of slaves.



    By this distribution, the produce of the earth (that is every



article of nourishment) came free and without cost to every



individual of the state. The Spartan landlords were rather



overseers of the slaves, and collectors of the public



subsistence, than direct proprietors of the soil which produced



it. For although every man was fed from his own lands, and



provided his own portion, yet this portion was regulated, and was



to be consumed in public; and any one who pretended to eat alone,



or before he came to the public hall, was held in the utmost



contempt.



    Their clothing was the most simple possible, perfectly alike,



and could be purchased for a small value. This frugality produced



no bad effect; because no man lived by his industry. Arts, as has



been said, were exercised by the Helotes, the property of private



citizens; and if such masters as entertained manufacturing slaves



gained by the traffic (as some must do) every method of profiting



of their superior riches was cut off.



    The Spartans were continually together; they had nothing to



do but to divert themselves; and their amusements were mostly



martial exercises. The regulations of these numerous assemblies



(which were compared, with great elegance and justness, to swarms



of bees) cut off all outward marks of distinction. There was not



a possibility for luxury to introduce itself, either in eating,



drinking, cloathing, furniture, or any other expence.



    Here then was a whole nation fed and provided for



gratuitously; there was not the least occasion for industry. the



usefulness of which, we have shewn principally to consist in its



proving an expedient for procuring for the necessitous, what the



Spartans found provided for them without labour.



    Under such circumstances we may conclude, from the principles



we have laid down, that a people thus abundantly nourished, must



have multiplied exceedingly. And so no doubt they did. But the



regulation of the lots permitted no more than a fixed number of



citizens. Whenever, therefore, numbers were found to exceed this



standard, the supernumeraries were dismissed, and sent to form



colonies. And when the Helotes increased too much, and thereby



began to rise above the proportion of the labour required of



them, in order to prevent the consuming the food of their



masters, which they had in their hands, and thereby becoming



idle, licentious, and consequently dangerous to the state, it was



permitted to destroy them by way of a military exercise,



conducted by stratagem and address; arts which this people



constantly preferred in war, to labour, strength and intrepidity.



    This appears a very barbarous custom, and I shall not offer



any thing as an apology for it, but the ferocity of the manners



of those times. Abstracting from the cruelty, the restraining the



numbers of this class within certain limits, was absolutely



necessary. The Lacedemonian slaves were in many respects far



happier than those of other nations. They were in reality a body



of farmers, which paid a certain quantity of fruits out of every



lot; to wit, 70 medimni of barley: their numbers were not



recruited from abroad, as elsewhere, but supported by their own



propagation; consequently there was an absolute necessity either



to prevent the over multiplication of them, or to diminish an



income proportioned exactly to the necessities of the state: and



what expedient could be fallen upon? They were slaves, and



therefore, could not be inrolled in the number of citizens; they



could not be sold to strangers, for money which was forbid; and



they were of no use to industry. No wonder then if the fierceness



of the manners of those days permitted the inhuman treatment they



received; which, however, Plutarch is far from attributing to the



primitive institution of Lycurgus. Besides, when we see that the



freemen themselves were obliged to quit the country the moment



their numbers exceeded a certain standard, it was not to be



expected, that useless slaves should be permitted to multiply at



discretion.



    From this sketch of Lycurgus's political oeconomy, we find



the state abundantly provided with every necessary article; an



effectual stop put to abusive procreation among the citizens; and



a corrective for the over multiplication of the slaves. The next



care of a statesman is to regulate the employment of a people.



    Every freeman in the state was bred up from his infancy to



arms. No family care could prevent him from serving the state as



a soldier: his children were no load upon him; it was the



business of the Helotes to supply them with provisions: of the



servants in town to prepare these, and the public tables were



always ready furnished. The whole youth of Sparta was educated



not as the children of their parents, but of the state. They



imbibed the same sentiments of frugality, temperance, and love of



simplicity. They exercised the same employment, and were occupied



in the same way in every respect. The simplicity of Lycurgus's



plan, rendered this a practicable scheme. The multiplicity and



variety of employments among us, makes it absolutely necessary to



trust the parents with the education of their children; whereas



in Sparta, there were not two employments for a free man; there



was neither orator, lawyer, physician, or politician, by



profession to be found. The institutions of their lawgiver were



constantly inculcated by the old upon the minds of the young;



every thing they heard or saw, was relative to war. The very gods



were represented in armour, and every precept they were taught,



tended to banish superfluity, and to establish moderation and



hard living.



    The youth were continually striving together in all military



exercises; such as boxing and wrestling. To keep up, therefore, a



spirit of emulation, and to banish animosity at the same time,



sharp, satirical expressions were much encouraged; but these were



always to be seasoned with something gracious or polite. The



grave demeanour likewise, and downcast look which they were



ordered to observe in the streets, and the injunction of keeping



their hands within their robes, might very naturally be



calculated to prevent quarrels, and especially blows, at times



when the authority of a public assembly could not moderate the



vivacity of their passions. By these arts, the Spartans lived in



great harmony in the midst of a continual war.



    Under such regulations a people must enjoy security from



foreign attacks; and certainly the intention of the legislator



never was to extend the limits of Laconia by conquest. What



people could ever think of attacking the Lacedemonians, where



nothing but blows could be expected?



    They enjoyed ease in the most supreme degree; they were



abundantly provided with every necessary of life; although, I



confess, the enjoyment of these, in so austere a manner, would



not be relished by any modern society. But habit is all in things



of this kind. A coarse meal, to a good stomach, has more relish



than all the delicacies of the most exquisite preparation to a



depraved appetite; and if the pleasures of love be reckoned among



the pleasures of life, enough of it might have been met with in



the manners of this people. It does not belong to my subject to



enter into particular details on this head. But the most rational



pleasure among men, the delightful communication of society, was



here enjoyed to the utmost extent. The whole republic was



continually gathered together in bodies, and their studies, their



occupations and their amusements, were the same. One taste was



universal; and the young and the old being constantly together,



the first under the immediate inspection and authority of the



latter, the same sentiments were transmitted from generation to



generation. The Spartans were so pleased, and so satisfied with



their situation, that they despised the manners of every other



nation. If this does not transmit an idea of happiness, I am at a



loss to form one. Security, ease, and happiness, therefore, are



not inseparable concomitants of trade and industry.



    Lycurgus had penetration enough to perceive the weak side of



his institution. He was no stranger to the seducing influence of



luxury; and plainly foresaw, that the consequences of industry,



which procures to mankind a great variety of new objects of



desire, and a wonderful facility in satisfying them, would easily



root out the principles he had endeavoured to instil into his



countrymen, if the state of simplicity should ever come to be



corrupted by foreign communications. He affected, therefore, to



introduce several customs which could not fail of disgusting and



shocking the delicacy of neighbouring states. He permitted the



dead to be buried within the walls; the handling of dead bodies



was not reckoned pollution among the Lacedemonians. He forbade



bathing, so necessary for cleanliness in a hot country; and the



coarseness and dirtiness of their cloaths, and sweat from their



hard exercises, could not fail to disgust strangers from coming



among them. On the other hand, nothing was found at Sparta which



could engage a stranger to wish to become one of their number.



And to prevent the contagion of foreign customs from getting in,



by means of the citizens themselves, he forbade the Spartans to



travel; and excluded from any employment in the state, those who



had got a foreign education. Nothing indeed but a Spartan



breeding could have fitted a person to live among them.



    The theft encouraged among the Lacedemonians was calculated



to make them artful and dextrous; and contained not the smallest



tincture of vice. It was generally of something eatable, and the



frugality of their table prompted them to it; while on the other



hand, their being exposed to the like reprisals, made them



watchful and careful of what belonged to themselves; and the



pleasure of punishing an unsuccessful attempt, in part



indemnified them for the trouble of being constantly upon their



guard. A Lacedemonian had nothing of any value that could be



stolen; and it is the desire and intention of making unlawful



gain which renders theft either criminal or scandalous.



    The hidden intercourse between the Spartans and their young



wives was no doubt, calculated to impress upon the minds of the



fair sex, the wide difference there is between an act of



immodesty, and that of simply appearing naked in the public



exercises; two things which we are apt to confound, from the



impression of our own customs only. I am persuaded that many a



young person has felt her modesty as much hurt by taking off her



handkerchief, the first time she appeared at court, as any



Lacedemonian girl could have done by stripping before a thousand



people; yet both her reason and common sense, must make her



sensible of the difference between a compliance with a custom in



a matter of dress, and a palpable transgression against the laws



of her honour, and the modesty of her sex.



    I have called this Lacedemonian republic a perfect plan of



political oeconomy; because it was a system, uniform and



consistent in all its parts. There, no superfluity was necessary,



because there was no occasion for industry, to give bread to any



body. There, no superfluity was permitted, because the moment the



limits of the absolutely necessary are transgressed, the degrees



of excess are quite indeterminate, and become purely relative.



The same thing which appears superfluity to a peasant, appears



necessary to a citizen; and the utmost luxury of this class



frequently does not come up to what is thought the mere necessary



for one in a higher rank. Lycurgus stopt at the only determined



frontier, the pure physical necessary. All beyond this was



considered as abusive.



    The only things in commerce among the Spartans were,



    First, What might remain to them of the fruits of their lot,



over their own consumption; and secondly, The work of the slaves



employed in trades. The numbers of these could not be many, as



the timber of their houses was worked with the saw and axe only;



and every utensil was made with the greatest simplicity. A small



quantity, therefore, of iron coin, as I imagine, must have been



sufficient for carrying on the circulation at Sparta. The very



nature of their wants must, as I have said, terminate all their



commerce, in the exchange of the surplus-food of their portions



of land, with the work of the manufacturing slaves, who must have



been fed from it.



    As the Lacedemonians had no mercantile communications with



other nations, the iron coin was no more than a bank note of no



intrinsic value, as I suppose, but a middle term introduced for



keeping accounts, and for facilitating barter. An additional



argument for this opinion of the coin being of no intrinsic



value, is, that it is said to have been rendered unserviceable



for other uses, by being slaked in vinegar; in order consequently



to destroy, as they imagined, any intrinsic value which might



otherwise remain. If this coin, therefore, was made of an



extra-ordinary weight, it must have been entirely with a



political view of discouraging commerce and circulation, an



institution quite consistent with the general plan, and nowise a



consequence of the baseness of the metal of which it was made: a



small quantity of this, with the stamp of public authority for



its currency and value, would have answered every purpose equally



well.



    Let me now conclude this chapter by an illustration of the



subject, which will still more clearly point out the force of the



principles upon which this Lacedemonian republic was established.



    Were any Prince in Europe, whose subjects, I shall suppose,



may amount to six millions of inhabitants, one half employed in



agriculture, the other half employed in trade and industry, or



living upon a revenue already acquired; were such a Prince, I



say, supposed to have authority sufficient to engage his people



to adopt a new plan of oeconomy, calculated to secure them



against the designs of a powerful neighbour, who, I shall



suppose, has formed schemes of invading and subduing them.



    Let him engage the whole proprietors of land to renounce



their several possessions: or if that supposition should appear



too absurd, let him contract debts to the value of the whole



property of the nation; let the land-tax be imposed at twenty



shillings in the pound, and then let him become bankrupt to the



creditors. Let the income of all the lands be collected



throughout the country for the use of the state; let all the



luxurious arts be proscribed; and let those employed in them be



formed, under the command of the former land proprietors, into a



body of regular troops, officers and soldiers, provided with



every thing necessary for their maintenance, and that of their



wives and families at the public expence. Let me carry the



supposition farther. Let every superfluity be cut off; let the



peasants be enslaved, and obliged to labour the ground with no



view of profit to themselves, but for simple subsistence; let the



use of gold and silver be proscribed; and let all these metals be



shut up in a public treasure. Let no foreign trade, and very



little domestic be encouraged; but let every man, willing to



serve as a soldier, be received and taken care of; and those who



either incline to be idle, or who are found superfluous, be sent



out of the country. I ask, what confederacy among the modern



European Princes, would carry on a successful war against such a



people? What article would be wanting to their ease, that is, to



their ample subsistence? Their happiness would depend upon the



temper of their mind. And what country could defend itself



against the attack of such an enemy? Such a system of political



oeconomy, I readily grant, is not likely to take place: but if



ever it did, would it not effectually dash to pieces the whole



fabric of trade and industry which has been forming for so many



years? And would it not quickly oblige every other nation to



adopt, as far as possible, a similar conduct, from a principle of



self-preservation.







Chap. XV







A general View of the Principles to be attended to by a



Statesman, who resolves to establish Trade and Industry upon a



lasting Footing







    The two preceding chapters I have introduced purposely to



swerve as an illustration of general principles, and as a



relaxation to the mind, like a farce between the acts of a



serious opera. I now return to the place where I broke off my



subject, at the end of the twelfth chapter.



    It is a great assistance to memory, now and then to assemble



our ideas, after certain intervals, in going through an extensive



subject. Every branch of it must, in setting out, be treated with



simplicity, and all combinations not absolutely necessary, must



be banished from the theory. When this theory again comes to be



applied to examples, combinations will crowd in, and every one of



these must be attended to.



    For this reason nothing can appear more inconsistent than the



spirit which runs through some parts of this book, if compared



with that which prevailed in the first. There luxury was looked



on with a favourable eye, and every augmentation of superfluity



was considered as a method of advancing population. We were then



employed in drawing mankind, as, it were, out of a state of



idleness, in order to increase their numbers, and engage them to



cultivate the earth. We had no occasion to divide them into



societies having separate interests, because the principles we



treated of were common to all. We therefore considered the



industrious, who are the providers, and the luxurious, who are



the consumers, as children of the same family, and as being under



the care of the same father.



    We are now engaged in a more complex operation; we represent



different societies, animated with a different spirit; some given



to industry and frugality, others to dissipation and luxury. This



creates separate interests among nations, and every one must be



supposed to be under the government of a statesman, who is wholly



taken up in advancing the good of those he governs, though at the



expence of other societies which lie round him.



    This presents a new idea, and gives birth to new principles.



The general society of mankind treated of in the first book, is



here in a manner divided into two: the industrious providers are



supposed to live in one country, the luxurious consumers in



another. The principles of the first book remain here in full



vigour. Luxury still tends as much as ever to the advancement of



industry, the statesman's business only is, to remove the seat of



it from his own country. When this can be accomplished without



detriment to industry at home, he has an opportunity of joining



all the advantages of ancient simplicity to the wealth and power



which attend upon the luxury of modern states. He may preserve



his people in sobriety, and moderation as to every expence, as to



every consumption, and make them enjoy, at the same time, riches



and superiority over all their neighbours.



    Such would be the state of trading nations, were they



employed in supplying the wants or extravagant consumption of



strangers only, and did they not insensibly adopt the very



manners with which they strive to inspire others.



    As often, therefore, as we suppose a people applying



themselves to the advancement of foreign trade, we must simplify



our ideas, by dismissing all political combinations of other



circumstances; that is to say, we must suppose this spirit



universal, and then point out the principles which influence the



success of it.



    We must encourage oeconomy, frugality, and a simplicity of



manners, discourage the consumption of every thing that can be



exported, and excite a taste for superfluity in neighbouring



nations. When such a system can no more be supported to its full



extent, by the scale of foreign demand becoming positively



lighter; then in order to set the balance even again, without



taking any thing out of the heavier scale, and to preserve and to



give bread to those who have enriched the state; an additional



home consumption, proportioned to the deficiency of foreign



demand, must be encouraged. For were the same simplicity of



manners still kept up, the infallible consequence would be a



forced restitution of the balance, by the distress, misery, and



at last extinction of the supernumerary workmen.



    I must therefore, upon such occasions, consider the



introduction of luxury, or superfluous consumption, as a rational



and moral consequence of the deficiency of foreign trade.



    I am, however, far from thinking that the luxury of every



modern state, is in proportion only to such failure; and I



readily admit, that many examples may be produced where the



progress of luxury at home and the domestic competitions with



strangers who come to market, have been the cause both of the



decline and extinction of their foreign, trade but as my business



is chiefly to point out principles, and to shew their effects, it



is here sufficient to observe, that in proportion as foreign



trade declines, either a proportional augmentation upon home



consumption must take place, or a number of the industrious,



proportioned to the diminution of former consumption, must



decrease. By the first, what I call a natural restitution of the



balance is brought about, from the principles above deduced; by



the second, what I call a forced one.



    Here then is an example, where the introduction of luxury may



be a rational and prudent step of administration; and as long as



the progress of it is not accelerated from any other motive, but



that of preserving the industrious, by giving them employment;



the same spirit, under the direction of an able statesman, will



soon throw industry into a new channel, better calculated for



reviving foreign trade, and for promoting the public good, by



substituting the call of foreigners instead of that of domestic



luxury.



    I hope, from what I have said, that the political effects of



luxury, or the consumption of superfluity, are sufficiently



understood. These I have hitherto considered as advantageous to



those classes only who are made to subsist by them; I reserve for



another occasion the pointing out how they influence the



imposition of taxes, and how the abuse of consumption in the rich



may affect the prosperity of a state.



    So soon as all foreign trade has come to a stop, without a



scheme for recalling it, and domestic consumption has filled up



its place in consuming the work, and giving bread to the



industrious, we fund ourselves obliged to reason again upon the



principles of the first book. The statesman has once more both



the producers and the consumers under his care. The consumers can



live without employment, the producers cannot. The first seldom



have occasion for the statesman's protection; the last constantly



stand in need of it. There is a perpetual fluctuation in the



balance between these two classes, from which a multitude of new



principles arise; and these render the administration of



government infinitely more difficult, and require superior



talents in the person who is at the helm. I shall here point out



the most striking effects only of the fluctuation and overturn of



this new balance, which in the subsequent chapters shall be more



fully illustrated.



    First, In proportion as the consumers become extravagant, the



producers become wealthy; and when the former become bankrupts,



the latter fill their place.



    Secondly, As the former become frugal and oeconomical, the



latter languish; when those begin to hoard, and to adopt a simple



life, these are extinguished: all extremes are vicious.



    Thirdly, If the produce of industry consumed in a country



surpass the income of those who do not work, the balance due by



the consumers must be paid to the suppliers by a proportional



alienation of their funds. This vibration of the balance gives a



very correct idea of what is meant by relative profit and loss.



The nation here loses nothing by the change produced.



    Fourthly, When, on the other hand, the annual produce of



industry consumed in a country, does not amount to the value of



the income of those who do not work, the balance of income saved;



must either be locked up in chests, made into plate, lent to



foreigners, or fairly exported as the price of foreign



consumption.



    Fifthly, The scales stand even when there is no balance on



either side; that is, when the domestic consumption is just



equivalent to the annual income of the funds. I do not pretend to



decide at present whether this exact equilibrium marks the state



of perfection in a country where there is no foreign trade, (of



which we are now treating,) or whether it would be better to have



small vibrations between the two scales; but I think I may say,



that all subversions of the balance on either side must be



hurtful, and therefore should be prevented.



    Let this suffice at present, upon a subject which shall be



more fully treated of afterwards.



    Let us next fix our attention upon the interests of a people



entirely taken up in the prosecution of foreign trade. So long as



this spirit prevails, I say, that it is the duty of a statesman



to encourage frugality, sobriety, and an application to labour in



his own people, and to excite in foreign nations a taste for



superfluities as much as possible.



    While a people are occupied in the prosecution of foreign



trade, the mutual relations between the individuals of the state,



will not be so intimate as when the producers and consumers live



in the same society; such trade implies, and even necessarily



creates a chain of foreign dependences; which proportionally



diminish the mutual dependence which formerly subsisted among the



citizens. Now the use of dependences, I have said, is to form a



band of society, capable of making the necessitous subsist out of



the superfluities of the rich, and to keep mankind in peace and



harmony with one another.



    Trade, therefore, and foreign communications, form a new kind



of a society among nations; and consequently render the



occupation of statesman more complex. He must, as before, be



attentive to provide food, other necessaries and employment for



all his people; but as the foreign connections make these very



circumstances depend upon the entertaining a good correspondence



with neighbouring nations, he must acquire a proper knowledge of



their domestic situation, so as to reconcile, as much as may be,



the interests of both parties, by engaging the strangers to



furnish articles of the first necessity, when the precious metals



cannot be procured; and to accept, in return, the most consumable



superfluities which industry can invent. And, last of all, he



must inspire his own people with a spirit of emulation in the



exercise of frugality, temperance, oeconomy, and an application



to labour and ingenuity. If this spirit of emulation be not kept



up, another will take place; for emulation is inseparable from



the nature of man; and if the citizens cannot be made to vie with



one another, in the practice of moderation, the wealth they must



acquire, will soon make them vie with strangers, in luxury and



dissipation.



    While a spirit of moderation prevails in a trading nation, it



may rest assured, that as far as in this particular it excels the



nations with whom it corresponds, so far will it increase the



proportion of its wealth, power, and superiority, over them.



These are lawful pursuits among men, when purchased by success in



so laudable an emulation.



    If it be true, that superfluity, intemperance, prodigality,



and idleness, qualities diametrically opposite to the former,



corrupt the human mind, and lead to violence and injustice; is it



not very wisely calculated by the Author of all things, that a



sober people, living under a good government should, by industry



and moderation, necessarily acquire wealth, which is the best



means of warding off the violence of those, with whom they are



bound in the great society of mankind? And is it not also most



wisely ordained, that in proportion as a people contract vicious



habits, which may lead to excess and injustice, the very



consequence of their dissipation (poverty) should deprive them of



the power of doing harm? But such reflections seem rather to be



too great a refinement on my subject, and exceed the bounds of



political oeconomy.



    When we treat of a virtuous people applying to trade and



industry, let us consider their interest only, in preserving



these sentiments; and examine the political evil of their falling



off from them. When we treat of a luxurious nation, where the



not-working part is given to excesses in all kinds of



consumption, and the working-part to labour and ingenuity, in



order to supply them, let us examine the consequences of such a



spirit, with respect to foreign trade: and if we find, that a



luxurious turn in the rich is prejudicial to it, let us try if we



can discover the methods for engaging the inhabitants to correct



their manners from a motive of self-interest. These things



premised.



    I shall now give a short sketch of the general principles



upon which a system of foreign trade may be established, and



preserved as long as possible; and of the methods by which it may



be again recovered, when, from the natural advantages and



superior ability of administration in rival nations, (not from



vices at home,) a people may have lost for a time every advantage



they used to draw from their foreign commerce.



    The first general principle is to employ, as usefully as



possible, a certain number of the society, in producing objects



of the first necessity, always more than sufficient to supply the



inhabitants; and to contrive means of enabling every one of the



free hands to procure subsistence for himself, by the exercise of



some species of industry.



    These first objects compassed, I consider the people as



abundantly provided with what is purely necessary; and also with



a surplus prepared for an additional number of free hands, so



soon as a demand can be procured for their labour. In the mean



time, the surplus will be an article of exportation; but no



sooner will demand come from abroad, for a greater quantity of



manufactures than formerly, than such demand will have the effect



of gradually multiplying the inhabitants up to the proportion of



the surplus above mentioned, provided the statesman be all along



careful to employ these additional numbers, which an useful



multiplication must have produced, in supplying the additional



demand: then with the equivalent they receive from strangers,



they will at the same time enrich the country, and purchase for



themselves that part of the national productions, which had been



permitted to be exported, for want only of a demand for it at



home.



    He must, at the same time, continue to give a proper



encouragement to the advancement of agriculture, in order that



there may be constantly found a surplus of subsistence (for



without a surplus there can never be enough); this must be



allowed to be exported, and ought to be considered as the



provision of those industrious hands which are yet unborn.



    He must cut off all foreign competition, above a certain



standard price, for that quantity of subsistence which is



necessary for home consumption; and, by premiums upon



exportation, he must discharge the farmers of any superfluous



load, which may remain upon their hands when prices fall too low.



This important matter shall be explained at large in another



place, when we come to treat of the policy of grain.



    If natural causes should produce a rise in the price of



subsistence, which cannot be brought down by any encouragement he



can give to agriculture, he must then lay the whole community



under contribution, in order to indemnify those who work for



strangers, for the advance upon the price of their food; or he



must indemnify the strangers in another way, for the advance in



the price of manufactures.



    He must consider the manufactures of superfluity, as wrought



up for the use of strangers, and discourage all domestic



competition for them, by every possible means.



    He must do what he can, constantly to proportion the supply



to the demand made for them; and when the supply necessarily



comes to exceed the demand, in spite of all his care, he must



then consider what remains over the demand, as a superfluity of



the strangers; and for the support of the equal balance between



work and demand, he must promote the sale of this superfluity



even within the country (under certain restrictions however),



until the hands employed in such branches where a redundancy is



found, can be more usefully set to work in another way.



    He must consider the advancement of the common good as a



direct object of private interest to every individual, and by a



disinterested administration of the public money, he must plainly



make it appear that it is so.



    From this principle flows the authority, vested in all



governments, to load the community with taxes, in order to



advance the prosperity of the state. And this object can be



nowise better obtained than by applying the amount of them to the



keeping an even balance between work and demand. Upon this the



health of a trading state principally depends.



    If the failure of foreign demand be found to proceed from the



superior natural advantages of other countries, he must double



his diligence to promote luxury among his neighbours; he must



support simplicity at home; he must increase his bounties upon



exportation; and his expence in relieving manufactures, as oft as



the price of their industry falls below the expence of their



subsistence.



    While these operations are conducted with coolness and



perseverance, while the allurements of the wealth acquired do not



frustrate the execution, the statesman may depend upon seeing



foreigners return to his ports, so soon as their own dissipation,



and want of frugality, come to compensate the advantages which



nature had formerly given them over their frugal and industrious



neighbours.



    If this plan be pursued, foreign trade will increase in



proportion to the number of inhabitants; and domestic luxury will



serve as an instrument only in the hands of the statesman to



increase demand at home, when the supply becomes too great for



foreign consumption. In other words, the rich citizens will be



engaged to consume what is superfluous, in order to keep the



balance even in favour of the industrious, and in favour of the



nation.



    The whole purport of this plan is to point out the operation



of three very easy principles.



    The first, That in a country entirely taken up with the



object of foreign trade, no competition should be allowed to come



from abroad for articles of the first necessity, and principally



for food, so as to raise prices beyond a certain standard.



    The second, That no domestic competition should be encouraged



upon articles of superfluity, so as to raise prices beyond a



certain standard.



    The third, That when these standards cannot be preserved, and



that, from natural causes, prices get above them, public money



must be thrown into the scale to bring prices to the level of



those of exportation.



    The greater the extent of foreign trade in any nation is, the



lower these standards must be kept; the less the extent of it is,



the higher they may be allowed to rise. Consequently,



    Were nobody in a nation employed in producing the necessaries



of life, and all the industrious employed in supplying other



articles of consumption, the prices of necessaries might be



allowed to fall as low as possible. There would be no occasion



for a standard in favour of those who live by producing them.



    Were no man in the state employed in supplying strangers, the



prices of superfluities might be allowed to rise as high as



possible, and a standard would also become useless, as the sole



design of it is to favour exportation.



    But as neither of these suppositions can ever take place, and



as in every nation there is a part employed in producing, and a



part in consuming; and as it is the surplus only of industry



which can be exported; a standard is necessary for supporting the



reciprocal interests of both parties at home; and the public



money must be made to operate upon the price of the surplus of



industry only so as to make it exportable, even in cases where



the national prices upon home consumption have got up beyond the



proper standard. Let me set this matter in another light, the



better to communicate an idea which I think is still a little



obscure.



    Were food and other necessaries the pure gift of nature in



any country, I should have laid it down as a principle to



discourage all foreign competition for them, either below or



above any certain standard; because in this case the lower the



price of them be, it is so much the better, since no



inconvenience can result from thence to any industrious person.



But as the production of these is in itself a manufacture, or an



object of industry, a certain standard must be kept up in favour



of those who live by producing them.



    On the other hand, as to the manufactures of superfluity,



domestic competition should be discouraged, beyond a certain



standard, in order that prices may not rise above those offered



by foreigners; but it might be encouraged below the standard, in



order to promote consumption and give bread to manufacturers. But



were there no foreign demand at all, there would be no occasion



for any standard, and the nation's wealth would thereby circulate



only with greater or less rapidity in proportion as prices might



rise or fall. The study of the balance between work and demand,



would still continue a principal object of attention in the



statesman, not with a view to enrich the state, but in order to



preserve every member of it in health and vigour. On the other



hand, the object of a standard regards foreign trade, and the



acquisition of new wealth, at the expence of other nations. The



rich, therefore, of a trading state must not be allowed to



increase their consumption of superfluities to the full



proportion of the constant supply; because an ample surplus must



remain for exportation; and the only way to prevent foreigners



from supplying themselves, is to prevent prices from getting up



beyond the standard, at which these foreigners can produce them.



    Farther, were every one of the society in the same pursuit



after industry, there would be no occasion for the public to be



laid under contribution for advancing the general welfare; but as



there is constantly a part employed in enriching the state, by



the sale of their work to strangers, and a part employed in



making these riches circulate at home, by the consumption of



superfluities, I think it is a good expedient to throw a part of



domestic circulation into the public coffers by the name of



taxes; that when the consequences of private wealth come



necessarily to raise prices, a statesman may be enabled to defray



the expense of bounties upon that part which can be exported, and



thereby enable the nation to continue to supply foreigners at the



same price as formerly.



    The farther these principles can be carried into execution,



the longer a state will flourish; and the longer she will support



her superiority. When foreign demand begins to fail, so as not to



be recalled, either industry must decline, or domestic luxury



must begin. The consequences of both may be easily guessed at,



and the principles which influence them shall be particularly



examined in the following chapter.











Chap. XVI







Illustration of some Principles laid down in the former Chapter,



relative to the Advancement and Support of foreign Trade







    I am now to give an illustration of some things relating to



that species of trade which is carried on with other nations,



laid down, I think, in too general terms in the former chapter.



    I have constantly in view to separate and distinguish the



principles of foreign trade, from those which influence the



advancement of an inland commerce, and a brisk circulation only;



operations which produce very different effects, equally meriting



the attention of a statesman.



    The very existence of foreign trade, implies a separate



interest between those nations who are found on the opposite



sides of the mercantile contract, namely the buyers and the



sellers, as both endeavour to make the hest bargain possible for



themselves. These transactions imply a mutual dependence upon one



another, which may either be necessary or contingent. It is



necessary, when one of the nations cannot subsist without the



assistance of the other, as is the case between the province of



Holland, and those countries which supply it with grain; or



contingent, when the wants of a particular nation cannot be



supplied by their own inhabitants, from a want of skill and



dexterity, only.



    Wherever, therefore, one nation finds another necessarily



depending upon her for particular branches of traffic, there is a



certain foundation for foreign trade; where the dependence is



contingent, there is occasion for management, and for the hand of



an able statesman.



    The best way to preserve every advantage is, to examine how



far they are necessary, and how far they are only contingent, to



consider in what respect the nation may be most easily rivalled



by her neighbours, and in what respect she has natural advantages



which cannot be taken from her.



    The natural advantages are chiefly to be depended on: France,



for example, never can be rivalled in her wines. Other countries



may enjoy great advantages from their situation, mines, rivers,



sea-ports, fishing, timber, and certain productions proper to the



soil. If you abstract from these natural advantages, all nations



are upon an equal footing as to trade. Industry and labour are no



properties attached to place, any more than oeconomy and



sobriety.



    This proposition may be called in question, upon the



principles of M. de Montesquieu, who deduces the origin of many



laws, customs, and even religions, from the influence of climate.



This great man reasoned from fact and from experience, and from



the power and tendency of natural causes, to produce certain



effects, when they are not checked by other circumstances; but in



my method of treating this subject, I do not suppose that these



causes are ever to be allowed to produce their natural and



immediate effects, when such effects would be followed by a



political inconvenience: but I constantly suppose a statesman at



the head of government, who makes every circumstance concur in



promoting the execution of the plan he has laid down.



    First, If a nation then has formed a scheme of being long



great and powerful by trade, she must first apply closely to the



manufacturing every natural produce of the country. For this



purpose a sufficient number of hands must be employed: for if



hands be found wanting, the natural produce will be exported



without receiving any additional value from labour; and the



consequences of this natural advantage will be lost.



    The price of food, and all necessaries for manufacturers,



must be found at an easy rate.



    And, in the last place, if oeconomy and sobriety in the



workmen, and good regulations on the part of the statesman, are



not kept up, the end will not be obtained: for if the



manufacture, when brought to market, do not retain the advantages



which the manufacturer had in the beginning, by employing the



natural produce of the country; it is the same thing as if the



advantage had not existed. I shall illustrate this by an example.



    I shall suppose wool to be better, more plentiful, and



cheaper, in one country than in another, and both to be rivals in



the woollen trade. It is natural that the last should desire to



buy wool of the first, and that the other should desire to keep



it at home, in order to manufacture it. Here then is a natural



advantage which the first country has over the latter, and which



cannot be taken from her. I shall suppose that subsistence is as



cheap in one country as in the other; that is to say, that bread



and every other necessary of life is at the same price. If the



workmen of the first country (by having been the founders of the



cloth manufacture, and by having had, for a long tract of years,



so great a superiority over other nations, as to make them, in a



manner, absolutely dependent upon them for cloths) shall have



raised their prices from time to time; and if, in consequence of



large profits, long enjoyed without rivalship, these profits



shall have been consolidated with the real value, in consequence



of an habitually greater expence in living, which implies an



augmentation of wages; this country may thereby lose all the



advantages it had from the low price and superior quality of its



wool. But if, on the other hand, the workmen in the last country



work less, be less dextrous, pay extravagant prices for wool at



prime cost, and be at great expence in carriage; if manufactures



cannot be carried on successfully, but by public authority, and



if private workmen be crushed with excessive taxes upon their



industry; all the accidental advantages which the last country



had over the first, may come to be more than balanced, and the



first may regain those which nature first had given her. But this



should by no means make the first country rest secure. These



accidental inconveniences found in the rival nation may come to



cease; and therefore her only real security for this branch, will



be the cheapness of the workmanship.



    Secondly, In speaking of a standard price, for goods in the



last chapter, I established a distinction between one regulated



by the height of foreign demand, and another kept as low as the



possibility of supplying the manufacture can admit. This requires



a little explanation.



    It must not here be supposed that a people, from a principle



of public spirit, will ever be engaged to relinquish the profit



of a rise in foreign demand; and as this rise may proceed from



circumstances and events which are entirely hid from the



manufacturers, such revolutions are unavoidable. We must



therefore restrain the generality of our former proposition, and



observe, that the indispensible vibrations of this foreign demand



do no harm; but that the statesman should be constantly on his



guard to prevent the subversion of the balance, or the smallest



consolidation of extraordinary profits with the real value. This



he may accomplish, as has been observed, by multiplying hands in



those branches of exportation, upon which profits have risen.



This will increase the home supply, and frustrate his own people



of extraordinary gains, which would otherwise terminate in a



prejudice to foreign trade.



    A statesman may sometimes, out of a principle of benevolence,



perhaps of natural equity towards the classes of the industrious,



as well as from sound policy, permit extraordinary profits, as an



encouragement to some of the more elegant arts, which serve as an



ornament to a country; which establish a reputation for taste and



refinement in favour of a people, and thereby make strangers



prefer articles of their production, which have no superior merit



but the name of the country they come from: but even these, he



never ought to allow to rise so high in the price as to prove an



encouragement to other nations to establish a successful



rivalship.



    Thirdly, The encouragement recommended to be given to the



domestic consumption of superfluities, as oft as the foreign



demand for them happens to fall so low as to be followed with the



distress of the workmen, requires a little farther explanation.



    If what I laid down in the last chapter with respect to this



encouragement be taken literally, I own it appears an absurd



supposition, because it both implies a degree of public spirit in



those who are in a capacity to purchase the superfluities, no



where to be met with, and at the same time a self-denial, in



discontinuing the demand, so soon as another branch of foreign



trade is opened for the employment of the industrious; one and



the other being equally contrary to the principles upon which we



have founded the whole scheme of our political oeconomy.



    I have elsewhere observed, that were revolutions to happen as



suddenly as I am obliged to represent them, all would go into



confusion.



    What, therefore, is recommended upon such an exigence comes



to this. That when a statesman finds, that the natural taste of



his people does not lead them to profit of the surplus of



commodities which lie upon hand, and which used to be exported,



he should interpose his authority and management in such a way as



to prevent the distress of the workmen, and when, by a sudden



fall in a foreign demand, this distress becomes unavoidable,



without a more powerful interposition, he should then himself



become the purchaser, if others will not; or, by premiums or



bounties on the exportation of the surplus which lies upon hand,



promote the sale of it at any rate, until the supernumerary hands



can be otherwise provided for. And although I allow that the rich



people of a state are not commonly led, from a principle either



of public spirit or self-denial, to concur in such political



operations; yet we cannot deny, that it is in the power of a good



governor, by exposing the political state of certain classes of



the people, to prevail with men of substance to join in schemes



for their relief; and this is all I intend to recommend in



practice. My point of view is to lay down the principles, and I



never recommend them farther than they may be rendered possible



in execution, by preparatory steps, and by properly working on



the spirit of the people.







Chap. XVII







Symptoms of Decay in foreign Trade







    If manufacturers be found without employment, we are not



immediately to accuse the statesman, nor conclude that it



proceeds from a decay of trade, until the cause of it be inquired



into. If upon examination it be found, that for some years past



food has been at a higher rate than in neighbouring countries,



the statesman may be to blame: for it is certain, that a trading



nation, by turning part of her commerce into a proper channel,



may always be able to establish a just balance in this



particular. And though it be not expedient in years of scarcity



to bring the price of grain very low, yet it is generally



possible to keep it at the rate it sells for in all rival



nations, which, with regard to the present point, is the same



thing.



    If this want of employment for manufacturers do not proceed



from the high prices of living, but for want of commissions from



the merchants, the causes of this diminution of demand must be



examined into. It may be accidental, and happen from causes which



may cease in a little time, and trade may return to flourish as



before. It may also happen upon the establishment of new



undertakings in different places of the country, from which, by



reason of some natural advantage, or a more frugal disposition in



the workmen, or from the proximity of place; certain markets may



be supplied, which formerly were furnished by those industrious



people who are now found to be without employment. In these last



suppositions, the distress of the manufacturers is no proof of



any decay of trade in general, but, on the contrary, it may



contribute to destroy the bad effects of consolidated profits, by



obliging those who formerly shared them, to abandon the ease of



their circumstances, and to submit a-new to a painful industry,



barely sufficient to procure subsistence. When such revolutions



are sudden, they prove hard to bear, and throw people into great



distress. It is partly to prevent such inconveniences, that we



have recommended the lowest standard possible in the price of



articles of exportation.



    Two causes there are, which very commonly mark a decline of



trade, to wit; 1. When foreign markets, usually supplied by the



trading nation, begin to be furnished, let it be in the most



trifling article, by others, not used to supply them. Or, 2. When



the country itself is furnished from abroad with such



manufactures as were formerly made at home.



    These circumstances prove one of two things, either that



there are workmen in other countries, who, from advantages which



they have acquired by nature, or by industry and frugality,



finding a demand for their work, take the bread out of the mouths



of those formerly employed, and deprive them of certain branches



of their foreign trade: or, that these foreign workmen, having



profited of the increased luxury and dissipation of the former



traders, have begun to supply the markets with certain articles



of consumption, the profits upon which being small, are, without



much rivalship, insensibly yielded up to them by the workmen of



the other trading nation, who find better bread in serving their



own wealthy countrymen.



    Against the first cause of decline, I see no better remedy



than patience, as I have said already, and a perseverance in



frugality and oeconomy, until the unwary beginners shall fall



into the inconveniences generally attending upon wealth and ease.



    The second cause of decline it is far more difficult to



remove. The root of it lies deep, and is ingrafted with the



spirit and manners of the whole people, high and low. The lower



classes have contracted a taste for superfluity and expence which



they are enabled to gratify, by working for their own countrymen;



while they despise the branches of foreign trade as low and



unprofitable. The higher classes again depend upon the lower



classes, for the gratification of a thousand little trifling



desires, formed by the taste for dissipation, and supported by



habit, fashion, and a love of expence.



    Here then is a system set on foot, whereby the poor are made



rich, and the rich are made happy, in the enjoyment of a



perpetual variety of every thing, which can remove the



inconveniences to which human nature is exposed. Thus both



parties become interested to support it, and vie with one another



in the ingenuity of contriving new wants; the one from the



immediate satisfaction of removing them; the other from the



profit of furnishing the means, and from the hopes of one day



sharing in them.



    But even for this great evil, the very nature of man points



out a remedy. It is the business of a statesman to lay hold of



it. The remedy flows from the instability of every taste not



founded upon rational desires.



    In every country of luxury, we constantly find certain



classes of workmen in distress, from the change of modes. Were a



statesman upon his guard to employ such as are forced to be idle,



before they betake themselves to new inventions, for the support



of the old plan, or before they contract an abandoned and vicious



habit, he would get them cheap, and might turn their labour both



to the advantage of the state and to the discouragement of



luxury.



    I confess, however, that while a luxurious taste in the rich



subsists, industrious people will always be ready to supply the



instruments of it to the utmost extent; and I also allow, that



such a taste has infinite allurements, especially while youth and



health enable a rich man to in it. Those, however, who are



systematically luxurious, that is, from a formed taste and



confirmed habit, are but few, in comparison of those who become



so from levity, vanity, and the imitation of others. The last are



those who principally support and extend the system; but they are



not the most incorrigible. Were it not for imitation, every age



would seek after, and be satisfied with the gratification of



natural desires. Twenty-five might think of dress, horses,



hunting, dogs, and generous wines: forty, of a plentiful table,



and the pleasures of society: sixty, of coaches, elbow-chairs,



soft carpets, and instruments of ease. But the taste for



imitation blends all ages together. The old fellow delights in



horses and fine clothes; the youth rides in his chariot on



springs, and lolls in an easy chair, large enough to serve him



for a bed. All this proceeds from the superfluity of riches and



taste for imitation, not from the real allurements of ease and



taste for luxury, as every one must feel, who has conversed at



all with the great and rich. Fashion, which I understand here to



be a synonimous term for imitation, leads most people into



superfluous expence, which is so far from being an article of



luxury, that it is frequently a load upon the person who complies



with it. All such branches of expence, it is in the power of a



statesman to cut off, by setting his own example, and that of his



favourites and servants, against the caprice of fashion.



    The levity and changeableness of mankind, as I have said,



will even assist him. A generation of oeconomists is sometimes



found to succeed a generation of spendthrifts; and we now see,



almost over all Europe, a system of sobriety succeeding an



habitual system of drunkenness. Drunkenness, and a multitude of



useless servants, were the luxury of former times.



    Every such revolution may be profited of by an able



statesman, who must set a good example on the one hand, while, on



the other, he must profit of every change of taste, in order to



re-establish the foreign trade of his subjects. An example of



frugality, in the head of a luxurious people, would do finite



harm, were it intended to reform the morals of the rich only,



without indemnifying the poor for the diminution upon



consumption.



    At the same time, therefore, that luxury comes to lose ground



at home, a door must be opened, to serve as an out-let for the



work of those hands which must be thereby made idle; and which,



consequently must fall into distress.



    This is no more than the principle before laid down, in the



fifteenth chapter, reversed: there we said, that when foreign



demand begins to decline, domestic luxury must be made to



increase, in order to soften the shock of the sudden revolution



in favour of the industrious. For the same reason here we say,



that foreign trade must be opened upon every diminution of



domestic luxury.



    How few Princes do we find either frugal or magnificent from



political considerations! And, this being the case, is it not



necessary to lay before them the natural consequences of the one



and the other? And it is still more necessary to point out the



methods to be taken in order to avoid the inconveniences which



may proceed from either.



    Under a prodigal administration, the number of people will



increase. The statesman therefore should keep a watchful eye upon



the supplying of subsistence. Under a frugal reign, numbers will



diminish, if the statesman do not open every channel which may



carry off the superfluous productions of industry. Here is the



reason: a diminution of expence at home, is a diminution of



employment; and this again implies a diminution of people;



because it interrupts the circulation of the subsistence which



made them live; but if foreign trade he made to fill up the void,



the nation will preserve its people, and the savings of the



Prince will be compensated by the balance coming in from



strangers.



    These topics are delivered as hints only; and the



amplification of them might not improperly have a place here; did



I not expect to bring them in to greater advantage, after



examining the principles of taxation, and pointing out those



which direct the application of public money.











Chap. XVIII







Methods of lowering the Price of Manufactures, in order to make



them vendible in foreign Markets







    The multiplicity of relations between the several parts of



political oeconomy, forces me to a frequent repetition of



principles. I have no other rule to judge whether such



repetitions be superfluous, or necessary, but by the tendency



they have to give me a more distinct view of my subject. This is



commonly the case when the same principles are applied to



different combinations of circumstances.



    Almost every thing to be said on the head mentioned in the



title of this chapter, has been already taken notice of; and my



present intention is merely to lay together ideas which appear



scattered, because they have been occasionally brought in by



their relations to other matters.



    The methods of lowering the price of manufactures, so as to



render them exportable, are of two kinds.



    The first, such as proceed from a good administration, and



which bring down prices within the country, in consequence of



natural causes.



    The second, such as operate upon that part only which comes



to be exported in consequence of a proper application of public



money.



    As I have not yet inquired into the methods of providing a



public fund, it would, I think, be contrary to order to examine



in this place the doctrine of premiums for bringing down the



price of manufactures. This operation will come in more naturally



afterwards, and the general distinction here mentioned, is only



introduced by the by, that my readers may retain it and apply it



as we go along.



    The end proposed is to lower the price of manufactures, so



that they may be exported. The first thing therefore to be known,



is the cause from whence it happens, that certain manufactures



cannot be furnished at home so cheap as in other countries; the



second, how to apply the proper remedy for lowering the price of



them.



    The causes of high prices, that is, of prices relatively



higher than they are found to be in other nations, are reducible



to four heads; which I shall lay down in their order, and then



point out the methods of removing them likewise, in their order.



    First, The consolidation of high profits with the real value



of the manufacture. This cause operates in countries where luxury



has gained ground, and where domestic competition has called off



too many of the hands, which were formerly content to serve at a



lower price, and for smaller gains.



    Secondly, The rise in the price of articles of the first



necessity. This cause operates when the progress of industry has



been more rapid than that of agriculture. The progress of



industry, as we have shewn, necessarily implies an augmentation



of useful inhabitants; and as these have commonly wherewithal to



purchase subsistence, the moment their numbers swell above the



proportion of the food produced by agriculture, or above what is



found in the markets of the country, or brought from abroad, they



enter into competition and raise the price of it. Here then let



it be observed, by the by, that what raises the price of



subsistence is the augmentation of the number of useful



inhabitants, that is, of such as are easy in their circumstances.



Let the wretched be ever so many, let abusive procreation go on



ever so far, such inhabitants will have little effect in raising



the price of food, but a very great one in increasing the misery



of their own class. A proof of this is to be met with in many



provinces where the number of poor is very great, and where at



the same time the price of necessaries is very low; whereas no



instance can be found where a number of the industrious being got



together, does not occasion an immediate rise on most of the



articles of subsistence.



    Thirdly, The natural advantages of other countries. This



operates in spite of all the precautions of the most frugal and



laborious people. Let them deprive themselves of every



superfluity; let them be ever so diligent and ingenious; let



every circumstance be improved to the utmost by the statesman for



the establishment of foreign trade; the advantage of climate and



situation may give such a superiority to the people of another



country, as to render a direct competition with them impossible.



    Fourthly, The superior dexterity of other nations in working



up their manufactures, their knowledge in the science of trade,



the promptitude of their payments, the advantage they have in



turning their money to account in the intervals of their own



direct circulation, the superior abilities of their statesman,



the application of their public money, in one word, the



perfection of their political oeconomy.



    Before I enter upon the method of removing these several



inconveniences, I must observe, that as we are at present



treating of the relative height of the price of manufactures, a



competition between nations is constantly implied. It is this



which obliges a statesman to be principally attentive to the rise



of prices. The term competition is relative to, and conveys the



idea of emulation between two parties striving to compass the



same end. I must therefore distinguish between the endeavours



which one nation makes to retain a superiority already got, and



the endeavours which another nation makes in order to acquire it.



The first I shall call a competition to retain; the second, a



competition to acquire.



    The first three heads represent the inconveniences to which



the competitors to retain are liable; and the fourth comprehends



those to which the competitors to acquire are most commonly



exposed.



    Having digested our subject into order, I shall run through



the principles which severally influence the removing of every



inconvenience, whether incident to a nation whose foreign trade



is already well established, or to another naturally calculated



for entering into a competition for the acquisition of it.



    In proposing a remedy for the particular causes of the rise



of prices above mentioned, we must suppose every one entirely



simple, and uncompounded with the others; a thing which in fact



seldom happens. This I do for the sake of distinctness; and the



principal difficulty in practice is to combine the remedies in



proportion to the complication of the disease. I now come to the



first of the four causes of high prices, to wit, consolidated



profits.



    The whole doctrine of these has been abundantly set forth in



the 10th chapter. We there explained the nature of them, shewed



how the subversion of the balance, by a long preponderancy of the



scale of demand, had the effect of consolidating profits in a



country of luxury; and observed, that the reducing them to the



proper standard could never fail of bringing those who had long



enjoyed them, into distress.



    The question now before us is how to reduce them, when



foreign trade cannot otherwise be retained, let the consequences



be ever so hurtful to certain individuals. When the well being of



a nation comes in competition with a temporary inconvenience to



some of the inhabitants, the general good must be preferred to



particular considerations.



    I have observed above, that domestic luxury, by offering high



prices upon certain species of industry, calls off many hands



employed to supply the articles of exportation, upon which



profits are generally very moderate. The first natural and



immediate effect of this, is, to diminish the hands employed in



furnishing the foreign demand; consequently, to diminish the



supply; consequently, to occasion a simple competition on the



side of the strangers, who are the purchasers; consequently, to



augment profits to the furnishers until by the rise and



consolidation of such profits the market is deserted.



    The very progress here laid down, points out the remedy. The



number of hands employed in these particular branches must be



multiplied; and if the luxurious taste and wealth of the country



prevent any one who can do better, from betaking himself to a



species of industry lucrative to the nation, but ungrateful to



those who exercise it, the statesman must collect the children of



the wretched into workhouses, and breed them to this employment,



under the best regulations possible for saving every article of



necessary expence; here likewise may be employed occasionally



those above mentioned, whom the change of modes may have cast out



of employment, until they can be better provided for. This is



also an outlet for foundlings, since many of those who work for



foreign exportation, are justly to be ranked in the lowest



classes of the people; and in the first book we proposed, that



every one brought up at the expence of public charity, should be



thrown in for recruiting these classes, which can with greatest



difficulty support their own numbers by propagation.



    Here let me observe, that although it be true in general,



that the greatest part of exportable manufactures do yield but



very middling profits, from the extension of industry in



different countries, yet sundry exceptions may be found;



especially in nations renowned for their elegance of taste. But



how quickly do we see these lucrative branches of foreign trade



cut off, in consequence of the very inconvenience we here seek a



remedy for. The reason is plain. When strangers demand such



manufactures, they share only in the instruments of foreign



luxury, which bring every where considerable profits to the



manufacturer. These high profits easily establish a rivalship in



favour of the nation to whom they are supplied; because a hint is



sufficient to enable such as exercise a similar profession at



home, to supply their own inhabitants. This being the case, an



able statesman should be constantly attentive to every growing



taste among foreign nations for the inventions of his people; and



so soon as his luxurious workmen have set any one on foot, he may



throw this branch into the hands of the most frugal, in order to



support it, and then give them such encouragement as to prevent



the rivalship of those strangers at least, who are accustomed to



work for larger profits. This is one method of turning a branch



of luxury into an article of foreign trade. Let me illustrate



this by an example.



    What great advantages do not the French reap from the



exportation of their modes? But how quickly do we find their



varnishes, gauzes, ribbands, and colifichets, imitated by other



nations? For no other reason but because of the large, or



consolidated profits enjoyed by the French workmen themselves,



who, fertile in new inventions, and supported by their reputation



for the elegance of their taste in matters of dress, have got



into possession of the right of prescribing to all Europe the



standard of taste in articles of mere superfluity. This however



is no permanent prerogative; and that elegant people, by long



setting the example, and determining the standard of refinement



in some luxurious arts, will at last inspire a similar taste into



their scholars, who will thereby be enabled to supplant them.



Whereas were they careful to supply all their inventions at the



lowest prices possible, they would ever continue to be the only



furnishers.



    The method therefore of reducing consolidated profits,



whether upon articles of exportation, or home consumption, is to



increase the number of hands employed in supplying them; and the



more gradually this change is made to take place, the fewer



inconveniences will result to those who will thereby be forced to



renounce them.



    A country which has an extensive territory, and great



opportunities of extending her agriculture (such as in a former



chapter I supposed the present situation of France to be) may,



under a good administration, find the progress of luxury very



compatible with the prosperity of her foreign trade; because



inhabitants may be multiplied at discretion. But so soon as



subsistence becomes hard to be obtained, this expedient is cut



off. A statesman must then make the best of the inhabitants he



has, luxury must suffer a check; and those who are employed in



supplying home consumption at high prices, must be made to reduce



their consolidated profits, in order to bring the price of their



manufactures within such bounds as to make them vendible in



foreign markets.



    If manufacturers become luxurious in their way of living, it



must proceed from their extraordinary profits. These they may



still continue to have, as long as the produce of their work is



consumed at home. But no merchant will pretend to sell it out of



the country; because, in this case, he will find the labour of



other people who are less luxurious, and consequently work



cheaper, in competition with him.



    To re-establish then the foreign trade, these consolidated



profits must be put an end to, by attacking luxury when



circumstances render an augmentation of people inconvenient, and



prices will fall of course.



    This will occasion great complaints among all sorts of



tradesmen. The cry will be, that trade is ruined, manufacturers



are starving, and the state is undone: but the truth will be,



that manufacturers will, by their labour, begin to enrich their



own nation, at the expence of all those who trade with her,



instead of being enriched at the expence of their own countrymen;



and by a revolution only in the balance of wealth at home.



    It will prove very discouraging to any statesman to attempt a



sudden reform of this abuse of consolidated profits, and to



attack the luxury of his own people. The best way therefore is to



prevent matters from coming to such as pass, as to demand so



dangerous and difficult a remedy.



    There is hardly a possibility of changing the manners of a



people, but by a proper attention to the education of the youth.



All methods, therefore, should be fallen upon to supply



manufactures with new hands; and lest the contagion of example



should get the better of all precautions, the seat of



manufactures might be changed; especially when they are found in



great and populous cities, where living is dear: in this case,



others should be erected in the provinces where living is cheap.



The state must encourage these new undertakings; numbers of



children must be taken in, in order to be bred early to industry



and frugality; this again will encourage people to marry and



propagate, as it will contribute towards discharging them of the



load of a numerous family. If such a plan as this be followed,



how inconsiderable will the number of poor people become in a



little time; and as it will insensibly multiply the useful



inhabitants, out of that youth which recruited and supported the



numbers of the poor, so the taxes appropriated for the relief of



poverty may be then wholly applied, in order to prevent it.



    Laws of naturalization have been often proposed in a nation,



where consolidated profits have occasioned the inconveniences for



which we have here been proposing a remedy. By this expedient



many flatter themselves to draw industrious strangers into the



country, who being accustomed to live more frugally, and upon



less profits, may, by their example and competition, beat down



the price of work among the inhabitants.



    Several circumstances concur to defeat the success of this



scheme. The first is, that consolidated profits are not the only



inconvenience to be removed: there is also a complication of high



prices upon many necessaries. Secondly, as no real change has



been proposed as a concomitant of such naturalization-laws (such



as a regulation for augmenting the supply of subsistence, and



fixing the price of it within proper bounds) these strangers,



who, as such, must be exposed to extraordinary expence, are not



able to subsist, nor consequently to work so cheap as they did at



home. Besides, what can be supposed to be their motive of coming,



if it be not to have higher wages, and to live better?



    Here then is a nation sending for strangers, in order that



they may work cheaper; and strangers flocking into the country in



hopes of selling their work dearer. This is just the case with



two friends who are about making a bargain; the seller imagines



that his friend will not grudge a good price. The buyer, on the



other hand, flatters himself that his friend will sell to him



cheaper than to another. This seldom fails to produce discontent



on both sides.



    Besides, unless the quantity of food be increased, if



strangers are imported to eat part of it, natives must in some



degree starve and if you augment the quantity of food, and keep



it at a little lower price than in neighbouring nations, your own



inhabitants will multiply; the state may take great numbers of



them into their service when young; they soon come to be able to



do something in the manufacturing way; they may be bound for a



number of years, sufficient to indemnify the public for the first



expence; and the encouragement alone of having bread cheaper than



elsewhere, will bring you as many strangers as you incline to



receive, provided a continual supply of food can be procured in



proportion to the increase of the people.



    But I imagine that it is always better for a state to



multiply by means of its own inhabitants, than by that of



strangers; for many reasons which to me appear obvious.



    We come now to the second cause of high prices, to wit, a



rise in the value of the articles of the first necessity, which



we have said proceeds from the progress of industry having



outstripped the progress of agriculture. Let me set this idea in



a clearer light; for here it is expressed in too general terms to



be rightly viewed on all sides.



    The idea of inhabitants being multiplied beyond the



proportion of subsistence, seems to imply that there are too many



already; and the demand for their industry having been the cause



of their multiplication, proves that formerly there were too few.



Add to this, that if, notwithstanding the rise upon the price of



work proceeding from the scarcity of subsistence, the scale of



home demand be found to preponderate, at the expence of foreign



trade, this circumstance proves farther, that however the



inhabitants may be already multiplied above the proportion of



subsistence, their numbers are still too few for what is demanded



of them at home; and for what is required of them towards



promoting the prosperity of their country, in supporting their



trade abroad.



    From this exposition of the matter, the remedy appears



evident: both inhabitants and subsistence must be augmented. The



question comes to be, in what manner, and with what precautions,



must these operations be performed?



    Inhabitants are multiplied by reducing the price of



subsistence to the value, which demand has fixed upon the work of



those who are to consume it. This can in no other way be



accomplished than by augmenting the quantity, by importation from



foreign parts, when the country cannot be made to produce more of



itself.



    Here the interposition of a statesman is absolutely



necessary; since great loss may often be incurred by bringing



down the price of grain in a year of scarcity. Premiums,



therefore, must be given upon importation, until a plan can be



executed for the extending of agriculture; of which in another



place. This must be gone about with the greatest circumspection;



for if grain be thereby made to fall too low, you ruin the landed



interest, and although (as we have said above) all things soon



become balanced in a trading nation, yet sudden and violent



revolutions, such as this must be, are always to be apprehended.



They are ever dangerous; and the spirit of every class of



inhabitants must be kept up.



    By a discredit cast upon any branch of industry, the hands



employed in it may be made to abandon it, to the great detriment



of the whole. This will infallibly happen, when violent



transitions do not proceed from natural causes, as in the example



here before us, namely, when the price of grain is supposed to be



brought down, from the increase of its quantity by importation,



and not by plenty. Because upon the falling of the market by



importation, the poor farmer has nothing to make up for the low



price he gets for his grain; whereas when the fall proceeds from



plenty, he has an additional quantity.



    In years, therefore, of general scarcity, a statesman should



not, by premiums given, reduce the price of grain, but in a



reciprocal proportion to the quantity wanted: that is to say, the



more grain is wanted, the less the price should be diminished.



    It may appear a very extensive project for any government to



undertake to keep down the prices of grain, in years of general



scarcity. I allow it to be politically impossible to keep prices



low, because if all Europe be taken together, the produce of the



whole is one with another consumed by the inhabitants; and in a



year when there is a general scarcity, it would be very hard, if



not impossible, (without having previously established a plan for



this purpose) to make any nation live in plenty while others are



starving. All therefore that is proposed, is to keep the prices



of grain in as just a proportion as possible to the plenty of the



year.



    Now if a government do not interpose, this never can be the



case. I shall suppose the inhabitants of a country to consume, in



a year of moderate plenty, six millions of quarters of grain; if



in a year of scarcity it shall be found, that one million of



quarters, or indeed a far less quantity, be wanting, the five



millions of quarters produced, will rise in their price to



perhaps double the ordinary value, instead of being increased by



one fifth only. But if you examine the case in countries where



trade is not well established, as in some inland provinces on the



continent, it is no extraordinary thing to see grain bearing



three times the price it is worth in ordinary years of plenty,



and yet if in such a year there were wanting six months'



provisions for the inhabitants of a great kingdom, all the rest



of Europe would perhaps hardly be able to keep them from



starving.



    It is the fear of want and not real want, which makes grain



rise to immoderate prices. Now as this extraordinary revolution



in the rise of it, does not proceed from a natural cause, to wit,



the degree of scarcity, but from the avarice and evil designs of



men who hoard it up, it produces as bad consequences to that part



of the inhabitants of a country employed in manufactures, as the



fall of grain would produce to the farmers, in case the prices



should be, by importation, brought below the just proportion of



the quantity produced in the nation.



    Besides the importation of grain, there is another way of



increasing the quantity of subsistence very considerably, in some



countries of Europe. In a year of scarcity, could not the



quantity of food be considerably augmented by a prohibition to



make malt liquors, allowing the importation of wines and



brandies; or indeed without laying any restraint upon the liberty



of the inhabitants as to malt liquors, I am persuaded that the



liberty of importing wines duty free, would, in years of



scarcity, considerably augment the quantity of subsistence.



    This is not a proper place to examine the inconvenience which



might result to the revenue by such a scheme: because we are here



talking of those expedients only which might be fallen upon to



preserve a balance on foreign trade. An exchequer which is filled



at the expence of this, will not continue long in a flourishing



condition.



    These appear to be the most rational temporary expedients to



diminish the price of grain in years of scarcity; we shall



afterwards examine the principles upon which a plan may be laid



down to destroy all precariousness in the price of subsistence.



    Precautions of another kind must be taken in years of plenty;



for high prices occasioned by exportation are as hurtful to the



poor tradesman as if they were occasioned by scarcity. And low



prices occasioned by importation are as hurtful to the poor



husbandman as if his crop had failed him.



    A statesman therefore, should be very attentive to put the



inland trade in grain upon the best footing possible, to prevent



the frauds of merchants, and to promote an equal distribution of



food in all corners of the country. and by the means of



importation and exportation, according to plenty and scarcity, to



regulate a just proportion between the general plenty of the year



in Europe, and the price of subsistence; always observing to keep



it somewhat lower at home, than it can be found in any nation



rival in trade. If this method be well observed, inhabitants will



multiply; and this is a principal step towards reducing the



expence of manufactures; because you increase the number of



hands, and consequently diminish the price of labour.



    Another expedient found to operate most admirable effects in



reducing the price of manufactures (in those countries where



living is rendered dear, by a hurtful competition among the



inhabitants for the subsistence produced) is the invention and



introduction of machines. We have, in a former chapter, answered



the principal objections which have been made against them, in



countries where the numbers of the idle, or triflingly



industrious are so great, that every expedient which can abridge



labour is looked upon by some as a scheme for starving the poor.



There is no solidity in this objection; and if there were, we are



not at present in quest of plans for feeding the poor; but for



accumulating the wealth of a trading nation, by enabling the



industrious to feed themselves at the expence of foreigners. The



introduction of machines is found to reduce prices in a



surprising manner. And if they have the effect of taking bread



from hundreds, formerly employed in performing their simple



operations, they have that also of giving bread to thousands, by



extending numberless branches of ingenuity, which, without the



machines, would have remained circumscribed within very narrow



limits. What progress has not building made within these hundred



years? Who doubts that the convenience of great iron works, and



saw mills, prompts many to build? But this taste has greatly



contributed to increase, not to diminish, the number both of



smiths and carpenters, as well as to extend navigation. I shall



add only in favour of such expedients, that experience shews the



advantage gained by certain machines to be more than enough to



compensate every inconvenience arising from consolidated profits,



and expensive living; and that the first inventors gain thereby a



superiority which nothing but adopting the same invention can



counterbalance.



    The third cause of high prices we have said to be owing to



the natural advantage which neighbouring nations reap from their



climate, soil, or situation.



    Here no rise of prices is implied in the country in question,



they are only supposed to have become relatively high by the



opportunity other nations have had to furnish the same articles



at a lower rate, in consequence of their natural advantages.



    Two expedients may be used, in order to defeat the bad



effects of a competition which cannot be got the better of in the



ordinary way. The first is, to assist the branches in distress



with the public money. The other is patience, and perseverance in



frugality, as has been already observed. A short example of the



first will be sufficient in this place to make the thing fully



understood. I have already said, that I purposely postpone an



ample dissertation upon the principles which influences such



operations.



    Let me suppose a nation which is accustomed to export to the



value of a million sterling of fish every year, to be undersold



in this article by another which has found a fishery on its own



coasts, so abundant as to enable it to undersell the first by 20



per cent. In this case, let the statesman buy up all the fish of



his subjects, and undersell his competitors at every foreign



market, at the loss to himself of perhaps 250,000l. What is the



consequence? That the million he paid for the fish remains at



home, and that 750,000l. comes in from abroad for the prices of



them. How is the 250,000l. to be made up? By a general imposition



upon all the inhabitants. This returns into the public coffers,



and all stands as it was. If this expedient be not followed, what



will be the consequence? That those employed in the fishery will



starve; that the fish taken will either remain upon hand, or be



sold by the proprietors at a great loss; they will be undone, and



the nation for the future will lose the acquisition of 750,000l.



a year.



    To abridge this operation premiums are given upon



exportation, which comes to the same thing, and this is a



refinement on the application of this very principle: but



premiums are often abused. It belongs to the department of the



coercive power of government to put a stop to such abuse. All I



shall say upon the matter is, that if there be a crime called



high treason, which is punished with greater severity than



highway robbery, and assassination, I should be apt (were I a



statesman) to put at the head of this bloody list, every attempt



to defeat the application of public money, for the purposes here



mentioned. The multiplicity of frauds alone discourages a wise



government from proceeding upon this principle, and disappoints



the scheme. If severe punishment can in its turn put a stop to



frauds, I believe it will be thought very well applied.



    While a statesman is thus defending the foreign trade of his



country by an extraordinary operation performed upon the



circulation of its wealth, he must at the same time employ the



second expedient with equal address. He must be attentive to



support sobriety at home, and wait patiently until abuses among



his neighbours shall produce some of the inconveniences we have



already mentioned. So soon as this comes to be the case, he has



gained his point; the premiums then may cease; the public money



may be turned into another channel; or the tax may be suppressed



altogether, according as circumstances may require.



    I need not add, that the more management and discretion be



used in such operations, the less jealousy will be conceived by



other rival nations. And as we are proposing this plan for a



state already in possession of a branch of foreign trade, ready



to be disputed by others, having superior natural advantages, it



is to be presumed that the weight of money, at least is on her



side. This, if rightly employed, will prove an advantage, more



than equal to any thing which can be brought against it; and if



such an operation comes to raise the indignation of her rival, it



will on the other hand, reconcile the favour of every neutral



state, who will find a palpable benefit from the competition, and



will never fail to give their money to those who sell the



cheapest. In a word, no private trader can stand in competition



with a nation's wealth. Premiums are an engine in commerce, which



nothing can resist but a similar operation.



    Hitherto we have been proposing methods for removing the



inconveniences which accompany wealth and superiority, and for



preserving the advantages which result from foreign trade already



established: we must now change sides, and adopt the interest of



those nations who labour under the weight of a heavy competition



with their rich neighbours, versed in commerce, dextrous in every



art and manufacture, and conducted by a statesman of superior



abilities, who sets all engines to work, in order to make the



most of every favourable circumstance.



    It is no easy matter for a state unacquainted with trade and



industry, even to form a distant prospect of rivalship with such



a nation, as long as the abuses attending upon their wealth are



not supposed to have crept in among them. Consequently, it would



be the highest imprudence to attempt, at first setting out, any



thing that could excite their jealousy.



    The first thing to be inquired into is the state of natural



advantages. If any branch of natural produce, such as grain,



cattle, wines, fruits, timber, or the like, are here found of so



great importance to the rival nations, that they will purchase



them with money, not with an exchange of their manufactures, such



branches of trade may be kept open with them. If none such can be



found, the first step is to cut off all communication of trade by



exchange with such a people; and to apply closely to the supply



of every want at home, without having recourse to foreigners.



    So soon as these wants begin to be supplied, and that a



surplus is found, other nations must be sought for, who enjoy



less advantages and trade may be carried on with them in a lower



way. People here must glean before they can expect to reap. But



by gleaning every year they will add to their stock of wealth,



and the more it is made subservient to public uses, the faster it



will increase.



    The beginners will have certain advantages inseparable from



their infant state; to wit, a series of augmentation of all



kinds, of which we have so frequently made mention. If these can



be preserved in an equable progression; if the balance of work



and demand, and that of population and agriculture, can be kept



in a gentle vibration, by alternate augmentations; and if a plan



of oeconomy, equally good with that of the rivals, be set on foot



and pursued; time will bring every natural advantage of climate,



soil, situation, and extent, to work their full effects; and in



the end they will decide the superiority.



    I shall now conclude my chapter, with some observations on



the difference between theory and practice, so far as regards the



present subject.



    In theory, we have considered every one of the causes which



produce high prices, and prevent exportation, as simple and



uncompounded: in practice they are seldom ever so. This



circumstance makes the remedies difficult, and sometimes



dangerous. Difficult, from the complication of the disease;



dangerous, because the remedy against consolidated profits which



is to increase the number of manufacturers, will do infinite



harm, if applied to remove that which proceeds from dear



subsistence, which calls for a supply of food, not of mouths, as



has been said.



    Another great difference between theory and practice occurs



in the fourth case; where we suppose a nation unacquainted with



trade, to set out upon a competition with those who are in



possession of it. When I examine the situation of some countries



of Europe (Spain perhaps) to which the application of these



principles may be made, I find that it is precisely in such



nations, where the other disadvantages of consolidated profits,



and even the high prices of living, are carried to the greatest



height; and that the only thing which keeps one shilling of



specie among them, is the infinite advantage they draw from their



mines, and from the sale of their pure and unmanufactured natural



productions, added to their simplicity of life, occasioned by the



wretchedness of the lower classes, which alone prevents these



also from consuming foreign commodities. Were money in these



countries as equally distributed as in those of trade and



industry, it would quickly be exported. Every one would extend



his consumption of foreign commodities, and the wealth would



disappear. But this is not the case; the rich keep their money in



their coffers; because lending at interest, there, is very wisely



laid under numberless obstructions. The vice, therefore, is not



so much that the lending of money at interest is forbid, as that



the people are not put in a situation to have any pressing



occasion for borrowing it, as a mean of advancing their industry.



Were they taught to supply their own wants, the state might



encourage circulation by loan; but as they run to strangers for



this supply, their money is far better locked up.



    Upon a right use and application of these general principles,



according to the different combinations of circumstances, in a



nation whose principal object is an extensive and profitable



foreign trade, I imagine a statesman may both establish and



preserve, for a very long time, a great superiority in point of



commerce; provided peace can be preserved: for in time of war,



every populous nation, if great and extended, will find such



difficulties in procuring food, and such numbers of hands



gratuitously to maintain, that what formerly made its greatness



will hasten its ruin.







Chap. XIX







Of infant, foreign, and inland Trade, with respect to the several



Principles which influence them







    I have always found it easier to retain the geography of a



country, from the inspection of maps, after travelling over the



regions there represented, than before; as most prefaces are best



understood, after reading the book which they are calculated to



introduce. Let this serve as an apology for presenting to my



readers a chapter of distribution, in the middle of my subject.



    I intend at present to take a view of the whole region of



trade, divided into its different districts, in order to point



out a ruling principle in each, from which every other must



naturally flow, or may be deduced by an easy reasoning. These I



shall lay before my reader, that from them he may distribute his



ideas in the same order I have done. Hence the terms I shall be



obliged to use will be rendered more adequate, in expressing the



ideas I may have occasion to convey by them.



    I divide trade into infant, foreign, and inland.



    First. Infant trade, taken in a general acceptation, may be



understood to be that species, which has for its object the



supplying the necessities of the inhabitants of a country;



because it is commonly antecedent to the supplying the wants of



strangers. This species has been known in all ages, and in all



countries, in a less or a greater degree, in proportion to the



multiplication of the wants of mankind, and in proportion to the



number of those who depend on their ingenuity for procuring



subsistence.



    The general principles which direct a statesman in the proper



encouragement of this commerce, relate to two objects.



    First, To promote the ease and happiness of the higher



classes, in making their wealth subservient to their wants and



inclinations.



    Secondly, To promote the ease and happiness of the lower



classes, by turning their natural faculties to an infallible



means of relieving their necessities.



    This communicates the idea of a free society; because it



implies the circulation of a real equivalent for every thing



transferred, and for every service performed; to acquire which,



mankind submit with pleasure to the hardest labour.



    In the first book, I had little occasion to consider trade



under different denominations; or as influenced by any other



principle than that of promoting the multiplication of mankind,



and the extension of agriculture, by drawing the wealth of the



rich into the hands of the industrious. This operation, when



carried no farther, is a true representation of infant trade.



    But now I must set this matter in a new light: and consider



this infant trade as a basis for establishing a foreign commerce.



In itself it is a mean only of gratifying the desires of those



who have the equivalent to give; and of providing it for those



who have it not. We are next to examine how a statesman may, by



proper care, convert it into the means of procuring to his people



a great superiority over all the neighbouring nations; by



diminishing, on one hand, the quantity they have of this general



equivalent (wealth); and by increasing, on the other, the



absolute quantity of it at home; in such a manner as not only to



promote the circulation of that part of it which is necessary to



supply the wants of all the citizens, but by a surplus of it, to



render other nations dependent upon them, in most operations of



their political oeconomy.



    The statesman who resolves to improve this infant trade into



foreign commerce, must examine the wants of other nations, and



consider the productions of his own country. He must then



determine, what kinds of manufactures are best adapted for



supplying the first, and for consuming the latter. He must



introduce the use of such manufactures among his subjects; and



endeavour to extend his population and his agriculture, by



encouragements given to these new branches of consumption. He



must provide his people with the best masters; he must supply



them with every useful machine; and above all, he must relieve



them of their work, when home-demand is not sufficient for the



consumption of it.



    A considerable time must of necessity be required to bring a



people to a dexterity in manufactures. The branches of these are



many; and every one requires a particular slight of hand, which



cannot be acquired but under the eye of a skilful master, able to



point out the rudiments of the art. People do not perceive this



inconvenience, in countries where the arts are already



introduced; and many a projector has been ruined for want of



attention to it.



    In the more simple operations of manufacturing, where



apprenticeships are not in use, every one teaches another. The



new beginners are put among a number who are already perfect: all



the instructions they get is, do as you see others do before you.



This is an advantage which an established industry has over



another newly set on foot; and this I apprehend to be the reason



why we see certain manufactures, after remaining long in a state



of infancy, make in a few years a most astonishing progress. What



loss must be at first incurred! what numbers of aspiring geniuses



overpowered by unsuccessful beginnings, when a statesman does not



concern himself in the operation! If he assist his subjects, by



laying a prohibition upon foreign work, this expedient will



become the means of encouraging the most extravagant profits,



unless, at the same time, he extend the manufacture, by



multiplying the hands employed in it. I allow, indeed, that as



long as the gates of a kingdom are kept shut, and that no foreign



communication is permitted, large profits do little harm, and



tend to promote dexterity and refinement. This is a very good



method for laying a foundation for manufactures: but so soon as



dexterity has been thus sufficiently encouraged, and that



abundance of excellent masters have been provided; then the



statesman, in order to carry the plan into execution, ought to



multiply the number of scholars; and a new generation must be



brought up in frugality, and in the enjoyment of the most



moderate profits.



    The ruling principle, therefore, which ought to direct a



statesman in promoting and improving the infant trade of his



people, is to encourage the manufacturing of every branch of



natural productions, by extending the home-consumption of them;



by excluding all competition with strangers; by permitting the



rise of profits, so far as to promote dexterity and emulation in



invention and improvement; by relieving the industrious of their



work, as often as demand for it falls short; and, until it can be



exported to advantage, it may be exported with loss, at the



expence of the public. He must likewise spare no expence in



procuring the ablest masters in every branch of industry, nor any



cost in making the first establishments, in providing machines,



and every other thing necessary or useful to make the undertaking



succeed. He must keep constantly an eye upon the profits made in



every branch of industry, and so soon as he finds that the real



value of the manufacture comes so low as to render it exportable,



he must employ the hands, as above, and put an end to these



profits he had permitted as the means only of bringing the



manufacture to its perfection. In proportion as the prices of



every species of industry are brought down to the standard of



exportation, in such proportion will this species of trade lose



its original character, and adopt the second.



    Secondly, Foreign trade has been explained sufficiently: the



ruling principles of which are to banish luxury; to encourage



frugality; to fix the lowest standard of prices possible; and to



watch, with the greatest attention, over the vibrations of the



balance between work and demand. While this is preserved, no



internal vice can affect the prosperity of it. And when the



natural advantages of other nations constitute a rivalship, not



otherwise to be overcome, the statesman must counterbalance these



advantages by the weight and influence of public money; and when



this expedient becomes also ineffectual, foreign trade is at an



end; and out of its ashes arises the third species, which I call



inland commerce.



    Thirdly, The more general principles of in land commerce have



been occasionally considered in the first book, and more



particularly hinted at in the 15th chapter of this; but there are



still many new relations to be examined, from which new



principles will arise: these shall be illustrated in the



subsequent chapters of this book. I shall here point out the



general heads only, which will serve to particularize and



distinguish this third species of trade, from the two preceding.



    Inland commerce, in the present acceptation of the term, is



supposed to take place upon the total extinction of foreign



trade. The statesman must, in such a case, as in the other two



species, attend to supplying the wants of the rich, in relieving



the necessities of the poor, by the circulation of the equivalent



as above; but as formerly he had it in his eye to watch over the



balance of work and demand, so now he must principally attend to



the balance of wealth, as it vibrates between consumers and



manufacturers; that is, between the rich and the industrious. The



effects of this vibration have been shortly pointed out, Chap.



xv.



    In conducting a foreign trade, his business was to establish



the lowest standard possible as to prices; and to confine profits



within the narrowest bounds: but as now there is no question of



exportation, this object of his care in a great measure



disappears; and high profits made by the industrious will have



then no other effect than to draw the balance of wealth more



speedily to their side. The higher profits rise, the more quickly



will the industrious be enriched, the more quickly will the



consumers become poor, and the more necessary will it be to cut



off every foreign communication in the way of trade.



    From this political situation of any state, arises the



fundamental principle of taxation; which is, that, at the time of



the vibration of the balance between the consumer and the



manufacturer, the state should, by the imposition of a tax,



advance the dissipation of the first, and share in the profits of



the latter. This branch of our subject I shall not here



anticipate; but I shall, in the remaining chapters of this book,



make it sufficiently evident, that so soon as the wealth of a



state becomes considerable enough to introduce luxury, and put an



end to foreign trade; and when, from the excessive rise of



prices, all hopes of restoring it are lost, then taxes become



necessary, both for the support of government on the one hand,



and, on the other, to serve as an expedient for recalling foreign



trade in spite of all the pernicious effects of luxury to



extinguish it.



    I hope from this short recapitulation and exposition of



principles, I have sufficiently communicated to my reader the



distinctions I want to establish, between what I have called



infant, foreign, and inland trade. Such distinctions are very



necessary to be retained, because it is proper they should be



applied in many places of this treatise, in order to qualify



general propositions: these cannot be avoided, without a



perpetual repetition of such restrictions, which would tire the



reader, appear frivolous to him, and divert his attention.



    I shall only add, that we are not to suppose the commerce of



any nation confined to any one of the three species. I have



considered them separately, according to custom, in order to



point out their different principles. It is the business of



statesmen to compound them according to circumstances.







Chap. XX







Of Luxury







    My reader may perhaps be surprized to find this subject



formally introduced, after all I have said of it in the first



book, under a definition which renders the term sufficiently



clear, by distinguishing it from sensuality and excess; and by



confining it to the providing of superfluities, in favour of a



consumption, which necessarily must produce the good effects of



giving employment and bread to the industrious.



    This simple acceptation of the term, was the most proper for



explaining the political effects of extraordinary consumption. I



cannot however deny, that the word luxury commonly conveys a more



complex idea; and did I take no notice of this circumstance, it



might be thought that I had purposely confined the meaning of a



general term to a particular acceptation, in order to lead to



error, and with a view to conceal the vicious influence of modern



economy over the minds of mankind; which influence, if vicious,



cannot fail to affect even their political happiness.



    My intention therefore, in this chapter, is to relax the mind



of my reader, while I set before him my ideas concerning luxury,



taken in the most extensive acceptation of the word, in such an



order, as first to vindicate the definition I have given of it,



by shewing that it is a proper one; and secondly, to reconcile



the sentiments of those who appear to combat one another, on a



subject wherein all must agree, when terms are fully understood.



    For this purpose, I shall set out by distinguishing luxury,



as it affects our different interest, by producing hurtful



consequences; from luxury, as it regards the moderate



gratification of our natural or rational desires. I must separate



objects which are but too frequently confounded, and analyze this



complicated term, by specifying the ideas it contains, under



partial definitions.



    The interests affected by luxury, I take to be four: first,



the moral, as it hurts the mind; secondly, the physical, as it



hurts the body; the domestic, as it hurts the fortune; and the



political, as it hurts the state.



    The natural desires which proceed from our animal oeconomy,



and which are gratified by luxury, may be also reduced to four,



viz. hunger, thirst, love, and ease or indolence. The moderate



gratification of these desires, and physical happiness, is the



same thing. The immoderate gratification of them is excess; and



if this also be implied by luxury, no man, I believe, ever



seriously became its apologist.



    The first point to be explained is, what is to be understood



by excess. What appears an excess to one man, may appear



moderation to another. I therefore measure the excess by the bad



effects it produces on the mind, the body, the fortune, and the.



state. and when we speak of luxury as a vice, it is requisite to



point out the particular bad effects it produces to one, more, or



all the interests which may be affected by it: when this is



neglected, ambiguities ensue, which involve people in



inextricable disputes.



    In order to communicate my thoughts upon this subject with



the more precision, I shall give an example of the harm resulting



to the mind, the body, the fortune, and the state, from the



excessive gratification of the several natural desires above



mentioned.



    First, As to the mind, eating to exCess produces the



inconvenience of rendering the perceptions dull, and of making a



person unfit for study or application.



    Drinking confounds the understanding, and often prevents our



discovering the most palpable relations of things.



    Love fixes our ideas too much upon the same object, makes all



our pursuits and pleasures analogous to itself, and consequently



renders them trifling and superficial.



    Ease, that is, too great a fondness for it, destroys



activity, damps our resolution, and misleads the decisions of our



judgment on every occasion, where one side of the question



implies an obstacle to the enjoyment of a favourite indolence.



    These are examples of the moral evils proceeding from luxury



in the most general acceptation of the term. While the



gratification of these desires is accompanied by no such



inconveniences, I think it is a proof, that there has been no



moral excess, or that no moral evil has been directly implied in



the gratification. But I cannot equally determine that there has



been no luxury in the enjoyment of superfluity.



    Secondly, The physical inconveniences which follow from all



the four, terminate in the hurt they do the body, health or



constitution. If no such harm follows upon the gratification of



our desires, I find no physical evil: but still luxury, I think,



may be implied in every acceptation of the term.



    Thirdly, If the domestic inconveniences of the four species



be examined, they all centre in one, viz. the dissipation of



fortune, upon which depends the future ease of the proprietor,



and the well-being of his posterity. When luxury is examined with



respect to this object, the idea we conceive of it admits of a



new modification. An exCess here is compatible with a very



moderate gratification of our most natural desires. It is not



eating nor drinking, love nor indolence which are hurtful to the



fortune, but the expence attending such gratifications. All these



are frequently indulged even to excess, in a moral and physical



sense, by people who are daily becoming more wealthy by these



very means.



    Fourthly, Some political inconveniences of luxury have been



already pointed out. The extinction of foreign trade is the most



striking. But the loss of trade conveys no ideas of any moral,



physical, or domestic excess; and still it is vicious so far as



it affects the well-being of a state. Besides this particular



evil, I very willingly agree, that as far as the good government



of a state depends upon the application and capacity, as well as



the integrity of those who sit at the helm, or who are employed



in the administration or direction of public affairs, so far may



the moral inconveniences of luxury mentioned above, affect the



prosperity of a state. The consequences of excessive luxury,



moral and physical, as well as the dissipation of private



fortunes, may render both the statesman, and those whom he



employs, negligent in their duty, unfit to discharge it,



rapacious and corrupt. These may, indirectly, be reckoned among



the political evils attending luxury, so far as they take place.



But on the other hand, as they cannot be called the necessary



effects of the cause to which they are here ascribed, that is, of



moral, physical and domestic luxury, I do not think they can with



propriety be implied in the definition of the term. They are



rather to be attributed to the imperfection of the human mind,



than to any other second cause which may occasionally contribute



to their production. They may proceed from avarice, as well as



from prodigality.



    I hope this short exposition of a matter, not absolutely



falling within the limits of my subject, will suffice to prove



that my definition of luxury, describes at least the most



essential requisite towards determining it; namely, the providing



of superfluity with a view to consumption. This is inseparable



from our ideas of luxury, but vicious excess certainly is not. A



sober man may have a most delicate table, as well as a glutton;



and a virtuous man may enjoy the pleasures of love and ease with



as much sensuality as a Heliogabalus. But no man can become



luxurious, in our acceptation of the word, without giving bread



to the industrious, without encouraging emulation, industry, and



agriculture; and without producing the circulation of an adequate



equivalent for every service. This last is the palladium of



liberty, the fountain of gentle dependence, and the agreeable



band of union among free societies.



    Let me therefore conclude my chapter, with a metaphysical



observation. The use of words, is to express ideas; the more



simple any idea is, the more easy it is to convey it by a word.



Whenever therefore, language furnishes several words, which are



called synonimous, we may conclude, that the idea conveyed by



them is not simple. On every such occasion, it is doing a service



to language, to render such words as little synonimous as



possible, and to point out the particular differences between the



ideas they convey.



    Let us now apply this remark to the point under



consideration. I find the three terms, luxury, sensuality, and



excess, generally considered in a synonimous light,



notwithstanding the characteristic differences which distinguish



them. Luxury consists in providing the objects of sensuality, so



far as they are superfluous. Sensuality consists in the actual



enjoyment of them, and excess implies an abuse of enjoyment. A



person, therefore, according to these definitions, may be very



luxurious from vanity, pride, ostentation, or with a political



view of encouraging consumption, without having a turn for



sensuality, or a tendency to fall into excess. Sensuality, on the



other hand, might have been indulged in a Lacedemonian republic,



as well as at the court of Artaxerxes. Excess indeed, seems more



closely connected with sensuality, than with luxury; but the



difference is so great, that I apprehend sensuality must in a



great measure be extinguished before excess can begin.







Chap. XXI







Of Physical and Political Necessaries







    After having cleared up our ideas concerning luxury, it



follows naturally, to examine what is meant by



physical-necessary.



    I have observed in the third chapter of the first book, that



in most countries where food is limited to a determinate



quantity, inhabitants are fed in a regular progression down from



plenty and ample subsistence, to the last period of want, and



dying from hunger. It is ample subsistence where no degree of



superfluity is implied, which communicates an idea of the



physical-necessary. It is the top of this ladder; it is the first



rank among men who enjoy no superfluity whatsoever. A man enjoys



the physical-necessary as to food, when he is fully fed; if he is



likewise sufficiently clothed, and well defended against every



thing which may hurt him, he enjoys his full physical-necessary.



The moment he begins to add to this, he may be considered as



moving upwards into another class, to wit, that of the luxurious,



or consumers of superfluity; of which there are to be found, in



most countries, as many stages upward, as there are stages



downwards, from where he stood before. This is one general idea



of the question. Let me now look for another.



    If we examine the state of many animals which have no



appetites leading them to excess, we may form a very just idea of



a physical-necessary for man. When they are free from labour, and



have food at will, they enjoy their full physical-necessary. They



are then in the height of beauty, and enjoy the greatest degree



of happiness they are capable of. Animals which are forced to



labour, prove to us very plainly, that this physical-necessary is



not fixed to a point, but that it may vary like most other



things: every one perceives the difference between labouring



cattle which are well fed, and those which are indifferently, or



ill fed; all however, I suppose to live in health, and to work



according to their strength. This represents the nature of a



physical-necessary for man.



    In all the inferior classes in every nation, we find various



degrees of ease among the individuals; and yet upon the whole, it



would be hard to determine, which are those who enjoy



superfluity; which are those who possess the pure



physical-necessary; and which are those who fall below it. The



cause of this ambiguity must here be explained.



    The nature of man furnishes him with some desires relative to



his wants, which do not proceed from his animal oeconomy, but



which are entirely similar to them in their effects. These



proceed from the affections of his mind, are formed by habit and



education, and when once regularly established, create another



kind of necessary, which, for the sake of distinction, I shall



call political. The similitude between these two species of



necessary, is therefore the cause of ambiguity.



    This political-necessary has for its object, certain articles



of physical superfluity, which distinguishes what we call rank in



society.



    Rank is determined by birth, education, or habit. A man with



difficulty submits to descend from a higher way of living to a



lower and when an accidental circumstance has raised him for a



while, above the level of that rank where his birth or education



had placed him, his ambition prompts him to support himself in



his elevation. If his attempt be a rational scheme, he is



generally approved of; the common consent of his fellow-citizens



prescribes a certain political-necessary for him, proportioned to



his ambition; and when at any time this comes to fail, he is



considered to be in want.



    If on the other hand, a person either from vanity, or from no



rational prospect of success, form a scheme of rising above the



rank where birth or education had placed him, his fellow-citizens



do not consent to prescribe for him a political-necessary



suitable to his ambition; and when this fails him, he is



considered to fall back only into the class to which he properly



belonged. But if the political-necessary suitable to this rank



should come to fail, then he is supposed to be deprived of his



political-necessary.



    The measure of this last species of necessary, is determined



by general opinion only, and therefore can never be justly



ascertained; and as this opinion may have for its object even



those who are below the level of the physical-necessary, it often



happens, that we find great difficulties in determining its exact



limits.



    It may appear absurd, to suppose any one to enjoy superfluity



(which we have called the characteristic of political-necessary)



to whom any part of the physical-necessary is found wanting.



However absurd this may appear, yet nothing is more common among



men, and the reason arises from what has been observed above. The



desires which proceed from the affections of his mind, are often



so strong as to make him comply with them at the expence of



becoming incapable of satisfying those which his animal oeconomy



necessarily demands.



    From this it happens, that however easy it may be to conceive



an accurate idea of a physical-necessary for other animals,



nothing is more difficult, than to prescribe the proper limits



for it with regard to man.



    This being the case, let us suppose the condition of those



who enjoy but little superfluity, and who fill the lower classes



of the people, to be distinguished into three denominations; to



wit, the highest, middle, and lowest degree of



physical-necessary, and then let us ask, how we may form an



estimation of the respective value of the consumption implied in



each, in order to determine the minimum as to the profits upon



industry. This question is of great importance; because we have



shewn that the prosperity of foreign trade depends on the



cheapness of manufacturing; and this again never can fall below



the proportion or value of the physical-necessary for



manufacturers.



    One very good method of estimating the value of the total



consumption implied by this necessary quantity, is to compute the



expence of those who live in communities, such as in hospitals,



workhouses, armies, convents, according to the different degrees



of ease, severally enjoyed by those who compose them. In running



over the few articles of expence in such establishments, it will



be easy to discern between those, which relate to the supply of



the physical, and those which relate to the supply of the



political-necessary: ammunition bread is an example of the first;



a monk's hood and long sleeves, are a species of the latter.



    When once the real value of a man's subsistence is found, the



statesman may the better judge of the degree of ease, necessary



or expedient to allow for the several classes of the laborious



and ingenious inhabitants.



    As we have divided this physical-necessary into three



degrees; the highest, middle, and lowest; the next question is,



which of the three degrees is the most expedient to be



established, as the standard value of the industry of the very



lowest class of a people?



    I answer, that in a society, it is requisite that the



individual of the most puny constitution for labour and industry,



and of the most slender genius for works of ingenuity, having no



natural defect, and enjoying health, should be able by a labour



proportioned to his force, to gain the lowest degree of the



physical-necessary; for in this case, by far the greatest part of



the industrious will be found in the second class, and the strong



and healthy all in the first.



    The difference between the highest class and the lowest, I do



not apprehend to be very great. A small quantity added to what is



barely sufficient, makes enough: but this small quantity is the



most difficult to acquire, and a desire to surmount this



difficulty is the most powerful spur to industry. The moment a



person begins to live by his industry, let his livelihood be ever



so poor, he immediately forms little objects of ambition,



compares his situation with that of his fellows who are a degree



above him, and considers a shade more of ease, as I may call it,



as an advancement, not of his happiness only, but also of his



rank.



    There are still more varieties to be met with in the



condition of those who are confined to the sphere of the



physical-necessary. The labour of a strong man ought to be



otherwise recompensed than that of a puny creature. But in every



state there is found labour of different kinds, some requiring



more, and some less strength, and all must be paid for; but as a



weakly person does not commonly require so much nourishment as



the strong and robust, the difference of his gains may be



compensated by the smallness of his consumption.



    What we mean by the first class of the physical-necessary, is



when a person gains wherewithal to be well fed, well clothed, and



well defended against the injuries of heat and cold, without any



superfluity. This I say, a strong healthy person should be able



to gain by the exercise of the lowest denominations of



industrious labour, and without a possibility of being deprived



of it, by the competition of others of the same profession.



    Could a method be fallen upon to prevent competition among



industrious people of the same profession, the moment they come



to be reduced within the limits of the physical-necessary, it



would prove the best security against decline in a modern state,



and the most solid basis of a lasting prosperity.



    But as we have observed in the first book, the thing is



impossible, while marriage subsists on the present footing. From



this one circumstance, the condition of the industrious of the



same profession, is rendered totally-different. Some are loaded



with a family, others are not. The only expedient, therefore, for



a statesman, is to keep the general principles constantly in his



eye, to destroy this competition as much as he can, at least in



branches for exportation; to avoid, in his administration, every



measure which may tend to promote it, by constituting a



particular advantage in favour of some individuals of the same



class above others; and if the management of public affairs



necessarily implies such inconveniences, he must find out a



method of indemnifying those who suffer by the competition.



    We may therefore, in this place, lay down two principles:



First, that no competition should be encouraged among those who



labour for a physical-necessary: secondly, that in a state which



flourishes by her foreign trade, competition is to be encouraged



in every branch of manufactures for exportation, until the



competitors have reduced one another within the limits of this



necessary.



    Farther, I must observe, that this physical-necessary ought



to be the highest degree of ease, which any one should be able to



acquire with labour and industry, where no peculiar ingenuity is



required. This also is a point deserving the attention of a



statesman. For how frequently do we find, in great cities,



different employments, such as carrying of water, and other



burdens, sawing of wood, &c. erected into confraternities, which



prevent competition, and raise profits beyond the standard of the



physical-necessary? This, I apprehend, to be a discouragement to



ingenuity, and have the bad effect of rendering living dear,



without answering any one of the intentions of establishing



corporations, as shall be shewn in another place. The



physical-necessary, therefore, ought to be the reward of labour



and industry; whatever any workman gains above this standard,



ought to be in consequence of his superior ingenuity.



    It is not at all necessary to ascertain the limits between



these two classes; they will sufficiently distinguish themselves



by the simple operation of competition. Let a particular person



fall upon an ingenious invention, he will profit by it, and rise



above the lower classes which are confined to the



physical-necessary; but if the invention be such as may be easily



copied, he will quickly be rivalled to such a degree as to reduce



his profits within the bounds of the physical-necessary; so soon



as this comes to be the case, his ingenuity disappears, because



it ceases to be peculiar to him.



    Here arises a question: whence does it happen that certain



workmen avoid this competition, and make considerable gains by



their employment, while others are rivalled in their endeavours



to retain a bare physical-necessary?



    There is a combination of several causes to produce these



effects, which we shall examine separately; leaving to the reader



to judge, how far these causes may extend profits beyond the



physical-necessary.



    First, We have said (chap. 9.) that the value of a workman's



labour is determined from the quantity performed, in general, by



those of his profession, neither supposing them the best or the



worst, or as having any advantage or disadvantage, from the place



of their abode. A workman therefore, who, to an extraordinary



dexterity, joins the advantages of place, must gain more than



another.



    Secondly, We have often remarked, that competition between



workmen of the same profession, diminishes the profits upon their



labour. From this it follows, that in such arts where the least



competition is found, there must be the largest profits. Now



several circumstances prevent competition. First, An



extraordinary dexterity in any art, and especially in those where



the whole excellency depends upon great accuracy and a refined



taste, such as watch-making, painting of all kinds, making



mathematical instruments, and the like; all which set a



celebrated artist in a manner above a possibility of rivalship,



and make him the master of his price, as experience shews.



Secondly, The difficulty of acquiring the dexterity requisite,



resulting both from the time and expence of apprenticeships,



proves a plain obstacle to a numerous competition. Few there are,



who having the stock sufficient to defray the loss of several



years fruitless application, have also the turn necessary to lead



them to a particular branch of ingenuity. Thirdly, Many there



are, who have skill and capacity sufficient to enter into



competition, but are obliged to work for others, because of the



expensive apparatus of instruments, machines, lodging, and many



other things necessary for setting out as a master in the art.



These, and similar causes, prevent competition, and support large



profits. Fourthly, Masters increase their profits greatly by



sharing those of their journeymen: this share, the first have a



just title to, from the constant employment they provide for the



latter. and the certainty these again have of gaining their



physical-necessary, together with a profit proportional to their



dexterity, makes them willing to share with their master. The



fifth cause of considerable gains, and the last I shall mention,



is the most effectual of all, viz. great oeconomy, and



parsimonious living. In proportion to the combination of these



circumstances, the fortune of the artist will increase, which is



the answer to the first part of the question proposed.



    We are next to enquire how it happens that many industrious



people are rivalled in an industry which brings no more than a



bare physical-necessary. This must proceed from some disadvantage



either in their personal or political situation. In their



personal situation, when they are loaded with a numerous family,



interrupted by sickness, or other accidental avocations. In their



political situation, when they happen to be under a particular



subordination from which others are free, or to be loaded with



taxes which others do not pay.



    I shall only add, that in computing the value of the



physical-necessary of the lowest denomination, a just allowance



must be made for all interruptions of labour: no person can be



supposed to work every free day; and the labour of the year must



defray the expence of the year. This is evident. Farther, neither



humanity, or policy, that is the interest of a state, can



recommend a rigorous oeconomy upon this essential quantity. If



the great abuses upon the price of labour be corrected, those



which remain imperceptible to the public eye, will prove no



disadvantage to exportation; and as long as this goes on with



success, the state is in health and vigour. Exportation of work



is another pulse of the political body.







Chap. XXII







Preliminary Reflections upon inland Commerce







    I resume the subject, which, as a rest to the mind, I dropt



at the end of the 19th chapter.



    I am now to treat directly of inland commerce, which has been



sufficiently distinguished from infant, and foreign trade.



    We are to consider ourselves now as transported into a new



country, where foreign trade had been carried to the greatest



height possible; until the luxury of the inhabitants, the



carelessness, perhaps, of the statesman, and the natural



advantages of other nations, added to the progress of their



industry and refinement, had concurred to cut it off, and thereby



to dry up the source which had till then been constantly



augmenting the national opulence.



    We must examine the natural effects of this revolution; we



must point out how every inconvenience proceeding from it may be



avoided, and how a statesman may regulate his conduct, so as to



prevent the exportation of any part of that wealth which the



nation may have heaped up within herself, during the prosperity



of her foreign trade. How he may keep the whole of his people



constantly employed, and by what means he may promote an equable



circulation of domestic wealth, through the hands of the lower



classes, which will prove an adequate equivalent given by the



rich, for the services rendered them by the industrious poor.



How, by a judicious imposition of taxes, he may draw together an



equitable proportion of every man's annual income, without



reducing any one below the standard of a full physical-necessary.



How he may, with this public fund, preserve in vigour every



branch of industry, and be enabled also, by the means of it, to



profit of the smallest revolution in the situation of other



nations, so as to reestablish the foreign trade of his own



people. And lastly, how the society may be thereby sufficiently



defended against foreign enemies, by a body of men regularly



supported and maintained at the public charge, without



occasioning any sudden revolution hurtful to industry, either



when it becomes necessary to increase their numbers, in order to



carry on an unavoidable war, or to diminish them, upon the return



of peace and tranquility. This is, in few words, the object of a



statesman's attention when he finds himself at the head of a



people living upon their own wealth without any mercantile



connections with strangers.



    How hurtful soever the natural and immediate effects of



political revolutions may have been formerly, when the mechanism



of government was more simple than at present, they are now



brought under such restrictions, by the complicated system of



modern oeconomy, that the evil which might otherwise result from



them may be guarded against with ease.



    As often, therefore, as we find a notable prejudice resulting



to a state, from a change of their circumstances, gradually



taking place, we may safely conclude, that negligence, or want of



abilities, in those who have the direction of public affairs, has



more than any other cause been the occasion of it.



    It was observed, in the third chapter of the first book, that



before the introduction of modern oeconomy, which is made to



subsist by the means of taxes, a state was seldom found to be



interested in watching over the actions of the people. They



bought and sold, transferred, transported, modified, and



compounded productions and manufactures, for public use, and



private consumption, just as they thought fit. Now it is



precisely in these operations that a modern state is chiefly



interested; because proportional taxes are made to affect a



people on every such occasion.



    The interest the state has in levying these impositions,



gives a statesman an opportunity of laying such operations under



certain restrictions; by the means of which, upon every change of



circumstances, he can produce the effect he thinks fit. Do the



people buy from foreigners what they can find at home? he imposes



a duty upon importation. Do they sell what they ought to



manufacture? he shuts the gates of the country. Do they transfer



or transport at home? he accelerates or retards the operation, as



best suits the common interest. Do they modify or compound what



the public good requires to be consumed in its simple state? he



can either prevent it by a positive prohibition, or he may permit



such consumption to the more wealthy only, by subjecting it to a



duty.



    So powerful an influence over the operations of a whole



people, vests an authority in a modern statesman, which in former



ages, even under the most absolute governments, was utterly



unknown. The truth of this remark will appear upon reflecting on



the force of some states, at present in Europe, where the



sovereign power is extremely limited, in every arbitrary exercise



of it, and where, at the same time, it is found to operate over



the wealth of the inhabitants, in a manner far more efficacious



than the most despotic and arbitrary authority possibly can do.



    It is the order and regularity in the administration of the



complicated modern oeconomy, which alone can put a statesman in a



capacity to exert the whole force of his people. The more he has



their actions under his influence, the easier it is for him to



make them concur in advancing the general good.



    Here it is objected, that any free people who invest a



statesman with a power to control their most trivial actions,



must be out of their wits, and considered as submitting to a



voluntary slavery of the worst nature, as it must be the most



difficult to be shaken off. This I agree to; supposing the power



vested to be of an arbitrary nature, such as we have described in



the thirteenth chapter of this book. But while the legislative



power is exerted in acquiring an influence only over the actions



of individuals, in order to promote a scheme of political



oeconomy, uniform and consistent in all its parts, the



consequence will be so far from introducing slavery among the



people, that the execution of the plan will prove absolutely



inconsistent with every arbitrary or irregular measure.



    The power of a modern prince, let it be by the constitution



of his kingdom, ever so absolute, immediately becomes limited so



soon as he establishes the plan of oeconomy which we are



endeavouring to explain. If his authority formerly resembled the



solidity and force of the wedge (which may indifferently be made



use of, for splitting of timber, stones and other hard bodies,



and which may be thrown aside and taken up again at pleasure), it



will at length come to resemble the delicacy of the watch, which



is good for no other purpose than to mark the progression of



time, and which is immediately destroyed, if put to any other



use, or touched with any but the gentlest hand.



    As modern oeconomy, therefore, is the most effectual bridle



ever was invented against the folly of despotism; so the wisdom



of so great a power never shines with greater lustre, than when



we see it exerted in planning and establishing this oeconomy, as



a bridle against the wanton exercise of itself in succeeding



generations. I leave it to my reader to seek for examples in the



conduct of our modern Princes, which may confirm what, I think,



reason seems to point out: were they less striking, I might be



tempted to mention them.



    The part of our subject we are now to treat of, will present



us with a system of political oeconomy, still more complicated



than any thing we have hitherto met with.



    While foreign trade flourishes and is extended, the wealth of



a nation increases daily; but force is not so easily exerted, as



after this wealth begins to circulate more at home, as we shall



easily shew. But, on the other hand, the force she exerts is much



more easily recruited. In the first case, her frugality enables



her to draw new supplies out of the coffers of her neighbours; in



the last, her luxury affords a resource from the wealth of her



own citizens.



    In opening my chapter, I have introduced my reader into a new



country; or indeed I may say, that I have brought him back into



that which we had under our consideration in the first book.



    Here luxury and superfluous consumption will strike his view



almost at every step. He will naturally compare the system of



frugality, which we have dismissed, with that of dissipation,



which we are now to take up; and he may very naturally conclude,



that the introduction of the latter, must prove a certain



forerunner of destruction. The examples found in history of the



greatest monarchies being broken to pieces, so soon as the taste



for simplicity was lost, seem to justify this conjecture. It is,



therefore, necessary to examine circumstances a little, that we



may compare, in this particular also, the oeconomy of the



ancients with our own; in order to discover whether the



introduction of luxury be as hurtful at present, as it formerly



proved to those states which made so great a figure in the world;



and which are known from history only, and judged of from the few



scattered ruins, which remain to bear testimony of their former



greatness.



    Luxury is the child of wealth; and wealth is acquired by



states, as by private people, either by a lucrative, or by an



onerous title, as the civilians speak. The lucrative title, by



which a state acquires, is either by rapine, or from her mines;



the onerous title, or that for a valuable consideration, is by



industry.



    The wealth of the ancient monarchs of Babylon, Persia,



Greece, and Rome, was the effect of rapine; whereas industry



enriched the cities of Sydon, Tyre, Carthage, Athens, and



Alexandria. The luxury of the first, proved the ruin of the



luxurious; the luxury of the last, advanced their grandeur:



because they had no rivals to take advantage of the natural



effects of this luxury, in cutting off the profits of their



foreign trade. Peace was as hurtful to the plunderers, as war was



destructive to the industrious.



    When an empire was at war, its wealth was thereby made to



circulate for an equivalent in services performed. So soon as



peace was restored, every one returned, as it were, to a state of



slavery. The monarch then possessed himself of all the wealth,



and distributed it by caprice. Fortunes were made in an instant,



and no body knew how: they were lost again by transitions equally



violent and sudden. The luxury of those days was attended with



the most excessive oppression. Extraordinary consumption was no



proof of the circulation of any adequate equivalent in favour of



the industrious: it had not the effect of giving bread to the



poor, nor of proportionally diminishing the wealth of the rich.



The great remained constantly great; and the more they were



prodigal, the more the small were brought into distress. In one



word, luxury had nothing to recommend it, but that quality which



solely constitutes the abuse of it in modern times; to wit, the



excessive gratification of the passions of the great, which



frequently brought on the corruption of their manners.



    When such a state became luxurious, public affairs were



neglected because it was not from a right administration that



wealth was to be procured. War, under such circumstances, worked



effects almost similar to the springing up of industry in modern



times; it procured employment, and this produced a more regular



circulation, as has been said.



    On the other hand, the wealth and luxury of the trading



cities above mentioned, which was of the same species with that



of modern times, proceeded from the alienation of their work;



that is, from their industry. Nothing was got for nothing, and



when they were forced to go to war, they found themselves obliged



either to dissipate their wealth, by hiring troops, or to abandon



the resources of it, the labour of their industrious citizens.



Thus the punic wars exalted the grandeur of plundering Rome, and



blotted out the existence of industrious Carthage. I do not here



pretend to vindicate the justness of these reflections in every



circumstance, and it is foreign to my present purpose to be more



particular; all I seek for, is to point out the different effects



of luxury in ancient and modern times.



    Ancient luxury was quite arbitrary; consequently could be



laid under no limitations, but produced the worst effects, which



naturally and mechanically could proceed from it.



    Modern luxury is systematical; it cannot make one step, but



at the expence of an adequate equivalent, acquired by those who



stand the most in need of the protection and assistance of their



fellow citizens; and without producing a vibration in the balance



of their wealth. This balance is in the hands of the statesman,



who may receive a contribution upon every such vibration. He has



the reins in his hand, and may turn, restrain, and direct the



luxury of his people, towards whatever object he thinks fit.



    Luxury here is so far from drawing on a neglect of public



affairs, that it requires the closest application to the



administration of them, in order to support it. When these are



neglected, the industrious will be brought to starve, consumption



and taxes will diminish; that is, luxury will insensibly



disappear, and hoarding will succeed it. These and similar



consequences will undoubtedly take place, and mechanically follow



one another, when a skilful hand is not applied to prevent them.



    It is impossible not to perceive the advantages of supporting



a flourishing inland trade, after the extinction of foreign



commerce. By such means elegance of taste, and the polite arts,



may be carried to the highest pitch. The whole of the inhabitants



may be employed in working and consuming; all may be made to live



in plenty and in ease, by the means of a swift circulation, which



will produce a reasonable equality of wealth among all the



inhabitants. Luxury can never be the cause of inequality, though



it may be the effect of it. Hoarding and parsimony form great



fortunes, luxury dissipates them and restores equality.



    Such a situation would surely be of all others the most



agreeable, and the most advantageous, were all mankind collected



into one society, or were the country where it is established cut



off from every communication with other nations.



    The balance between work and demand would then only influence



the balance of wealth among individuals, and the subversions of



it would do little harm. If hands became scarce, the balance



would turn the quicker in favour of the laborious, and the idle



would grow poor. If hands became too plentiful (which indeed is



hardly to be expected) every thing would be bought the cheaper;



but the same quantity of national wealth would still remain



without any diminution.



    Where is, therefore, the great advantage of foreign trade?



    I answer by putting another question. Where is the great



advantage of a person's making a large fortune in his own



country? A man of a small estate may, no doubt, be as happy as



another with a great one; and the same thing would be true of



nations, were all equally inspired with a spirit of peace and



justice; or were they subordinate to a higher temporal power,



which could protect the weak against the violence and injustice



of the strong.



    It is, therefore, the separate interests of nations who



incline to communicate together, and consume part of one



another's commodities, which renders the consideration of the



principles of trade, a matter of great importance.



    While nations contented themselves with their own



productions, while the difference of their customs, and contrast



of their prejudices were great, the connections between them were



not very intimate.



    From this proceeds the great diversity of languages and



dialects. When a traveller finds a sudden transition from one



language to another, or from one dialect to another, it is a



proof that the manners of such people have been long different,



and that they have had little communication with one another. On



the contrary, when dialects change by degrees, as in the



provinces of the same country, it is a proof that there has been



no great repugnancy in their customs. In like manner, when we



find several languages, at present different, but plainly



deriving from the same source, we may conclude, that there was a



time when such nations were connected by correspondence, or that



the language has been transplanted from one to the other, by the



migration of colonies. But I insensibly wander from my subject.



    I have said, that when nations contented themselves with



their own productions, connections between them were not very



intimate. While trade was carried on by the exchange of



consumable commodities, this operation also little interested the



state: consumption then was equal on both sides; and no balance



was found upon either. But so soon as the precious metals became



an object of commerce, and when, by being rendered an universal



equivalent for everything; they become also the measure of power



between nations, then the acquisition, or at least the



preservation of a proportional quantity of them, became to the



more prudent, an object of the last importance.



    We have seen how a foreign trade, well conducted, has the



necessary effect of drawing wealth from all other nations. We



have seen in what manner the benefit resulting from this trade



may come to a stop, and how the balance of it may come round to



the other side. We are now to examine how the same prudence which



set foreign trade on foot, and supported it as long as possible,



may put an effectual stop to it, and at the same time guard



against a sudden revolution; to the end that a nation enriched by



commerce may not, by blindly or mechanically carrying it on, when



the balance is against her, fall into those inconveniences which



other nations must have experienced during her prosperity.







Chap. XXIII







When a Nation, which has enriched herself by a reciprocal



Commerce in Manufactures with other Nations, finds the Balance of



Trade turn against her, it is her Interest to put a Stop to it



altogether







    Trade having subsisted long in the nation we are now to keep



in our eye, I shall suppose that, through length of time, her



neighbours have learned to supply one article of their own and



other people's wants cheaper than she can do. What is to be done?



Nobody will buy from her, when they can be supplied from another



quarter at a less price. I say, what is to be done? For if there



be no check put upon trade, and if the statesman do not interpose



with the greatest care, it is certain, that merchants will import



the produce, and even the manufactures of rival nations; the



inhabitants will buy them preferably to their own; the wealth of



the nation will be exported; and her industrious manufacturers



will be brought to starve. We may therefore look upon this, as a



problem in trade, to be resolved by the principles already



established.



    First, then, it must be inquired, if, in the branch in which



she is undersold, her rivals enjoy a natural advantage above her,



which no superior industry, frugality, or address on her side,



can counterbalance? If this he the case, there are three



different courses to be pursued, according to circumstances.



    First, To renounce this branch of commerce entirely, and to



take the commodities wanted from foreigners, as they can furnish



them cheaper.



    Secondly, To prohibit the importation of such commodities



altogether.



    Thirdly, To impose a duty upon importation, in order to raise



the price of them so high as to make them dearer than the same



kind of commodity produced at home.



    The first course may be taken, if, upon examining how the



hands employed in a manufacture may be disposed of, it be found,



that they may easily be thrown into another branch of industry,



in which the nation's natural advantages are as superior to her



rivals, as their's are superior to her's in the branch she



intends to abandon; and provided her neighbours will agree to



open their ports to the free importation of the commodities in



question. For though there may be little profit in a trade by



exchange, I still think it advisable to continue correspondence,



and to avoid every occasion of cutting off commerce with other



nations. A laborious, oeconomical, and sagacious nation, such as



I suppose our traders to be, will be able to profit of many



circumstances, which would infallibly turn to the disadvantage of



others less expert in commerce, with whom she trades; and in



expectation of favourable revolutions, she ought not rashly, nor



because of small inconveniences, to renounce trading with them;



especially if luxury should appear there to be on the growing



hand.



    But suppose the rival nation will not consent to receive the



manufactures, which the traders may produce with great natural



advantages, what course is then the best to be taken?



    I think she ought to encourage, for her own consumption, the



branch in which she is rivalled, though she must give over



exporting it; and, in this case, it must be examined, whether the



importation of it should be prohibited altogether, (which is the



second course mentioned above) or whether it be more advisable to



prefer the last scheme, viz. to allow such commodities to be



imported, with a duty which may raise their price to so just a



height as neither to suffer them to he sold so cheap as to



discourage the domestic fabrication, nor so dear, as to raise the



profits of manufactures above a reasonable standard, in case of



an augmentation of demand.



    The second course must be taken, when the natural advantages



of the foreign nations are so great, as to oblige the statesman



to raise duties to such a height as to give encouragement to



smuggling.



    The third course seems the best, when the advantages of the



rivals are more inconsiderable; in which case, the traders may,



in time, and by the progress of luxury among their neighbours, or



from other revolutions, which frequently happen in trading



nations, regain their former advantages.



    This may be the decision, in case a nation be rivalled in a



branch where she has not equal advantages with her neighbours;



and when she cannot compensate this inconvenience, either by her



frugality or industry, or by the means of a proper application of



her national wealth. These operations have been already fully



explained, and are now considered as laid aside; not that we



suppose they can ever cease to operate their effects in all



nations; but in order to simplify our ideas, and to point out the



principles which ought to direct a statesman's conduct upon



occasions, where from different combinations of circumstances, he



finds better expedients impracticable.



    Let me next suppose a nation to be rivalled in her staple



manufactures; that is, in those where she has the greatest



natural advantages.



    Whenever such a case happens, it must proceed from some vice



within the state. Either from the progress of luxury in the



workmen, which must proceed from consolidated profits, or from



accidental disadvantages; such as dearness of subsistence, or



from taxes injudiciously imposed. These (I mean all, except the



taxes, of which afterwards) must be removed upon the principles



above laid down: and if this cannot be compassed, no matter why;



then comes the fatal period, when all foreign reciprocal commerce



in manufactures must be given up. For if no profit can be made



upon branches where a nation has the greatest natural advantages,



it is more than probable, that every other branch will prove at



least equally disadvantageous. If upon this revolution the ports



of the nation be not shut against the importation of foreign



manufactures, merchants will introduce them, and this will drain



off the nation's wealth, and bring the industrious to starve.



    It is upon this principle that incorporations are



established. Of these we shall say a word, and conclude our



chapter.



    Cities and corporations, may be considered as nations, where



luxury and taxes have rendered living so expensive, that goods



cannot be furnished but at a high rate. If labour, therefore, of



all kinds, were permitted to be brought from the provinces, or



from the country, to supply the demand of the capital and smaller



corporations, what would become of tradesmen and manufacturers



who have their residence there? If these, on the other hand, were



to remove beyond the liberties of such corporations, what would



become of the public revenue, collected in these little states,



as I may call them?



    By the establishment of corporations, a statesman is enabled



to raise high impositions upon all sorts of consumption; and



notwithstanding these have the necessary consequence of



increasing the price of labour, yet by other regulations, (of



which afterwards,) the bad consequences thereby resulting to



foreign trade may be avoided, and every article of exportation be



prevented from rising above the proper standard for making it



vendible, in spite of all foreign competition.



    The plan of modern taxation seems first to have been



introduced into cities, while the country was subject to the



barons, and remained in a manner quite free from it. Cities



having obtained the privilege of incorporation, began, in



consequence of the powers vested in their magistrates, to levy



taxes: and finding the inconveniences resulting from external



competition (foreign trade), they erected the different classes



of their industrious into confraternities, or corporations of a



lower denomination, with power to prevent the importation of work



from their fellow tradesmen not of the society.



    Here arises a question.



    Why are corporations complained of in many countries, as



being a check upon industry; if the establishment of them proceed



from so  plain a principle as this here laid down?



    Let me draw my answer from another question. Why are they not



complained of in all countries?



    The difference between the situation of one country and



another, will plainly point out the principle which ought to



regulate the establishment and government of corporations. When



this is well understood, all disputes concerning the general



utility, or harm arising from them will be at an end: and the



question will be brought to the proper issue; to wit, their



relative utility considered with respect to the actual situation



of the country where they are established. In one province a



corporation will be found to be useful, in another just the



contrary.



    First then it must be agreed, on all hands, that the



principle laid down is just. Nobody ever advanced, that the



industry carried on in towns, where living is dear, ought to



suffer a competition with that of the country, where living is



cheap; I mean for the direct consumption of the citizens. But it



may be alleged, that no subaltern corporation should enjoy an



exclusive privilege against those who share of every burthen



imposed by the great corporation from which they draw their



existence: and that they have no right of exclusion against



citizens; but against strangers only, who are not under the same



jurisdiction, nor liable to the same burthens. Here the dispute



lies between the members of the great corporation and those of



the smaller. Now, I say, while no other interest is concerned,



the decision of this question ought to be left to the corporation



itself. But the moment the public good comes to be affected by



certain privileges enjoyed by individuals, such privileges should



either be abolished, or put under limitations.



    In countries where industry stands at a determinate height,



while the consumption of cities neither augments or diminishes;



while those who live upon an income acquired, live uniformly in



the same way; while this regular consumption is regularly



supplied, by a certain number of citizens sufficient to supply



it; while the hands employed for this purpose are in a perfect



proportion to the demand made upon them; in such countries, I



say, any diminution of the privileges of corporations, would be a



mean of overturning the equal balance between work and demand.



    We have said above, that when hands become too many for the



work, profits fall below the necessary standard of subsistence;



that the industrious enter into competition for the



physical-necessary, and hurt one another. Here then is the



principle which the corporation ought to keep in its eye: the



profits under every trade ought to be in proportion to the demand



for it.



    In order the better to support this proportion, many towns in



Germany have the subaltern corporations of trades restrained to



certain numbers. There is a determinate number of apothecaries,



joiners, smiths, &c. allowed in every town, and no more;



according as employment is found for them. This seems a good



regulation. I do not say but it may be abused. But the power of



administration must be lodged somewhere; and if in a country



where industry is making little progress, corporations were laid



open, the consequence would be, that every workman would starve



another, and the consumers would be ill served.



    On the other hand, when industry springs up, when the manners



of a people change all of a sudden, or by quick degrees, as has



been the case in many countries in Europe within these threescore



years: it is a mark of a narrow capacity not to perceive that a



change of administration becomes necessary; and if on such



revolutions those who are at the head of corporations should wish



to profit of the increase of demand, in order to raise prices in



favour of the incorporated workmen, the infallible consequence



would be, to make the city become deserted, and deprived of a



trade, which otherwise would necessarily fall to her share, in



consequence of the advantage she must draw from establishments



already made for supplying every branch of consumption.(1*) But



let the principle above mentioned be constantly followed; let



profits be kept at a right standard; let hands be increased



according to demand; let the city workmen gain no advantage over



those of the country which may not be compensated by the



difference of the price of living; let the disadvantages again on



the side of the town affect their own consumption only, not the



surplus of their industry; let every convenience for carrying on



foreign trade (every thing here is understood to be foreign,



which does not enter into the consumption of the town) be



provided for in the suburbs, or, if you please, in a place out of



the town walled in for this purpose; let markets there be held



for every kind of work coming from the country; and then the true



intent of a corporation will be answered. If it be found that the



prosperity of trade demands still more liberty, then the



corporation may be thrown open; but on the other hand, every



burthen must be taken off, and every incorporated member must be



indemnified by the state, for the loss he is thereby made to



suffer.



    The great change daily operating on the spirit of European



nations, where corporations have been long established, without



any great inconvenience having been found to arise from them,



suggest these reflections, which seem naturally to flow from the



principles to which we refer. I shall only add, that from the



practice of imposing taxes within these little republics (as I



have called them) Princes seem to have taken the hint of



extending this system; by first appropriating to the public



revenue, what the cities had established in favour of themselves,



and then by enlarging the plan as circumstances favoured their



design. That this is the true origin of the modern plan of



taxation (I mean that upon consumption) may be gathered from



hence; that the right of imposing taxes appears no where, almost,



to have been essentially attached to royalty, even in those



kingdoms, where Princes have long enjoyed an unlimited



constitutional authority over the persons of their subjects. An



authority, which I take to be the least equivocal characteristic



of an absolute and unlimited power. I know of no christian



monarchy (except, perhaps, Russia) where either the consent of



states, or the approbation or concurrence of some political body



within the state, has not been requisite to make the imposition



of taxes constitutional; and if more exceptions be found, I



believe it will not be difficult to trace the origin of such an



exertion of sovereign authority, without ascending to a very high



antiquity. The prerogative of Princes in former times, was



measured by the power they could constitutionally exercise over



the persons of their subjects; that of modern princes, by the



power they have over their purse.



    Having, therefore, shewn the necessity of putting a stop to



foreign reciprocal commerce in manufactures, so soon as in every



branch this trade becomes disadvantageous to a nation; the next



question is how to proceed in the execution of so great an



undertaking, so as to avoid a sudden and violent revolution in



the oeconomy of the state, which is of all things the most



dangerous: the hurt, therefore, ought to be foreseen at a great



distance, in order to be methodically prevented.







Chap. XXIV







What is the proper Method to put a Stop to a foreign Trade in



Manufactures, when the Balance of it turns against a Nations?







    It must not be understood, from what was said in the last



chapter, that so soon as the balance of foreign trade, either on



the whole, or on any branch of manufacture, is found to be



against a nation, that a statesman should then at once put a



total stop to it. This is too violent a remedy ever to be applied



with success.



    It is hardly possible, that a considerable revolution in the



trade of a nation should happen suddenly, either to its



advantage, or disadvantage, unless in times of civil discord, or



foreign wars, which at present do not enter into the question.



    A sagacious statesman will, at all times, keep a watchful eye



upon every branch of foreign commerce, especially upon



importations. These consist either in the natural produce of



other countries, or in such produce increased in its value by



manufacture.



    In all trade, two things are to be considered in the



commodity sold. The first is the matter; the second is the labour



employed to render this matter useful.



    The matter exported from a country, is what the country



loses; the price of the labour exported, is what it gains.



    If the value of the matter imported be greater than the value



of what is exported, the country gains. If a greater value of



labour be imported, than exported, the country loses. Why?



Because in the first case, strangers must have paid, in matter,



the surplus of labour exported; and in the second case, because



the country must have paid to strangers, in matter, the surplus



of labour imported.



    It is therefore a general maxim, to discourage the



importation of work. and to encourage the exportation of it.



    When any manufacture begins to be imported, which was usually



made at home, it is a mark that either the price of it begins to



rise within the country, or that strangers are making a new



progress in it. On the other hand, when the importation of



manufactures consumed within a country comes to diminish, and



when merchants begin to lose upon such branches of trade, it is a



proof that industry at home is gaining ground in those articles.



The statesman then must take the hint, and set out by gently



clogging the importation of those commodities, not so as to put a



stop to it all at once; because this might have the effect of



carrying profits too high upon the home-fabrication of them.



    All sudden revolutions are to be avoided. A sudden stop upon



a large importation, raises the prices of domestic industry by



jerks, as it were; they do not rise gradually; and these



extraordinary profits engage too many people to endeavour to



share in them. This occasions a desertion from other branches of



industry equally profitable to the state. Such revolutions do



great harm; because it is a long time before people come to be



informed of their true cause, and during the uncertainty, they



are in a wilderness, as it were, surprised and delighted with the



consequences of them, according as their several interests are



affected by them. Every one accounts for the phenomena in a



different way. Some are for applying remedies against the



inconveniences; while others are totally taken up in profiting to



the utmost of every momentary advantage. In a word, nothing is



more hurtful than a sudden revolution in so complicated an



interest as that of the whole class of the industrious, in a



modern society. When therefore such changes happen, in spite of



all a statesman can do, the best way to prevent the



inconveniences which they draw along with them, is to inform the



public of the true causes of every change, favourable or hurtful



to the several classes of inhabitants. This also seems to be the



best method to engage every one to concur in rendering the proper



remedies effectual, when the inconveniences themselves cannot be



prevented. So much for a scheme for encouraging growing



manufactures, or for supporting them in their decline. I proceed



next to consider the methods for preventing the loss of others



already established.



    We have said, that the importation of any article of



consumption usually provided at home, was a proof by no means



equivocal of a foreign rivalship. I shall say nothing at present,



of the methods to be used as a remedy for this inconvenience:



these have been already discussed. We must now suppose, every one



that might be contrived for this purpose, to have become



ineffectual; and foreign industry to be so far gaining ground, as



daily, more and more, to supply the several branches of domestic



consumption.



    Upon this, the statesman will begin by laying the importation



of such commodities under certain restrictions. If these do not



prove sufficient, they will be increased: and if the augmentation



produces frauds, difficult to be prevented, the articles will be



prohibited altogether. By this method of proceeding, it will be



found, that without any violent or sudden prohibition laid all at



once upon foreign trade. by little and little, every pernicious



branch of it will be cut off, till at last it will cease



altogether, as in the case mentioned above; to wit, when the most



advantageous branches of it cannot be carried on without loss.



    Something, however, must here be added, in order to restrain



so general a plan of administration. Nothing is more complex than



the interests of trade, considered with respect to a whole



nation. It is hardly possible for a people to have every branch



of trade favourable for the increase of her wealth: consequently,



a statesman who, upon the single inspection of one branch, would



lay the importation of it under limitations, in proportion as he



found the balance upon it unfavourable to the nation, might very



possibly undo a flourishing commerce.



    He must first examine minutely every use to which the



merchandize imported is put: if a part is re-exported with



profit, this profit must be deducted from the balance of loss



incurred by the consumption of the remainder. If it be consumed



upon the account of other branches of industry, which are thereby



advanced, the balance of loss may still be more than compensated.



If it be a mean of supporting a correspondence with a



neighbouring nation, otherwise advantageous, the loss resulting



from it may be submitted to, in a certain degree. But if upon



examining the whole chain of consequences, he find the nation's



wealth not at all increased, nor her trade encouraged, in



proportion to the damage at first incurred by the importation; I



believe he may decide such a branch of trade to be hurtful; and



therefore that it ought to be cut off, in the most prudent



manner, according to the general rule.



    The first object of the care of a statesman, who governs a



nation, which is upon the point of losing her foreign trade,



without any prospect or probability of recovering it, is to



preserve the wealth she has already acquired. No motive ought to



engage him to sacrifice this wealth, the safety alone of the



whole society excepted, when suddenly threatened by foreign



enemies. The gratification of particular people's habitual



desires, although the wealth they possess may enable them,



without the smallest hurt to their private fortunes, to consume



the productions of other nations; the motive of preventing



hoards; that of promoting a brisk circulation within the country;



the advantages to be by caring on a trade made by merchants, who



may enrich themselves disadvantageous to the nation; to say all



in one word, even the supporting of the same number of



inhabitants, ought not to engage his consent to the diminution of



national wealth.



    Here follow my reasons for carrying this proposition so very



far as to recommend the incurring of the loss of a part of the



inhabitants to that of any considerable part of the wealth



acquired; and I flatter myself, that when duly examined, I may



avoid the smallest imputation of Machiavellian principles, in



consequence of so bold an assertion.



    While a people are fed with the produce of their own lands,



the preservation of their numbers is quite consistent with the



preservation of their wealth. If, therefore, in such a case,



their numbers should be diminished upon a decay of foreign trade,



either by the exportation of their food, or by their lands



becoming uncultivated, I should never hesitate to lay the blame



upon the statesman's administration.



    But an industrious people may (as has been said) carry their



numbers far beyond the proportion of their own growth. The



deficiency must then be supplied from abroad, and must be paid



for with the balance of the trade in their favour. Now when this



balance comes to turn against them, and when, consequently, a



stop is put to the disadvantageous foreign trade, upon the



principles we have been laying down, the statesman is reduced to



this alternative; either annually to allow a part of the wealth



already got, to be exported, in order to buy subsistence for the



surplus of his people, as I may call them; or to reduce their



numbers by degrees (either by encouragements given to their



leaving the country, or by establishing colonies, &c.) until they



be brought down to the just proportion of the growth of national



subsistence. If he prefers the first, supposing the execution of



such a plan to be possible, the consequence will be, that so soon



as all the wealth is spent, the whole society, except the



proprietors of the lands, and those who cultivate them, must go



to destruction. If he prefers the second, he will remain



independent of all the world with respect to the inhabitants he



will preserve. They will remain in a capacity of maintaining



themselves, and he may alter the plan of his political oeconomy



as best may suit his circumstances, relatively to other nations.



While all his subjects are employed and provided for, he will



remain at the head of a flourishing and a happy people.



    It may be here objected, that the first alternative is an



impossible supposition. I allow it to be so, if you suppose it to



be carried the length to which I have traced it; because no power



whatsoever in a statesman can go so far as to preserve numbers at



the expense of the whole riches of his people. But I can very



easily suppose a case, where numbers may be supported at an



eminent loss to a state which finds itself in the situation in



which we have represented it in our supposition.



    Suppose a prince, upon the failure of his foreign trade, to



increase his army, in proportion as he finds his industrious



hands become idle by a deficiency of demand for their labour;



suppose him to fill his magazines for their subsistence by



foreign importation, leaving the produce of his country to feed



the rest of his subjects. By such a plan, every body will remain



employed, and also provided for, and such a prince may be looked



upon as a most humane governor. This I willingly agree to. I



should love such a prince; but the more I loved him, the more I



should regret that his project must fail, from a physical



impossibility of its being long supported; and when it comes to



fail by the exhausting of his wealth, it will not be his regrets



which will give bread to his soldiers, nor employment to his



industrious subjects, who will no longer find an equivalent for



their labour.



    Let this suffice at present, upon the general principles



which influence the stop necessary to be put to the importation



of foreign commodities, and to the diminution of national wealth,



in the case we have had before us.



    Next, as to the articles of exportation. The most profitable



branches of exportation are those of work, the less profitable



those of pure natural produce. When work cannot be exported in



all its perfection, because of its high price, it is better to



export it with a moderate degree of perfection, than not at all;



and if even this cannot be done to advantage, then will a people



be obliged to renounce manufacturing except for themselves: and



then, if domestic consumption do not increase in proportion to



the deficiency of foreign demand, a certain number of hands will



be idle, and a certain quantity of natural produce will remain



upon hand. The first must disappear in a short time; they will



starve or desert; the last will become an article of exportation.



Here then is a new species of trade which takes place upon the



extinction of the other. When a nation has been forced to reduce



her exportations to articles of pure natural produce, in



conformity to the principles we have been laying down, then the



plan proposed in the title of this chapter is executed. She is



then brought as low in point of trade as she can be, but, at the



same time, she may enjoy her natural advantages in spite of



fortune; and in proportion to them, she may, with a good



government and frugality, retain a balance of trade in her



favour, which will constantly go on in augmenting her national



wealth.



    There is, therefore, a period at which foreign trade may stop



in every article, but in natural produce. I do not know whether



this period be at a great distance, when the state of trade is



considered relatively to certain nations of Europe.



    Were industry and frugality found to prevail equally in every



part of these great political bodies, or were luxury and



superfluous consumption every where carried to the same height,



trade might, without any hurt, be thrown entirely open. It would



then cease to be an object of a statesman's care and concern. On



the other hand, were all nations equally careful to check every



branch of unprofitable commerce, a general stagnation of trade



would soon be brought about. Manufactures would no more be the



object of traffic; every nation would supply itself, and nothing



would be either exported or imported, but natural productions.



    But as industry and idleness, luxury and frugality, are



constantly changing their balance throughout the nations of



Europe, able merchants make it their business to inform



themselves of these fluctuations, and able statesmen profit of



the discovery for the re-establishment of their own commerce; and



when they find that this can no more be carried on with the



manufactures or produce of their own country, they engage their



merchants to become carriers for their neighbours, and by these



means, form as it were a third and last entrenchment, which,



while they can defend it, will not suffer their foreign trade to



be quite extinguished; because, by this last expedient, it may



continue for some time to increase their national stock. It is in



order to cut off even this resource, that some nations lay not



only importations under restraint, but also the importers. Let



such precautions be carried to a certain length on all hands, and



we shall see an end to the whole system of foreign trade, so much



*-la-mode, that it appears to become more and more the object of



the attention as well as of the imitation of all modern



statesmen.











Chap. XXV







When a rich Nation finds her Foreign Trade reduced to the



Articles of Natural Produce, what is the best Plan to be



followed? and what are the Consequences of such a Change of



Circumstances?







    There is now no more question of a trading nation; this



character is lost, the moment there is a stop put to the export



of the labour and ingenuity of her people.



    The first objects of her care should now be to increase, by



every possible means, the quantity of her natural produce; to be



as frugal as possible in the consumption of it, and to export the



surplus to the best advantage.



    If she find the exportation of subsistence going forward,



while some of her people remain in want, she may rest assured



that industry is suffering from some internal vice; and the most



probable cause of such an effect may be an unequal competition



between those of the lower classes, who work for a physical



necessary. This must be removed, and the statesman should never



rest until he has set the balance of work and demand so far



right, as to prevent the scale of work at least from



preponderating; for this is the door by which misery gets in



among a people.



    The preponderation of the scale of demand will not now be so



hurtful; because this alteration of the balance will only raise



prices, accelerate circulation, and keep the other balance, to



wit, that of wealth (of which we shall treat in the following



chapter), in a constant vibration, without diminution of the



public stock.



    Another object of a statesman's care in these supposed



circumstances, is to prohibit the importation of all work, and



even the natural produce of any other country conducive to



luxury; for although I have said, that superfluous consumption



can do little harm when the interests of foreign trade do not



enter into the question so as to prevent exportation, by raising



prices at home; and though the importation of foreign produce, in



exchange for like commodities of national growth, do no hurt to a



state with respect to her wealth; yet if such importation be an



article of mere superfluity, I think a statesman should prudently



itself a proof of discourage it; because the search after



superfluities is of a luxurious turn, and I should wish to see



this turn improved so as to promote national purposes only, that



is, the augmentation and subsistence of useful inhabitants.



    Let me illustrate this by an example. Foreign wines, I shall



suppose, become *-la-mode, as a part of the luxury of an elegant



table. A statesman by his example, may discourage this, by



introducing many other articles of expense in entertainments



sufficient to compensate it. The furniture of apartments may be



rendered more magnificent, ornaments of the side-board,



decoration of desserts, new amusements immediately after dinner,



may be introduced, which would have an air of refinement and



delicacy.



    By such examples he may easily substitute one expense, which



may become a national improvement, in the place of another, where



the luxury produces no such effect. And when prodigality and



expense have neither the good effect of giving bread to the poor,



nor of accelerating circulation at home in favour of the public,



I can see no reason why a statesman should interest himself for



their support; and much less, why a speculative person, who



investigates the methods only of making mankind happy by



rendering mutual services to each other, should strain a subject,



in order to find arguments proper to make either the apology or



panegyric of the various schemes of dissipation.



    I need not add, as a restriction upon this principle of



discouraging the importation of foreign commodities, that when



such a branch of trade becomes necessary to be carried on, in



order to engage a neighbouring nation reciprocally to consume of



home-superfluities; in this case, the luxury of the consumers of



the foreign produce has an evident tendency to national



improvement. If, for example, delicate wines, and raw silk, be



imported as a return for salt herrings and raw hides, the support



of such trade is evidently the means of making the rich consume



these articles of home-production, by converting them into



burgundy and velvet.



    These considerations regard the augmentation or at least the



preservation of national wealth. If they are attended to, it is



hardly possible that any part of what is already acquired, can go



abroad; and in this case the whole balance of the exportation of



natural produce becomes clear again.



    There are still several things to be observed with regard to



the exportation of natural produce. Such articles as are in great



abundance, and are not produced in other countries, as wines in



the southern countries of Europe, ought always to be exported by



the natives, because considerable profits must be made upon such



a trade; and on such occasions, a people ought to be wise enough



to keep such profits for themselves.



    But if other nations will not receive them, unless they be



imported by their own subjects, then the statesman may impose a



duty upon exportation, which is one way of sharing the profits



with the carriers. All the precaution necessary, in imposing this



duty, is not to raise it so high as to diminish the demand; nor



to give an encouragement to a neighbouring nation, to enter into



competition for such a branch of trade.



    Neighbouring states which furnish the same articles of



natural produce, regulate, commonly, the duties upon exportation,



in such a manner as nearly to compensate all differences which



strangers may find, between trading with one or with the other.



Or they grant particular privileges to the nations with whom they



find it most for their advantage to trade.



    If the natural advantages upon such articles are less



considerable, no duty can be imposed. Exportation may then be



encouraged by granting still greater privileges to strangers or



others, who may promote the exportation at little cost to the



state.



    If, in the last place, the natural produce of a country be



common to others, where it is perhaps equally plentiful, it will



be difficult to procure the exportation of it; and yet it may



happen, that too great an abundance of it at home may occasion



inconveniences. In this case, the statesman must give a premium



or bounty upon exportation, as the only method of getting rid of



a superfluity, which may so much influence the whole mass of the



commodity produced, as to sink the price of the industry of those



employed in it, below the standard of their physical necessary.



By giving, therefore, this premium, he will support industry in



this branch; he will take nothing from the national wealth; and



the exportation, which takes place in consequence of the bounty,



will be clear gain. This is an uncommon operation in trade, but



it has so intimate a connection with the doctrine of taxes, and



the proper application of public money, that I will postpone the



farther consideration of it until I come to these branches of my



subject; and the rather, because this book is swelling beyond its



due proportion.



    I have little occasion to speak of importations into a



country which exports no manufactures. The ruling principle in



such cases, is to suffer no importation but what tends to



encourage the exportation of the surplus of natural produce, and



which, at the same time, has no tendency to rival any branch of



domestic industry. Thus it is much better for a northern country



to pamper the taste of her rich inhabitants with wines and



spices, than to discourage agriculture by the importation of rice



and foreign grain; supposing the alternative offered to her



choice, and the one as well as the other to be the returns for



her own superfluity exported.



    I come next to the consideration of her inland trade, and



consumption of her own manufactures. Here there is no question of



either an increase or diminution of her wealth, but merely of



making it circulate in the best manner to keep every body



employed. Several considerations must here influence our



statesman's conduct, and a due regard must be had to every one of



them. I shall reduce them to three different heads, and pass them



in review very cursorily, as we have already sufficiently



explained the principles upon which they depend.



    First, To regulate consumption and the progress of luxury, in



proportion to the hands which are found to supply them.



    Secondly, To regulate the multiplication of inhabitants



according to the extent of the fertility of the soil. These two



considerations must constantly go hand in hand.



    So long, therefore, as the statesman finds his country still



capable of improvement, so long may he encourage a demand for



work, and even countenance new branches of superfluous



consumption; since the equivalent to be given for them must of



necessity prove an encouragement to agriculture. But whenever the



country becomes thoroughly cultivated and peopled to the full



proportion of its own produce, a check must be put to



multiplication, that is, to luxury, otherwise misery and



depopulation will follow; unless indeed we suppose, that numbers



ought to be supported even at the expence of national wealth; the



fatal consequences of which we have already pointed out.



    Thirdly, He should regulate the distribution of the classes



of his people, according to the political situation of the



country.



    This is the most complicated case of all. It would be



imprudent, for example, in a very small state situated on the



continent, to distribute all its inhabitants into producers and



consumers, as we have called them on several occasions; that is,



into those who live upon a revenue already acquired, and those



who are constantly employed in acquiring one by supplying the



wants of the other. There must be a third class; to wit, those



who are maintained and taken care of at the expense of the whole



community, in order to serve as a defence. This set of men give



no real equivalent for what they receive; that is to say, none



which can circulate or pass from hand to hand; but still they are



usefully employed as members of a society mutually tied together



by the band of reciprocal dependence. Here no vice is implied;



but at the same time, the statesman must attend to the



consequences of such a distribution of classes.



    The richer any state is, the more it has to fear from its



neighbours; consequently, the greater proportion of the



inhabitants must be maintained for its defence, at the expense of



the industry of the other inhabitants. This must diminish the



number of free hands employed in manufactures, and in supplying



articles of consumption: consequently, it would be imprudent to



encourage the progress of luxury, while public safety calls for a



diminution of the hands which must supply it. If in such



circumstances luxury do not suffer a check, demand will rise



above the proper standard; living will become dearer daily,



prices will rise, and they will prove an obstacle to the recovery



of foreign trade; an object of which a prudent statesman will



never lose sight for a moment.



    It is for these and other such considerations, that many



small states are found to fortify their capital; to keep a body



of soldiers in constant pay, bearing a great proportion to the



number of the inhabitants; to form arsenals well stored with



artillery, and to institute sumptuary laws and other regulations



proper to check luxury. Nothing is so wise in every respect!



Their territory cannot be extended nor improved, nor can their



inhabitants be augmented, but at the expence of their wealth; for



such as gain their livelihood at the expence of strangers, are at



present out of the question. Were their own citizens therefore



permitted, out of the abundance of their wealth, to give bread to



as many workmen as their extravagance could maintain, the public



stock would be constantly diminishing, in proportion to the



foreign subsistence imported for these supernumeraries, and paid



for at the expence of the luxurious; which would be just so much



squandered out of the general wealth.



    In other states which are extended, powerful by means of



wealth, and strong by nature and situation, whose safety is



connected with the general system of European politics, which



secures them against conquest; such as Spain, France, Great



Britain, &c. the progress of luxury does little harm (as these



territories are still capable of infinite improvements) provided



it does not descend to the lower classes of the people.



    It ought to be the particular care of a statesman to check



its progress there, otherwise there will be small hopes of ever



recovering foreign trade. Whereas, if the lower classes of a



people continue frugal and industrious, from these very



circumstances trade may open anew, and be recovered by degrees,



in proportion as luxury comes to get footing in other nations,



where the common people are less laborious and frugal.



    Luxury, among those who live upon a revenue already got, and



who, by their rank in the state, are not calculated for industry,



has the good effect of affording bread to those who supply them;



but there never can be any advantage in having luxury introduced



among the lower classes, because it is then a mean only of



rendering their subsistence more chargeable, and consequently



more precarious.



    Having thus briefly laid together the principal objects of a



statesman's care, upon the cessation of the foreign trade of his



people, I shall finish my chapter, by pointing out some general



consequences relative to the spirit, government, and manners of a



people, which reason and experience shew to be naturally



connected with such a revolution.



    Nothing is more certain than that the spirit of a nation



changes according to circumstances. While foreign trade



flourishes, the minds of the monied people are turned towards



gain. Money, in such hands, is generally employed to procure



more, not to purchase instruments of luxury; except for the



consumption of those prodigal strangers who are thereby becoming



daily poorer. It is this desire of becoming rich, which produces



frugality. A man is commonly frugal while he is making a fortune;



another very commonly becomes extravagant in the enjoyment of it;



just so would it be with nations, were a wise statesman never to



interpose.



    When, by the cessation of foreign trade, the mercantile part



of a nation find themselves cut off from the profits they used to



draw from strangers; and on the other hand, perceive the barriers



of the nation gradually shutting against every article of



unprofitable correspondence, they begin to withdraw their stocks



from trade, and seek to place them within the country. This money



is frequently lent to landed men, hitherto living within bounds,



for two most substantial reasons. First, because there was little



money to be borrowed, from the high rate of interest, owing to



the great profits on foreign trade; and because the national



stock was then only forming. The second, because the taste of the



times was frugality. But when once the money usually employed in



buying up loads of work for the foreign markets, comes to fall



into the hands of landed men, they begin to acquire a taste for



luxury. This taste is soon improved and extended by an infinity



of arts, which employ the hands formerly taken up in furnishing



the goods for exportation. Thus by degrees we see a rich,



industrious, frugal, trading nation, transformed into a rich,



ingenious, luxurious, and polite nation.



    As the statesman formerly kept his attention fixed on the



preservation of an equal balance between work and demand, and on



every branch of commerce, in order to prevent the carrying off



any part of the wealth already acquired; he must now direct his



attention towards the effects of the domestic operations of his



wealth. He was formerly interested in its accumulation; he must



now guard against the consequences of its circulation.



    While the bulk of a nation's riches is in foreign trade, they



do not circulate within the country; they circulate with



strangers, against whom the balance is constantly found. In this



case, the richest man in a state may appear among the poorest at



home. In foreign countries you may hear of the wealth of a



merchant, who is your next door neighbour at home, and who, from



his way of living, you never knew to be worth a shilling. The



circulation of money from home-consumption will then be very



small; consequently, taxes must be very low; consequently,



government will be poor.



    So soon as all this load of money which formerly was



continually going backwards and forwards, and scarcely penetrated



into the country, is taken out of foreign trade, and thrown into



domestic circulation, a new scene opens.



    Every one now begins to appear rich. That wealth which



formerly made the admiration of foreigners, now astonishes the



proprietors themselves. The use of money, formerly, was to make



more of it: the use of money now, is to give it in exchange for



those or such like commodities, which were then consumed by



strangers only.



    It is this revolution in the spirit of a people, which



renders the consideration of the balance of their wealth an



object of the greatest political concern: because upon the



constant fluctuation of it, among the several classes of



inhabitants, is laid the foundation of public opulence.



    Government must constantly be respected, feared, and obeyed



by the people governed; consequently, it must be powerful, and



its power must be of a nature analogous to that of the subjects.



If you suppose a great authority vested in the grandees of a



kingdom, in consequence of the number and dependence of their



vassals, the crown must have still a more powerful vassalage at



its command: if they are powerful by riches, the crown must be



rich. Without preserving this just balance, no government can



subsist. All power consists in men, or in money.



    If upon the cessation of foreign trade we suppose a vast



quantity of wealth thrown into domestic circulation, the



statesman must follow new maxims. He must promote the circulation



of it so as to fill up the blank of foreign consumption, and



preserve all the industrious who have enriched him. The quicker



the circulation is found to be, the better opportunity will the



industrious have of becoming rich speedily; and the idle and



extravagant will become the more quickly poor. Another



consequence equally certain is, that the quicker the circulation



be, the sooner will wealth become equally divided; and the more



equally it be divided, the more equality will be found in power.



From these principles it will follow, that upon such a revolution



of national circumstances, a popular government may very probably



take place, if the statesman do not take proper care to prevent



it.



    This may be accomplished by the imposition of taxes, and



these may be differently laid on, according to the spirit of the



government.



    By taxes a statesman is enriched, and by means of his wealth,



he is enabled to keep his subjects in awe, and to preserve his



dignity and consideration.



    By the distribution of taxes, and manner of levying them, the



power is thrown into such hands as the spirit of the constitution



requires it should be found in. Are they imposed in a monarchy,



where every man is taught to tremble at the King's name, the



great men will be made rich by his bounty, and the lower classes



will be loaded and kept poor; that they may, on easier terms, be



engaged to fill those armies which the Prince entertains to



support his authority at home, and his influence abroad.



    Here independent people will always be looked upon with an



evil eye, and considered as rivals to the Prince, who ought to be



the only independent person in the state.



    In limited governments, where the sovereign has not the sole



power of taxation, they will be laid on more equally, and less



arbitrarily; provided the theory of them in general be well



understood. Here every man must know what he is to pay, and when;



and the amount of the tax must bear a proportion, on one hand, to



the exigencies of the state; and on the other, to the quantity of



circulation which takes place upon the payment of it; that is, a



man must not be made to pay all the state can demand of him for a



year, upon his making a trifling, though most essential,



acquisition of a necessary article of subsistence.



    I think I have observed one remarkable difference in the



point of view in levying taxes in countries, where these two



forms of government are established.



    Under the pure monarchy, the Prince seems jealous, as it



were, of growing wealth, and therefore imposes taxes upon people



who are growing richer. Under the limited government they are



calculated chiefly to affect those who from rich are growing



poorer.



    Thus the monarch imposes a tax upon industry; where every one



is rated in proportion to the gain he is supposed to make by his



profession. The poll-tax and taille, are likewise proportioned to



the supposed opulence of every one liable to them. These, with



others of the same nature, are calculated (as it is alleged) to



establish an equality in the load supported by the subjects; by



making the industrious, and money-gatherers, contribute in



proportion to their gains, although the capital stock from which



these profits arise be concealed from the eyes of the public.



    In limited governments, impositions are more generally laid



upon consumption. They encourage industry, and leave the full



profits of it to make up a stock for the industrious person. When



the stock is made, that is, when it ceases to grow, it commonly



begins to decrease: the number of prudent people, who live



precisely upon their income, is very small. It is therefore upon



the dissipation of wealth, in the hands of private people, that



the state is enriched. Thus the carreer towards poverty is only a



little abridged: he who is in the way of spending his estate will



get at the end of it, if his life be spared; and therefore there



is no harm done to him, and much good done to the state, in



making a part of his wealth circulate through the public coffers.



    The only precaution necessary to be taken in taxing



consumption, is, to render the impositions universally equal, and



to prevent their affecting what is purely necessary. or producing



an unequal competition between people of the same denomination.



Such impositions have still a worse effect, than those which fall



upon growing wealth: they prevent the poor from being able to



subsist themselves. A fellow-feeling excites compassion among



those of the lower classes; they endeavour to assist each other,



and by this operation, like a pack of cards, set up by children



upon a table, the first that is thrown down tumbles down another,



until all are laid flat; that is, misery invades the lower



classes: more than one half of a people.



    From these principles (which I have been obliged to



anticipate) we may gather the necessity of taxes, in states where



foreign trade begins to decay. Without them, there is no security



for government against the power of domestic wealth. Formerly,



Princes lived upon their domain, or patrimonial estate. What



domain would be sufficient, at present, to support the expence of



government? And if government be not able to hold the reins of



every principle of action within the state, it is no government,



but an idol, that is, an object of a voluntary respect. The



statesman, therefore, must hold the reins; and not commit the



management of the horses to the discretion of those whom he is



employed to conduct.



    Another consequence of taxes, is, that the more luxury



prevails, the more the state becomes rich: if luxury, therefore,



breeds licentiousness, it at the same time provides a curb



against its bad effects.



    This augmentation of wealth produces a double advantage to



the statesman: for, besides the increase of the public revenue,



the progress of luxury changing the balance of wealth constantly,



by removing it from the rich and extravagant, to the poor and



laborious, renders those who were formerly rich, and consequently



powerful, dependent upon him for their support. By the



acquisition of such persons, he gains additional credit, and



supports his authority. Thus wealth and power circulate and go



hand in hand.



    It may be asked, how these principles can be reconciled with



the vigour and strength commonly found in the government of



flourishing trading nations; for in such we must suppose few



taxes, consequently a poor and therefore a weak government; and a



rich, consequently, a powerful people?



    I answer, that under such circumstances, a people are



commonly taken up with their trade, and are therefore peaceable;



and as their wealth does not appear, being constantly in



circulation with strangers, the influence of it is not felt at



home. While wealth is employed in pursuit of farther gains, it



cannot give power. consequently, as to all political effects at



home, it is as if it did not exist; and therefore there is no



occasion for the state to be possessed of a wealth they have no



occasion to employ. If such a nation be attacked by her enemies,



she becomes wealthy in an instant; every one contributes to ward



off the common danger: but if, on the contrary, her tranquillity



be disturbed at home, the rebellion generally proves successful;



which is a confirmation of the principles laid down. I might



illustrate this from many historical remarks. I shall suggest



only to my reader, to examine the nature of the Dutch



revolutions, and to compare the success of rebellions in France



and England, during the last century, with others of a fresher



date. Here the reader may consult the learned Mr Hume's



observation upon the commencement of the civil war. History of



Great Britain, vol. i. p. 325.



    When, therefore, foreign trade has ceased for some time, and



luxury has filled up the void, a considerable part of national



wealth begins to circulate through the public treasury. It is



natural then for great men to resort to court, in order to



partake of the profits of government; and for the statesman to be



fond of attaching such people to his interest, in order to be a



constant check upon the turbulent spirit, which new-gotten wealth



may excite in the minds of one set of people, and desperate



fortunes raise in those of others.



    While there was little circulation of money in Europe, and



few taxes, there was small profit to be made in the following of



Kings. These were more formidable to their enemies than



profitable to their friends. The great men of the state lived



upon their lands, and their grandeur resembled that of the



Prince; it consisted in the number and dependence of their



vassals; who got as little by their Lord, as he did by the King.



The poor in those days were plundered of the little money they



had, by the great; now the great are stripped of the largest



sums, by the numbers of poor, who demand from them on all hands,



the just equivalent for their industry.



    When Princes find their great men all about them, all asking,



and all depending for different marks of their favour, they may



perceive the great change of their situation, produced by luxury,



and a swift circulation. This revolution has not been sudden, it



has been the work of several centuries; and I think we may



distinguish three different stages during this period.



    The first during the grandeur of the feudal government: then



the great barons were to be consulted, and engaged to concur in



the King's wars, because they were those who paid the expence,



and suffered the greatest loss. These are called by some the days



of liberty; because the states of every country in Europe almost,



were then in all their glory: they are called so with great



reason, when we consider the condition of the great only.



    In those days there were seldom any troubles or disturbances



in the state, seldom any civil wars levied against the King, but



such as were supported by the grandees; who, either jealous of



their own just rights, or ambitious of acquiring others at the



expence of the crown, used to compel their vassals, or engage



them by the constitutional influence they had over them, to



disturb the public tranquillity.



    The second stage, I think, may be said to have begun with the



times of industry, and the springing up of trade. Such Princes,



whose subjects began to enrich themselves at the expence of other



nations, found, on one side, the means of limiting the power of



the great lords, in favour of the extension of public liberty.



The lords, on the other side, when they wanted to disturb the



public tranquillity, did not, as formerly, vindicate their own



privileges, so much as they combined with the people and moved



them to revolt, on popular considerations.



    This may be called the period of confusion, out of which has



arisen certain determinate forms of government; some drawing



nearer to the monarchical, others nearer to the popular form,



according as the power of Princes has been more or less able to



support itself, during the shock of the revolution, and the



overturn of the balance between public and private opulence.



    The third and last stage, of which I shall speak at present,



may be fixed at the period when the proportion of the public



revenue became adequate to the mass of national wealth; when



general laws were made to govern, and not the arbitrary power of



the great. The grandees now, from being a bridle on royal



authority, are often found dependent upon it for their support.



The extraordinary flux of money into the treasury, enables



Princes to keep splendid courts, where every kind of pleasure and



amusement is to be had. This draws together the rich men of the



state. The example of the sovereign prompts these to an imitation



of his expence, this imitation increases consumption, which in



its turn augments the King's income, as it diminishes that of



every other person.



    When the great men of a kingdom have exhausted their estates,



in paying a regular court to the Prince, they employ the credit



they have acquired with him during the time of their dissipation,



to obtain marks of his favour, in order to support them in their



decline. By these they are enabled to live in as much state as



before. They find no difference in their situation; unless



perhaps they should accidentally reflect, that the fund which



produced their former opulence, was in their own possession;



whereas that of their present wealth is in the hands of their



master.



    To compensate this difference, they are made to acquire, by



the favour of the court, advantages which they never could have



enjoyed from the largest independent fortune.



    The luxurious system of living, every where introduced, draws



the wealthy together, either in the capital or in other great



cities of the kingdom; where every one compares the expence and



figure he makes, with that of others who are about him. A person



honoured with the King's favour, of the same quality with



another, acquires, from this circumstance, a great superiority.



He commands, I shall suppose, in the place; he is the person to



whom people must apply, in order to obtain favours, perhaps



justice; he is adorned with a title, or outward mark of



distinction, which procures him respect and consideration; and,



which is still more, he is on the road to a farther elevation. It



requires a great stock both of philosophy and good sense, not to



be dazzled with these advantages. Independence, compared with



them, is but a negative happiness. To be truly happy, we must



have power, and have other people to depend on us.







Chap. XXVI







Of the Vibration of the Balance of Wealth between the Subjects of



a modern State







    We have frequently mentioned this balance, as an object of



great importance to a statesman who is at the head of a luxurious



nation; which having lost its foreign trade, has substituted in



the place of it, an extensive inland commerce. This will supply



the loss of the former, so far, as equally to provide employment,



and, consequently, subsistence, to every one inclined to be



industrious; although it must prove quite ineffectual for



augmenting the national wealth already acquired.



    I shall first explain what I mean by the balance of wealth



vibrating between the members of society; from which will be seen



why I rank this also among the political balances of a modern



state.



    It has been observed in the beginning of the nineteenth



chapter, that the great characteristic of what we call liberty,



is the circulation of an adequate equivalent for every thing



transferred and every service performed.



    By wealth I understand the circulating adequate equivalent.



    The desires of the rich, and the means of gratifying them,



make them call for the services of the poor: the necessities of



the poor, and their desire of becoming rich, make them chearfully



answer the summons; they submit to the hardest labour and comply



with the inclinations of the wealthy, for the sake of an



equivalent in money.



    This permutation between the two classes, is what we call



circulation; and the effects produced by it upon the political



situation of the parties, at the precise time of the circulation,



and the consequences, after it is completely effected, explain



what is called the balance of wealth.



    To render our ideas more correct, let us consider the money



on one side, and the prestations, as the civilians call them, or



performances of any kind, on the other, as reciprocal equivalents



for one other; and then let us examine the nature of those



prestations which tend to put these equivalents into circulation;



that is to say, what are the things which money can purchase.



    These we may divide, with the lawyers, into corporeal and



incorporeal. The corporeal may again be divided into consumable



and inconsumable; and the incorporeal into personal service, and



what the lawyers call jura, rights in or to any thing whatever. I



cannot fully explain myself without the help of this



distribution.



    Let us next consider the effects of the circulation of money,



as it has for its object, the acquisition of the four several



species here laid down.



    First, of inconsumable things. Secondly, of things



consumable. Thirdly, of personal service. Fourthly, of rights



acquired in or to any thing whatever.



    First, the only thing inconsumable is the surface of the



earth. This must not be taken in a philosophical, and far less in



a chemical sense. A thing is consumed, so far as it concerns our



inquiry, the moment it becomes useless, or even when it is lost.



    The surface of the earth, therefore, is the only thing



inconsumable; because, generally speaking, it never can cease to



be useful, and never can be lost; it may be changed, but the



earth must always have a surface. What is said of the surface,



may be understood likewise of that small part of its body



accessible to man, for supplying him with what he finds useful



there, as the produce of mines.



    Next to the earth itself, nothing is less consumable than her



metals, consequently coin may very properly be classed under the



head of things inconsumable; although it may be lost, and even



worn out in circulation.



    Let us now consider the effects of circulation in the



purchase of land. (A), I shall suppose, has a piece of land, and



(B) has one thousand pounds weight of gold coin, which the laws



of society have constituted to be an adequate circulating



equivalent for every thing vendible. They agree to make an



exchange. Before the exchange, the balance of their wealth is



equal; the coin is worth the land, the land is worth the coin;



the exchange makes no alteration, nor has it the effect of making



any afterwards; the new landlord may apply himself to the



improvement of the soil, the moneyed man to the turning of his



thousand weight of gold coin to the best advantage; consequently,



by this transaction, no vibration of the balance seems to be



affected.



    If coin itself be the object of sale, the consequences are



much the same. (A) has a guinea, (B) has twenty-one shillings,



the exchange they make produces no alteration in their



circumstances. The same holds good in other species of



circulation, such as the transmission of money by inheritance.



(A) dies and leaves his money to (B); here the possessor of the



money changes only his name, perhaps his inclinations, and that



is all. In like manner, a person pays his debts, and withdraws



his bond, or other security; no balance is affected by this



circulation, matters stand between the parties just as before.



    The nature, therefore, of circulation, when one inconsumable



commodity is given for another, is, that it operates no vibration



in the balance of wealth between the parties; because, in order



to produce this, one must remain richer than he was before, and



the other proportionately poorer.



    Secondly, under the second head of alienation, to wit, that



of consumable commodities, is comprehended every thing corporeal,



except money, and land, which money may purchase. Here two things



deserve our attention. First, the simple substance, or the



production of nature; the other, the modification, or the work of



man. The first I shall call the intrinsic worth, the other, the



useful value. The value of the first must always be estimated



according to its usefulness after the modification it has



received is entirely destroyed, and when by the nature of the



thing both must be consumed together, then the total value is the



sum of both. The value of the second must be estimated according



to the labour it has cost to produce it. An example will make



this plain.



    The intrinsic worth of any silk, woollen, or linen



manufacture, is less than the primitive value employed, because



it is rendered almost unserviceable for any other use but that



for which the manufacture is intended. But the intrinsic



substance of a loaf of bread loses nothing by the modification,



because the last cannot be consumed without the first. In a piece



of silver-plate curiously wrought, the intrinsic worth subsists



entire, and independent of the useful value, because it loses



nothing by the modification. The intrinsic value, therefore, is



constantly something real in itself; the labour employed in the



modification represent a portion of a man's time, which having



been usefully employed, has given a form to some substance which



has rendered it useful, ornamental, or, in short, fit for man,



mediately or immediately.



    Let us now apply these distinctions to the different



circumstances which attend consumption, in order to perceive



their effects.



    The consumption of the intrinsic value of any commodity,



takes place the moment the matter employed begins to diminish,



and is completed so soon as it is consumed totally. The



consumption of the useful value proceeds in like manner, in



proportion as the use it is put to makes the value of it



diminish, or disappear altogether.



    Let us next take an example, and examine the effects of



circulation in the purchase of things consumable, as to the



vibration of the balance of wealth. (A) has a piece of coin, (B)



has something which his labour has produced; they make an



exchange. (A) hitherto has neither gained or lost, neither has



(B); but (A) begins to make use of what he had purchased with his



coin, and in using it a part disappears; that moment the balance



begins to turn against him. (B), on the other hand, exchanges his



piece of coin with another, whom we shall call (C), and gets in



return a piece of wood; if (B) puts this piece of wood into the



fire, in proportion as the wood consumes, the balance is



returning to its level between (A) and (B), and is changing in



favour of (C). If (B), instead of burning his wood, makes a beam



of it for supporting his house, the balance will turn more



slowly, because the wood is then longer in consuming; but if he



makes some useful piece of furniture of one part of his wood, he



may warm himself with the remaining part of it, and with the coin



he gets for his work, may buy a beam for his house, and even food



to eat. If (B) stops at this period, and works no more, he will



find himself just upon a level with (A), so soon as his fire is



burnt out, his beam rotten, and his food consumed; and the whole



balance will be found in favour of (C); provided that by his



industry he has been able to procure for himself all his



necessaries, and preserve the piece of coin entire. Here then is



the spur to industry; to wit, the acquisition of this balance,



which gives a relative superiority even among those of the lowest



classes, and determines their rank as well as their



political-necessary, according to the principles laid down in the



twenty-first chapter.



    The essential characteristic of this vibration of the balance



of wealth, is the change in the relative proportion of riches



between individuals. But it must be observed, that under this



second species we are to consider the change of proportion no



farther than as it is produced by the circulation of a free



adequate equivalent, of such a nature as to be transferable to



another hand without any diminution. The consumption, therefore,



is the only thing which makes the balance turn. While the



consumable commodity remains entire in the hands of the



purchaser, he still remains possessor of the value, and may, by



inverting the operation, return to the possession of the same



species of wealth he had before.



    Here it may be asked, if money be absolutely necessary for



producing a vibration of this balance by the means of



consumption. We may easily conceive the greatest inequality



between the members of a state, without supposing the existence



of money. We may suppose the property of lands unequally divided,



and a great surplus of subsistence found in the hands of one



individual, which may by him be given in exchange for the produce



of industry. Under such circumstances then it may be asked, if



without money there can be such a thing as a vibration in the



balance of wealth? supposing in this case the term wealth to



imply, in general, the means of purchasing whatever man can



perform or produce.



    I answer, that no doubt the balance may be susceptible of



small vibrations, because even in the exchange of consumable



commodities, the consumption may go on faster on one side than on



the other; but I think, unless the inconsumable fund of wealth



(which is what gives the superiority, and which in the example



alleged, we supposed to be coin) can be made to change hands



according to the adequate proportion of the consumption made, we



cannot say properly, that a vibration can be operated in any



considerable degree.



    Let us suppose (A) to be a proprietor of a bit of land, and



(B) an industrious workman; in order that (B) may purchase the



land of (A), it must be supposed that (A) is very extravagant,



and that he inclines to consume a much greater proportion of work



than what is equivalent to all the surplus produce of his land.



Now in order to supply (A) to the value of the land itself, (B)



must distribute his work to many different persons, and take in



exchange, not such things as he has use for himself, but such as



may be found useful to (A). But so soon as (A) has paid to (B)



the whole surplus of his land, what fund of credit will he find



in order to engage (B) to furnish more? He cannot pay him in



land, because this fund is not susceptible of circulation; and



every expedient that could be fallen upon to keep accounts clear



between them, is neither more or less than the introduction of



money, either real or symbolical.



    By real money, is meant what we call coin, or a modification



of the precious metals, which by general agreement among men, and



under the authority of a state, carries along with it its own



intrinsic value.



    By symbolical money, I understand what is commonly called



credit, or an expedient for keeping accounts of debt and credit



between parties, expressed in those denominations of money which



are realized in the coin. Bank notes, credit in bank, bills,



bonds, and merchants' books (where credit is given and taken) are



some of the many species of credit included under the term



symbolical money.



    In the example before us, we may suppose that (A) having no



more circulating equivalent to give (B) for his work, and being



desirous to consume of it to the value of his land, shall agree



to issue notes of hand, every one of which shall carry in it a



right to an acre of land, to a fruit tree, to ten yards of the



course of a river, &c. and that every such parcel of property,



shall be esteemed at a certain proportion of work. This agreement



made, he goes on with his consumption, and pays regularly, and



adequately, the value of what he receives; and in proportion as



consumption proceeds on the side of (A), the balance of wealth



must turn in favour of (B); whereas while (A) kept his bit of



land, and (B) his faculty of working up an equivalent for the



surplus of it, the balance stood even: because the land on one



hand, and the industry on the other, produced adequate



equivalents for each other. The produce of both was consumable,



and was supposed to be consumed; which operation being over, the



land and the industry remained as before, ready to produce anew.



Here then is the effect of credit or symbolical money. Now I ask,



whether the notes of hand given by (A) to (B), do not contain as



real a value, as if he had given gold or silver? and farther,



whether it appears, that the country where they live becomes any



richer by this invention? does this note any more than declare,



who is the proprietor of the value contained?



    Nothing is so easy as to invent a money which may make land



circulate as well as houses, and every other thing which is of a



nature to preserve the same value during the time of circulation.



Whatever has a value, may change hands for an equivalent, and



whenever this value is determined, and cannot vary, it may be



made to circulate, as well as a pound of gold or silver made into



coin, and in the circulation to produce a vibration in the



balance of wealth.



    Those nations, therefore, who circulate their metals only,



confine industry to the proportion of the mass of them. Those who



can circulate their lands, their houses, their manufactures, nay



their personal service, even their hours, may produce an



encouragement for industry far beyond what could be done by



metals only. And this may be done, when the progress of industry



demands a circulation beyond the power of the metals to perform.



    This anticipation of the subject of the following books, is



here thrown in merely to enable my reader to form to himself an



idea of the extent of the subject we are at present upon, and to



help him to judge to what length luxury, that is consumption, may



be carried. Since, by what we have said, it appears that there is



no impossibility for a people to throw the whole intrinsic value



of their country into circulation. All may be cut into paper, as



it were, or stamped upon copper, tin, or iron, and made to pass



current as an adequate equivalent for the produce of industry:



and as there are no bounds to be set to consumption and



prodigality, it might be possible, by such an invention, in the



compass of a year, to circulate an equivalent in consumable



commodities produced by industry, for the whole property of the



most extended and most wealthy kingdom. That this is no



chimerical supposition, appears plain by the activity of many



modern geniuses, who, in an inconsiderable space of time, find



means to get through the greatest fortunes; that is to say, in



our language, they throw them into circulation by the means of



the symbolical money of bonds, mortgages, and accounts. But does



this species of circulation increase the riches of the state?



surely no more than it would increase the riches of France or



England, to carry all the plate in the two kingdoms to be coined



at the mint. The use of symbolical money is no more than to



enable those who have effects, which by their nature cannot



circulate (and which, by-the-bye, are the principal cause of



inequality), to give, to the full extent of all their worth, an



adequate circulating equivalent for the services they demand. In



other words, it is a method of melting down, as it were, the very



causes of inequality, and of rendering fortunes equal.



    The patrons therefore of Agrarian laws and of universal



equality, instead of crying down luxury and superfluous



consumption, ought rather to be contriving methods for rendering



them more universal. If they blame what is called perpetual



substitutions of property or entails (made by parents in favour



of their posterity as yet unborn), because they are in some



respects prejudicial to industry; they should not, I think, find



fault with this charming leveller dissipation, the nurse of



industry, and the only thing intended to be prevented by such



entails.



    Some have persuaded themselves, that an equality of fortune



would banish luxury and superfluous consumption. Among the rest,



is M. de Montesquieu, an author for whom I have the highest



esteem, and who has, in this respect, been copied by many others.



But I never found his idea set in a clear light. Equality of



fortune would certainly change the nature of luxury, it would



diminish the consumption of some, and would augment the



consumption of others; but without making people idle, it could



never destroy industry itself, and while this subsists in an



equal degree, there must be the same quantity of what it produces



regularly consumed. Farther this proposition never can be



advanced, but on the supposition that the luxurious person, that



is, the consumer, must be richer than he who supplies him. This I



cannot by any means admit to be true. Must the carter who drinks



a pot of beer be richer than the ale-houseman? Must a



country-girl, who buys a bit of ribband, be richer than the



haberdasher who sells it? Must the beau be richer than his



taylor? the traveller than the banker who gives him his money?



the client than the lawyer? the sick than the physician?



    How then does it appear that equality must prevent luxury,



unless we suppose every one confined to an absolute



physical-necessary, and either deprived of the faculty of



contriving, or of the power of acquiring any thing beyond it.



This principle Lycurgus alone laid down for the basis of his



republic; and yet riches were known in Sparta, as well as



poverty.



    Absolute equality, de facto, is an absurd supposition, if



applied to a human society. Must not frugality amass, and



prodigality dissipate? These opposite dispositions are of



themselves sufficient to destroy, at once, the best regulations



for supporting equality; and, when carried to a certain length,



must substitute in its place as great an inequality as the



quantity of circulation is capable to produce. Whatever



circulates may stagnate. Why was there so great an equality at



Sparta? because there was little circulation. Why are the



Capucins in a state of perfect equality? because among them there



is no circulation at all.



    If therefore such variations in the balance of wealth depend



on the difference of genius among men, what scheme can be laid



down for preserving equality, better than that of an unlimited



industry equivalent to an universal circulation of all property,



whereby dissipation may correct the effects of hoarding, and



hoarding again correct those of dissipation? This is the most



effectual remedy both against poverty and overgrown riches;



because the rich and the poor are thereby perpetually made to



change conditions. In these alterations in their respective



situations, the parties who are changing by degrees, must surely



in their progress towards a total alteration, become, at one time



or other, upon a level, that is, to an equality; as the buckets



in a well meet, before they can pass one another.



    Thirdly, The first species of things incorporeal, which may



be purchased with money, is personal service; such as daily



labour, the attendance of a menial servant, the advice of a



physician, of a lawyer, the assistance of skilful people in order



to acquire knowledge, the service of those employed in the



administration of public affairs at home and abroad, or for the



defence of a kingdom by sea or land; the residence of great men



at court, who do honour to princes, and make their authority



respected; and even when money is given to procure amusement,



pleasure, or dissipation, when no durable and transferable value



is given in return.



    There is a kind of resemblance between the species here



enumerated, and what we called the useful value in consumable



commodities. In the one and the other, there is an equivalent



given for a man's time usefully employed; but the difference



between them lies in this: that the useful value being supported,



or having for a substratum, as the schoolmen call it, the



intrinsic substance, is thereby rendered permanent and vendible;



whereas here, for want of a permanent and transferable substance,



the personal services, though producing advantages which are



sufficiently felt, cannot however be transferred for the adequate



price they cost.



    The circulation produced by this third species of



acquisition, operates an instantaneous vibration of the balance.



The moment the personal service is performed, it may be said to



be consumed; and although the purchaser has received a just



equivalent for the money given, and in some cases may even be



thereby put in a situation to indemnify himself of all his



expence, by performing the like services to others, yet every



body must perceive that such services cannot properly be



considered as a circulation of the former.



    Fourthly, The acquisition of the other species of things



incorporeal, that is, rights, produces little more balance, when



an adequate circulating equivalent is given for them, than the



sale of land; because a right implies no more than a power to



use, that is, to consume; and, by the use, the right is not



diminished: it is balanced by the use of the money; the money



therefore and the right being both permanent, there is no



vibration in the scales. Of this species are all servitudes; the



purchasing of privileges or immunities, even the lending of money



at interest, may here not improperly be classed.



    Here it will, perhaps, be alleged, that an example may be



given, where the creation of such a right, though purchased with



an adequate circulating equivalent, produces the greatest



vibration possible in the balance of wealth. It is when a state



contracts debts, and when the public creditors acquire a right to



general impositions on the people for the payment of their



interest. This objection requires a little explanation in order



to be removed and I have proposed it chiefly for the sake of



introducing an illustration of my subject.



    If it be said, that in this example a vibration in the



balance of wealth within the state is implied, then I say that it



must take place either, first, between the creditors and the



state, or, secondly, between the state and the people, or,



thirdly, between the creditors and the people. But,



    First, The creditors acquire no balance against the state



because they have given one inconsumable commodity for another;



to wit, money for an annual income. The money is worth the



income, the income is worth the money. If therefore any change in



the balance comes afterwards to take place, it must be in



consequence of other operations quite independent of this



transaction. But let us suppose, which is but too frequently the



case, that here money must be considered as a consumable



commodity, because it is only borrowed in order to be spent. In



this light does not the creditor seem to acquire a balance in his



favour against the state, so soon as the money is actually spent?



I answer in the negative: because a state, by expending the money



borrowed remains with respect to the creditors just as wealthy as



before. It is the people who pay the interest, for which the



state gives them in return no adequate transferable equivalent.



    Secondly, Here it is urged, that this being the case, the



state has acquired a balance against the people according to the



principles above laid down, where it was said, that upon



occasions, where money is given for personal service, and where



nothing transferable is given in return, the balance turns



instantaneously in favour of him who received the money.



    To this I answer, that as to the interest paid by the people,



the state does not receive it for herself, but for the creditors.



The personal services are then supposed to be already paid for,



and the vibration has taken place before the interest becomes



due. Therefore the balance does not turn between the state and



the people.



    In the levying of taxes which are destined to pay the



interest of money already spent, the public gives no adequate



equivalent on one hand; and on the other, it is not enriched with



respect to the people, any more than it was impoverished with



respect to the creditors, by spending the money borrowed; and



since there is no reciprocal change in the situation of the two



parties, I do not see how we can infer any vibration in the



balance of wealth between them. We shall presently see between



whom the balance is made to vibrate.



    Thirdly, The balance between the creditors and the people is



what at first sight appears to be principally affected; because



the first receive a constant retribution from the latter, in



consequence of the loan. But neither is any true vibration found



here, either adequate to the loan, or to the money spent. First,



because the creditors themselves are part of the people who



contribute towards all impositions on consumptions, which are



commonly the most regular, the most permanent, the most generally



appropriated for the payment of the interest. Secondly, because



the money spent by the state, if spent at home, returns to other



hands indeed, but still returns to the people, of whom we are



here speaking. And, thirdly, because there is no transaction at



all between the creditors and the people.



    Objection. By this way of reasoning it would appear, that the



exhausting of a people by taxes, makes no vibration in the



balance of their wealth.



    Answer. If the people be exhausted, it must be by enriching



strangers. This case should at present be excluded, as we have



laid aside the consideration of foreign relations. But allowing



this circumstance also to be implied in the objections made, I



agree that every penny of money sent out of a country, for no



real and permanent equivalent received in return, operates a



vibration in the wealth between nation and nation; but none



between subject and subject. To this it is answered, that when



taxes are high, many people are ruined while others are enriched:



this operates a vibration. I allow it; but then I reply, that by



the very supposition in every such case, the money must remain at



home; whereas in the former, it was supposed to be expended



abroad. Now we are not at present examining the effects of debts



and taxes, in changing the balance between man and man, but only



between the three cumulative interests above specified, the



state, the people and the creditors.



    Let me now ask, what is the effect of taxes on the vibration



of the balance of wealth between individuals?



    I answer, that whoever pays a tax, appears to pay for a



personal service. He receives no corporeal equivalent which can



be alienated by him for the same value; and he who is employed by



the state, and is paid with the produce of taxes, acquires a



balance in his favour against those who pay them. When the amount



of taxes goes abroad for foreign services, there can be no



alteration upon the balance at home, as has been said; neither is



there any when it remains at home: the people, that is, the whole



nation taken together, and the creditors, are as rich as before.



Let this suffice at present, as to the effects of debts and taxes



upon the balance of national wealth.



    Industry is the only method of making wealth circulate, so as



to change its balance between the parties; all kinds of



circulation which produce no such change, are foreign to the



present purpose.



    A man dies and leaves his wealth to another, nobody loses by



this, but he who is no more; a second pays his debts, neither



debtor, or creditor can be said to change circumstances by the



operation. A merchant buys a quantity of merchandize for ready



money, he thereby loses no balance of his wealth; it is true he



has given money for consumable effects; but the balance does not



operate until the consumption takes place, and as he is not



supposed to buy in order to consume, I rank this branch of



circulation among those which do not influence the balance.



    Thus we find two different kinds of circulation in a state;



one which makes the balance turn, and one which does not. These



objects are of no small consequence to be attended to in the



right imposition of taxes, as shall, in its proper place, be more



fully explained. At present it is sufficient to observe, that the



proper time of laying On taxes is at the time of circulation:



because the imposition may then be always exactly proportioned to



the sum circulating; consequently, to the faculties of the



persons severally interested.



    In all excises, or taxes upon consumption, it is the money of



the consumer which is taxed, in the instant of the payment; so



that he against whom the balance is to turn, has the additional



load to pay. This species of tax, imposed at the time of



circulation, is what produces the largest sums to a state. I



never heard of a proper expedient for taxing the person in whose



favour the balance is to turn, though from the principles which



are afterwards to be laid down, we may perhaps discover one.



    As for the other species of circulation, where the balance



does not turn, it is not so much the custom to impose very



considerable taxes upon it: there are however several examples to



be met with, which point out how they may be imposed. The



casualities paid upon the change of vassals or upon the fall of



lives, in leases upon lands in England; the confirmation of



testaments in Scotland; investitures in Germany; the centiéme



denier, the lods et ventes, and the control upon the acts of



notaries in France; the emoluments of the Rota in Spain, and in



many Roman Catholic countries, are of this species. Upon the same



principle, taxes more or less considerable might be laid upon



every branch of this kind of circulation; for which purpose, it



would be highly necessary to find out all the ramifications of



it, by analysing it to the bottom, as we have hitherto run



through it very superficially.







Chap. XXVII







Circulation and the Balance of Wealth, objects worthy of the



attention of a modern Statesman







    Having explained the nature of circulation, and of this



balance, we are next to point out the objects of a statesman's



attention concerning them.



    I. He ought to form to himself a clear and distinct idea of



the nature, properties, and effects of circulation; a word



frequently made use of without much meaning, and in a vague and



undeterminate sense.



    The term circulation is, perhaps, one of the most expressive



in any language, and is therefore easily understood. It



represents the successive transition of money, or transferable



commodities, from hand to hand, and their return, as it were in a



circle, to the point from which they set out. This is the rough



idea which every one, who understands the word at all, must form



its meaning. But a statesman's perceptions should be more



accurate as well as more complex.



    He must combine the consequences which result from this



successive transition, and attend to the effects produced by it.



He must not consider the money only, which is a permanent value,



passing from hand to hand, but weigh the consequences of the



variety of consumption which it draws along with it, in its



progress.



    Before a guinea can travel from London to York, it may be the



means of consuming a thousand times its value, and as much more,



before it can return to London again. Every stop the guinea makes



in its course, marks a want of desire to consume, in him who



possesses it, for the time. If, therefore, in any country, there



were but one guinea in circulation, all consumption would stop



(or barter would take place) the moment it fell into the hands of



a miser. This leads us to the second object of a statesman' s



attention.



    II. He ought at all times to maintain a just proportion



between the produce of industry, and the quantity of circulating



equivalent, in the hands of his subjects, for the purchase of it;



that, by a steady and judicious administration, he may have it in



his power at all times, either to check prodigality and hurtful



luxury, or to extend industry and domestic consumption, according



as the circumstances of his people shall require the one or the



other corrective, to be applied to the natural bent and spirit of



the times.



    For this purpose, he must examine the situation of his



country, relatively to three objects, viz. the propensity of the



rich to consume; the disposition of the poor to be industrious;



and the proportion of circulating money, with respect to the one



and the other.



    If the quantity of money in circulation is below the



proportion of the two first, industry will never be able to exert



itself; because the equivalent in the hands of the consumers, is



then below the proportion of their desires to consume, and of



those of the industrious to produce. Let me illustrate this by a



familiar example taken from a party at quadrille.



    When, on dealing the cards, every one puts in a fish into the



stake, according to the old English fashion, a very few fishes



are sufficient for the circulation of the game: but when you play



the aces, the consolation and the multiplication of beasts



according to the French custom, you must have a box with



contracts, fishes, and counters; so reducing all to the lowest



denomination, every player has occasion for above five hundred



marks. It is therefore plain, that the number of marks ought to



be in proportion to the circulation of the game. But at play, as



in a state, circumstances render this circulation very irregular.



Fortune may run so equally among the players, during a



considerable time, that none of them may have occasion to pay



away above the value of a hundred counters, and while this



equality continues, there will not be found the smallest



interruption in the circulation. But let one of the players have



a run of good luck, you will soon see three of the boxes empty



and all the circulating marks heaped up before the winner.



Fortune at quadrille, forms stagnations of the circulating



equivalent, as industry and frugality form them in a state. At



this period of the game, must not the players stop, or must they



not fall upon a way of drawing back their marks into circulation?



If they borrow back from the winner, this represents loan. If



they buy back their marks with money from their purses, it



represents what I call throwing solid property into circulation.



    From this familiar example, we may judge how necessary it is



that the circulating fund be constantly kept up to the proportion



of the occasions for it. It is impossible to determine the



proportion of coin necessary for carrying on the circulation of a



country, especially of one where neither loan, or paper-credit,



that is, the melting down of solid property, are familiarly



known. Here is the reason: the solution of the question does not



depend upon the quantity of coin alone, but also upon the



disposition of those who are the possessors of it; and as these



dispositions are constantly changing, the question thereby



becomes insoluble.



    It is, therefore, the business of a statesman, who intends to



promote circulation, to be upon his guard against every cause of



stagnation; and when he has it not in his power to remove these



political obstructions, as I may call them, by drawing the coin



of the country out of its repositories; he ought (in proportion



as the other political interests of his people are found to



require it) to facilitate the introduction of symbolical money to



supply its place.



    A great political genius is better discovered by the extent



of his perceptions, than by the minute exactness of them in every



part of the detail. It is far better for a statesman to be able



to discern (though superficially) every object of government



under all its relations, than to be able to trace any one with



the greatest accuracy. This is apt to occupy him too much, and no



one relation should ever engross his whole attention.



    I cannot omit in this place taking notice of a very judicious



remark of M. de Melon, an eminent political French writer, who



was employed by the Duke of Orleans in state affairs, during his



regency of the kingdom.



    'It belongs only (says he) to one who has had the direction



of every branch of government to lay down a general plan of



administration, and even then, one must not expect from such a



person, very particular details with respect to many objects, of



which he himself is entirely ignorant, and which he has been



obliged to confide to the care of others subordinate to him. A



person who can stoop to a minute exactness in small affairs,



proves commonly very unequal to the administration of great ones.



It is enough for such a person to know principles by experience



and reflection, and how to apply fundamental maxims as occasion



requires.'



    I apply this observation to the point in hand. A statesman



who allows himself to be entirely taken up in promoting



circulation, and the advancement of every species of luxurious



consumption, may carry matters too far, and destroy the industry



he wishes to promote. This is the case, when the consequence of



domestic consumption raises prices, and thereby hurts



exportation.



    A principal object of his attention must therefore be, to



judge when it is proper to encourage consumption, in favour of



industry: and when to discourage it, in favour of a reformation



upon the growth of luxury.



    If the country he governs be in a state of simplicity, and



that he wishes to awaken a taste for industry and refinement, he



must, as has been said, encourage domestic consumption, for the



sake of multiplying, and giving bread to the industrious; he must



facilitate circulation, by drawing into the hands of the public



what coin there is in the country, in case he finds any part of



it locked up; and he must supply the actual deficiency of the



metals, by such a proportion of paper-credit, as may abundantly



supply the deficiency.



    In every country where simplicity prevails, and where there



is any considerable quantity of coin, a great proportion of it



must be locked up: because there the consumption must be small;



consequently, little circulation; consequently, either little



coin, or many treasures. In such cases, therefore, a statesman



must engage the possessors of these riches to part with them, at



the desire of those who can give security for their worth: and he



must establish the standard of an annual retribution for the



loan. If this be difficult to be brought about, from the want of



confidence in the moneyed men, he may, in their favour, contrive



expedients to become the borrower himself, at the expence of the



alienation of certain rights, or the creation of new privileges,



in lieu of interest; and when he has engaged them to part with



their coin, he may lend it out to such as have both solid



property and a desire to consume; but who, for want of a



circulating fund to purchase superfluities, have hitherto lived



in simplicity.



    The introduction, therefore, of loans upon interest, is a



very good expedient to accelerate circulation, and to give birth



to industry.



    Objection. But here it is objected, that such a plan is



looked upon by some nations to be contrary to the precepts of the



christian religion, and therefore a statesman cannot permit it.



    To this I can make no answer, because I am no casuist; but I



can propose an expedient which will supply the defect of



borrowing at interest; and, as it may serve to illustrate the



principles I am now upon, I shall here introduce it.



    The intention of permitting loans upon interest, is not to



provide a revenue to those who have ready money locked up, but to



obtain the use of a circulating equivalent to those who have a



sufficient security to pledge for it. If the statesman,



therefore, shall find himself withheld by the canons of his



church, from drawing the coin of his subjects into circulation,



by permitting the loan of it upon interest, nothing is more easy



than to invent another species of circulation, where no interest



at all is necessary.



    Let him open an office, where every proprietor of lands may



receive, by virtue of a mortgage thereon, a certain proportional



value of circulating paper of different denominations, the most



proper for circulation. He may therein specify a term of payment



in favour of the debtor; in order to give him an opportunity to



call in his obligation, and relieve the engagement of his



property. But this term being elapsed, the land is to belong to



the creditor, or the paper to become payable by the state, if



required, which may in consequence become authorised either to



sell the land engaged, or to retain a proportional value of the



income, or of the property of the land itself, as shall be judged



most expedient.



    Farther, let him constitute a real security for all debts



upon every species of solid property, with the greatest facility



in the liquidation of them, in favour of those who shall have



given credit to the proprietors for merchandise of any kind. To



compass this, let all entails, substitutions, and fidei commissa,



or trusts, restraining the alienation of land-property, be



dissolved; and let such property be rendered as saleable as



household furniture. Let such principles influence the spirit of



the government; let this sort of paper-credit be modified and



extended according to circumstances, and a taste for consumption



will soon take place.



    The greatest of all obstacles to industry in its fancy, is



the general want of credit on both sides. The consumers having no



circulating value, the difficulty of liquidating what they owe by



the alienation of their lands, prevents their getting credit; and



the many examples of industrious people giving way, on account of



bad payments, discourages others from assisting them in the



beginning of their undertaking.



    From these principles we may gather, that a statesman who



intends to increase industry and domestic consumption, should set



out by providing a circulating fund of one kind or other, which



ought always to be ready, and constantly at the command of those



who have any sort of real equivalent to give for the consumption



they incline to make; for as specie may oftentimes be scarce, a



contrivance must be fallen upon immediately to supply the want of



it.



    The utility of this kind of credit, or paper-money, is



principally at the instant of its entering into circulation;



because it is then only that it supplies the want of real specie;



and by this invention the desire to consume creates, as it were,



the circulating equivalent, without which the alienation of the



produce of industry would not have taken place; consequently, the



industry itself would have suffered a check.



    But in the after-circulation of this paper-money from hand to



hand, this utility comes to cease; because the subsequent



consumer, who has another man's paper to give in exchange, is



already provided with a circulating equivalent, and therefore,



were it not for the wearing of the specie, or difficulty of



procuring it, it is quite indifferent both to the state, as well



as to circulation, whether this paper continue to pass current,



or whether it be taken up, and realized by the debtor, and gold



and silver be made to circulate in its place.



    Let me now endeavour to make this whole doctrine still more



plain, by an example.



    Suppose a country where there is a million of pieces of gold



employed necessarily in carrying on the ordinary circulation, a



million of pieces of the same value locked up, because the



proprietors have no desire to spend them. Suppose the revenue of



the solid property of the country to be worth also a million a



year; and that if the fund itself could be sold, it might be



worth twenty millions of the same specie. Suppose no such thing



as credit or paper-money to be known, and that every man who



inclined to make any consumption, must be previously provided



with a part of the circulating million, before he can satisfy his



inclination.



    Under these circumstances, the statesman resolves to



establish industry, and finding that by his people's taking a



taste for a greater consumption, the million which was formerly



sufficient for carrying on circulation, is no longer so; he



proposes to those who have the other million locked up, to borrow



it from them at 5 per cent and the better to engage them to



comply with his proposal, he offers to impose duties upon the



whole of the inhabitants to the annual amount of fifty thousand



pieces of gold, to be paid annually to the creditors, in return



for their treasure. If this scheme be adopted, he may, upon good



security, lend out his million in small sums, to every one who



inclines to borrow; or by premiums and other encouragements given



to his infant manufactures, he may throw it into the hands of the



public, that is, into circulation. Here is one method for



increasing the quantity of a circulating fund, when an



augmentation upon the consumption of the produce of industry



comes to demand it.



    But let us now suppose this regular plan of borrowing to be



contrary to what is called the constitution of the state, to



religion, or to the spirit of the people, what must be done to



supply the place of such a scheme?



    The statesman must then fall upon another contrivance, by



extending the use of pledges, and instead of moveables, accept of



lands, houses, &c. The Monte pieta at Rome issues paper money



upon moveable security deposited in their hands. Let the



statesman, without exacting interest, do the same upon the lands



of his subjects, the best of all securities. While the lands



subsist, this paper-money must retain its value; because I



suppose the regulations to be such as to make it convey an



indisputable right to the lands engaged. The advantage of such an



establishment will be, that as formerly no man could purchase the



smallest produce of industry, without having a part of the



circulating million of pieces of gold; every body now who has an



inclination to consume, may immediately procure paper-money in



proportion to his worth, and receive in return whatever he



desires to possess.



    Now let me suppose that this paper-money shall in time, and



from the growing taste for superfluities, amount to the value of



five millions of pieces of gold. I ask, whether the real value of



this paper is any way diminished, because it exceeds, by far, all



the gold and silver in the country, and consequently cannot all



at once be realized by the means of the coin? Certainly not:



because it does not draw its value from any representation of



these metals, but from the lands to which it conveys a right.



Next, I ask, if the country is thereby become any richer? I



answer, also, in the negative: because the property of the lands,



if sold being supposed worth twenty millions, the proprietors of



the paper are here supposed to have acquired, by their industry,



five millions of the twenty; and no more than the remaining



fifteen millions belong to the landlords.



    Let us now suppose a million of this paper-money to fall into



the hands of those who have no inclination to spend it. This is



the case of the frugal, or money-hoarding persons: will they not



naturally choose to realize their paper, by taking possession of



the lands represented by it? The moment this operation takes



place, the million of paper-money is annihilated, and the



circulating capital is reduced to four millions of paper, and one



million of specie. Suppose, on the other hand, that those who



have treasures which they cannot lend at interest, seeing a paper



money in circulation, which conveys a right to solid property,



shall first purchase it with their million of pieces of gold, and



afterwards lay hold of a proportional part of the land: what



effect will this double operation produce upon the circulating



fund? I answer, that the currency, instead of being composed, as



formerly, of one million of coin and five millions of paper,



will, at first, on the buying up of the paper, consist of two



millions of coin and five millions of paper; and so soon as the



million of paper bought up comes to be realized upon the land, it



will be thereby extinguished; consequently the circulating coin



will be raised to two millions, and the paper will be reduced to



four. Here then is a very rational method of drawing all the coin



of the country from the treasures of the frugal, without the help



of interest. Let me take one step farther, and then I will stop,



that I may not too far anticipate the subject of the fourth book.



    I suppose, that the statesman, perceiving that the constant



circulation of the coin insensibly wears it away, and reflecting



that the value of it is entirely in proportion to its weight, and



that the diminution of the mass must be an effectual diminution



of the real riches of his country, shall call in the metals and



deposit them in a treasure, and shall deliver, in their place, a



paper-money, having a security upon the coin locked up. Is it not



plain, that while the treasure remains, the paper circulated will



carry along with it as real (though not so intrinsic) a value as



the coin itself could have done? But if this treasure comes to be



spent, what will the case be then? It is evident, that the paper,



conveying a right to the coin, will then as effectually lose its



value, as the other species of paper conveying a right to the



lands, and issued, as we have supposed, by the proprietors of



them, would have lost its value, had an earthquake swallowed up,



or a foreign conqueror seized, the solid property engaged as a



security for it.



    The expedient, therefore, of symbolical money, which is no



more than a species of what is called credit, is principally



useful to encourage consumption, and to increase the demand for



the produce of industry. And bringing the largest quantity of



coin possible into a country, cannot supply the want of it in



this respect; because the credit is constantly at hand to every



one who has property, and the other may fail them on a thousand



occasions. A man who has credit may purchase at all times, though



he may frequently be without a shilling in his pocket.



    Whenever, therefore, the interest of a state requires that



the rich inhabitants should increase their consumption, in favour



of the industrious poor, then the statesman should fall upon



every method to maintain a proportion between the progress of



industry, and the gradual augmentation of the circulating fund,



by enabling the inhabitants to throw with ease their solid



property into circulation whenever coin is found wanting. Here



entails are pernicious.



    On the other hand, when luxury begins to make too great a



progress, and when it threatens to be prejudicial to foreign



trade, then may solid property be rendered more unwieldy, and



entails may then become useful: all moveable debts, except bills



of exchange in foreign circulation, may be stripped of their



privileges, and particularly, as in France, of the right of



arresting the person of the debtor. Usury ought then to be



punished severely; even something like the Senatus Consultum



Macedonianum, which made the contract of loan void on the side of



the borrowers, while they remained under the power of their



fathers, may be introduced. Merchants' accounts should no more be



allowed to enjoy a preference to other debts; but on the



contrary, be made liable to a short prescription. In a word,



domestic circulation should be clogged, and foreign circulation



accelerated. When foreign trade again comes to a stop, then the



former plan may be taken up a-new, and domestic circulation



accelerated and facilitated, in proportion as the produce of



industry and taste for superfluity require it.



    III. A statesman ought carefully to distinguish between those



branches of circulation which operate a vibration in the balance



of wealth, and those which do not, in order to regulate the taxes



which he may think proper to lay upon his people.



    In treating of this third object of a statesman's attention,



I shall confine myself to the application of those principles



which point out the necessity of taxation among a luxurious



people, become wealthy by the means of a foreign trade which they



now have lost; and where the industrious can no longer be made to



subsist but by means of a great domestic circulation. This is the



object of our present inquiry.



    In every case where the balance of wealth is made to vibrate



by circulation, there is an opportunity of imposing a tax upon



consumption, perfectly proportioned to the quantity of the



circulation. Now by the imposition of taxes, and the right



employment of the amount of them, a statesman has it in his power



to retard or to promote the consumption of any branch of



industry. By the imposition of duties he may either check luxury



when he finds it calling off too many hands from other more



necessary occupations; or by granting premiums, he may promote



consumption or exportation upon branches where it is expedient to



increase the hands employed, which last is the reverse of



taxation; or in the third place, when foreign trade begins to



bear a small proportion to domestic consumption, he may profit of



luxury, and draw a part of the wealth of the luxurious into the



public treasure, by gently augmenting the impositions upon it;



for when taxes are gently increased, consumption is not checked;



consequently, this is the proper method to be followed, when



luxury does no harm. But when it proves hurtful, the rise in the



impositions should be sudden, that they may operate the effects



of violent revolutions which are always accompanied with



inconveniences, and on such occasions every inconvenience will



mark the success of the operation. An example will make this



plain.



    If you want to check the drinking of spirituous liquors, let



every alteration of your oeconomy concerning them, either as to



the impositions upon the consumption, or regulations in retailing



them, proceed by jerks as it were; if you want to increase the



revenue, from the propensity people have to poison themselves



with spirits, your augmentations and alterations may be gentle



and progressive.



    Here let me observe by the way, that the best method for a



statesman to curb any sort of vice among his people, is to set



out by facilitating the gratification of it, in order to bring it



once upon a regular and systematical footing, and then by sudden



and violent revolutions in the administration of the oeconomy of



it, to destroy it and root it out.



    Were all the strumpets in London received into a large and



convenient building, whither the dissolute might repair for a



while with secrecy and security, in a short time, no loose women



would be found in the streets. And it cannot be doubted, but that



by having them all together under certain regulations, which



might render their lives more easy than they are at present, the



progress of debauchery, and its hurtful consequences, might in a



great measure be prevented. At Paris, they are to be found in



their houses, because the police never troubles them there, while



they commit no riot or disturbance. But when they are persecuted



in their habitations, they break forth into the streets, and by



the open exercise of their profession, the delicacy of modesty is



universally hurt and but too frequently blunted, and the example



which those prostitutes openly set to their own sex, debauches



more women than all the rakes in town do.



    I hope this digression will not be misconstructed into an



apology for public stews, in which, instead of following good



regulations for suppressing the vices with which they are filled,



the principal object is frequently to encourage the abuses for



the sake of making them turn to account as a branch of revenue.



Such a plan of administration represents a statesman who turns



against his people those arms, which he had provided for their



defence. My intention is very different, it is to curb vice as



much as possible, and to shut up what cannot be rooted out within



the bounds of order, and to remove it as a nuisance from the eyes



of the public, and from the contagious imitation of the innocent.



I now come to the object of a statesman's attention, relative to



that branch of circulation which implies no vibration of the



balance of wealth between the parties concerned.



    The more perfect and the more extended any statesman's



knowledge is of the circumstances and situation of every



individual in the state he governs, the more he has it in his



power to do them good or harm. I always suppose his inclinations



to be virtuous and benevolent.



    The circulation of large sums of money brings riches to light



for a moment, which before and after are commonly hid from the



eyes of the public. These branches of property therefore, which



have once made their appearance in this species of circulation,



should not be lost sight of until they come naturally to melt



away, by returning into the other branch of which we have been



speaking; that is, until they be fairly spent, and the balance be



made to turn against the former proprietors of them. After this



revolution, they will circulate for a while in small sums, and



remain imperceptible; until with time they come to form new



stagnations; then they will be lent out again, or employed in the



purchase of lands; and falling once more under the eye of the



state, they will again become an object of the same attention as



formerly.



    Nothing is more reasonable, than that all property which



produces an annual determinate income, should be made to



contribute to the common burthens of a state. But those taxes



which are intended to operate upon so moveable a property as



ready money, ought to be imposed with a most gentle hand, and



even so as not to appear directly to affect it. The statesman



here must load his wealthy citizens with duties, as Horace loads



his sovereign with adulation, never addressing his compliments



directly to the emperor, but conveying them to him in the most



elegant manner, through the channel of an interposed person. Thus



people, possessing large capitals of ready money, which in a



moment they can transport beyond the reach of the most extended



jurisdiction, may have certain privileges granted them which may



attach them to the country, (in England, for example, a vote in a



county or borough,) and then in consequence of their rank, not



because of their money, be made to come under a sort of



capitation, or other similar imposition bearing another name.



Might not the creditors of this nation be represented in



parliament, and in consequence of so great a privilege, and the



additional security thereby granted to the funds, be made



afterwards to come under taxation as well as other proprietors of



a determinate revenue? An admirable hint for the imposition of



such taxes, is to be met with in a certain great European



monarchy, where the highest order of knighthood is distinguished



with a ribband, a star, and a pension of about an hundred and



thirty pounds sterling a year. But so soon as any one is raised



to this dignity, he pays exactly this very sum in lieu of



capitation. The pension was given by the prince who instituted



the order; the capitation followed in a subsequent reign, and now



appears rather a mark of distinction than a burthen.



    IV. The next object of a statesman's attention, proper to be



taken notice of, is the different political considerations which



must occur to him when he compares the consequences of turning



the balance of wealth against the industrious members of a state,



with those vibrations which take place against the not working



part of the inhabitants. In other words, the different effect of



taxes, as they severally affect those who consume in order to



reproduce, and those who consume in order to gratify their



desires.



    The one and the other consumption implies a vibration in the



balance of wealth, and whenever there is a vibration, there we



have said that a proportional tax may be imposed.



    But as the intention of taxes, as I understand them, is to



advance only the public good, by throwing a part of the wealth of



the rich into the hands of the industrious poor, and not to



exhaust one part of a nation in order to enrich another; from



hence it follows, that no necessary article of consumption should



ever be taxed to an industrious person, but in such a way as to



enable him to draw back the full amount of it, from those who



consume his work. By this means, the whole load of taxes, must



fall upon the other class of inhabitants, to wit, those who live



upon the produce of a fund already acquired.



    Let me here observe, by the way, that if taxes are rightly



laid on, no industrious person, any more than another who lives



upon his income, will ever be able to draw back one farthing of



such impositions as he has paid upon his consumption of



superfluity. This shall in its proper place be made sufficiently



plain; at present it would be a superfluous anticipation of the



doctrine of taxation, to point out the methods of compassing this



end. My intention at present is to recapitulate only the objects



of a statesman's attention, with regard to the consequences of



circulation, and the vibrations of the balance of wealth; and



having shewn how nearly those principles are connected with those



of taxation, this alone is sufficient to shew their importance.



    V. A statesman ought to attend to the difference between the



foreign and domestic circulation of the national wealth.



    This object, though in part relative to foreign commerce,



must not be passed over without observation. In fact, there is no



nation entirely deprived of foreign communications; therefore,



although a statesman, who is at the head of a luxurious people,



may act in general as if there were none at all, yet still he



ought to be attentive to the consequences of circulation with his



neighbours, so far as it does or may take place.



    Every commercial correspondence with foreign nations, not



carried on by the exchange of consumable commodities, must



produce a vibration of the balance of wealth, either in favour or



prejudice of the interest we have in our eye. But it does not



follow, because there is a vibration, that therefore a statesman



has the same liberty of imposing taxes upon every article of



consumption, as if the two scales were vibrating within the



country subject to his administration.



    When the consumers are his subjects, he may safely impose a



tax on the goods imported; and although he should gradually



augment the duty, so as to diminish the consumption of such



goods, as well as the amount of the duty, he will, by



discouraging the importation of them, most amply indemnify his



people by keeping their wealth at home.



    When the foreigners are the consumers, the case is very



different: for you cannot oblige a man who is not your subject,



to pay beyond the advantage he gains by your correspondence. It



is therefore, as has been said, upon the exportation only of



goods, where the nation has great natural advantages over her



neighbours, that any duty can be raised.



    VI. The last object I shall mention as worthy of a



statesman's attention, is, the rules of conduct he should



prescribe to himself, as to extending or contracting taxation,



according as he finds a variation in the proportion between the



FOREIGN and DOMESTIC circulation of his country.



    For this purpose he must know exactly the proportions of the



one and the other; he must compare the quantity of domestic



consumption, with the produce of industry and quantity of



importations.



    If domestic consumption be equal to the sum of both, the



country must annually lose the value imported. In this case,



taxes are to be raised by sudden jerks, especially upon



importations; not to increase the produce of them, but to prevent



the increase of luxury and dissipation of national wealth.



    If domestic consumption do not exceed the produce of



industry, this will prove that exportation is at least equal to



importation. In this case the exportation must be supported; and



when this can no otherwise be done, a part of the taxes levied



upon home-consumption must be distributed in premiums upon the



articles of exportation; and when this also becomes ineffectual,



then all importations for home-consumption must be cut off



according to the principles above laid down.



    If the domestic consumption should really fall short of the



produce of industry, it marks a flourishing foreign trade. Prices



then must be kept low, as has been abundantly explained;



consequently there will be less profit from taxes; because every



penny imposed, which affects the price of exportable goods, must



be refunded out of the net produce of them, and all the expence



of collecting this part will be entirely lost to the public: the



remainder, therefore, will be greater or less, according as



foreign trade is great or small.



    In proportion, therefore, as domestic circulation gains



ground, foreign trade must decay, and taxes become necessary; in



order, with the amount of them, to correct the bad effects of



luxury, by giving larger premiums to support exportation. And in



proportion as a statesman's endeavours to support by these means



the trade of his country becomes ineffectual, from the growing



taste of dissipation in his subjects, the utility of an opulent



exchequer will be more and more discovered; as he will be thereby



enabled both to support his own authority against the influence



of a great load of riches thrown into domestic circulation, and



to defend his luxurious and wealthy subjects from the effects of



the jealousy of those nations which enriched them.



    To conclude: the exportation of work, and the supporting of a



superiority in the competition of foreign markets (as has been



said, and as shall be farther explained) seem to be the most



rational inducements to engage a statesman to begin a scheme of



imposing considerable taxes upon his people, while they enjoy any



share of foreign commerce. If such taxes continue to subsist



after the extinction of it, and are then found necessary; this



necessity is itself a consequence of the change in the spirit and



manners of a people become rich and luxurious.



    The charge of government, under such circumstances, must



greatly increase, as well as the price of every commodity. Is it



not very natural, that he who is employed by the state should



receive an equivalent proportioned to the value of his services?



Is it to be supposed, that a person born in a high rank, who,



from this circumstance alone, acquires an advantage in most



nations, hardly to be made up by any acquired abilities, will



dedicate his time and his attendance for the remuneration which



might satisfy an inferior? The talents of great men deserve



reward as much as those of the lowest among the industrious; and



the state is with reason made to pay for every service she



receives. This circulation of an adequate equivalent, we have



said to be the palladium of liberty, the band of gentle



dependence among freemen; and the same spirit ought to animate



every part of the political body. That nothing is to be done for



nothing, is a fundamental political maxim in every free



government, and obligations, not liquidated by a just equivalent,



form pretensions beyond their worth; and are constantly



accompanied with discontent at one time or other.



    Another use of taxes, after the extinction of foreign trade,



is to assist circulation, by performing, as it were, the function



of the heart of a child, when at its birth that of the mother can



be of no farther use to it. The public treasure, by receiving



from the amount of taxes, a continual flux of money, may throw it



out into the most proper channels, and thereby keep that industry



alive, which formerly flourished, and depended upon the



prosperity of foreign commerce only.



    In proportion, therefore, as a statesman perceives the rivers



of wealth (as we have called them above), which were in brisk



circulation with all the world, begin to flow abroad more slowly,



and to form stagnations, which break out into domestic



circulation, he ought to set a plan of taxation on foot, as a



fund for premiums to indemnify exportation for the loss it must



sustain from the rise of prices, occasioned by luxury; and also



for securing the state itself, against the influence of domestic



riches, as well as for recompensing those who are employed in its



service.



    This system ought to be carried on and extended in proportion



to the decay of foreign trade; and when this comes in a manner to



cease, then the increase of taxes, and the judicious application



of them, going hand in hand, the state itself will support



circulation, by receiving with one hand, while it is giving out



with the other; until by a prudent management under the care and



direction of an able statesman, through time and perseverance,



every internal vice be corrected, and foreign commerce be made



once more to flourish from the principles we have been laying



down, and from what may be farther said to illustrate them in the



subsequent books of this inquiry.



    While industry is kept alive there is still ground for hope.



Manners change, and the same luxury which extinguished foreign



trade, by calling home the wealth employed in that species of



circulation, may afterwards, by keeping industry alive at home,



and by throwing a sufficient power of wealth into the hands of a



good statesman, render the recovery of that trade no difficult



project, to one who has an instrument in his possession so



irresistible in removing every obstacle in the way of his



undertaking.



    This represents a kind of circulation of the spirit and



manners of a people, who, under the government of able statesmen,



may be rendered happy in every situation; and since, from the



nature of man, no prosperity can be permanent, the next best



thing to be done, is, to the yield to the force which cannot be



resisted; and, by address and management, to reconduct a people



to the height of their former prosperity, after having made them



travel (as I may say) with as little inconvenience as possible,



through all the stages of decline.







Chap. XXVIII







Circulation considered with regard to the Rise and Fall of the



Price of Subsistence and Manufactures







    The intention of this chapter is to apply the principles we



have been in search of, to the solution of some questions, which



have been treated by those great masters of political reasoning,



Messrs de Montesquieu and Hume. The ideas they have broached are



so pretty, and the theory they have laid down for determining the



rise and fall of prices so simple, and so extensive, that it is



no wonder to see it adopted by almost every one who has written



after them.



    I have not forgot how much I was pleased when I first perused



these authors, from the easy distribution which a general theory



enabled me to make of certain classes of my ideas then lying



without order, in that great repository of human crudities, the



memory; which frequently retains more materials, than people,



commonly, have either time, or perhaps capacity rightly to



digest.



    I am very far from pretending to any superiority of



understanding over those gentlemen whose opinions I intend to



review. accident alone has led me to a more minute examination of



the particular circumstances, upon which they have founded their



general maxims; and, in consequence of my inquiries, I think I



have discovered, that in this, as in every other part of the



science of political oeconomy, there is hardly such a thing as a



general rule to be laid down.



    There is no real or adequate proportion between the value of



money and of goods; and yet in every country we find one



established. How is this to be accounted for?



    We have, in the fourth chapter of this book, already inquired



into the principles which point out the influence of trade upon



the variation of the price of goods; but the question now comes



to be, how to fix and determine the fundamental price, which is



the object of variation. It has been said, that the price of a



manufacture is to be known by the expence of living of the



workman, the sum it costs him to bring his work to perfection,



and his reasonable profit. We are now to examine what it is,



which in all countries must determine the standard prices of



these articles of the first necessity; since the value of them



does necessarily influence that of all others.



    The best way to come at truth, in all questions of this



nature, is to simplify them as much as possible, that they may be



first clearly understood.



    Whenever a question arises about price, an alienation is



necessarily implied; and when we suppose a common standard in the



price of any thing, we must suppose the alienation of it to be



frequent and familiar. Now I must here observe, that in countries



where simplicity reigns (which are those where the decision of



this question ought regularly to be sought for, since it is there



only where a complication of circumstances do not concur to raise



the prices of subsistence) it is hardly possible to determine any



standard for the price of articles of the first necessity.



    Let us examine the state of those hunting Indians who live by



their bow, and of other nations where the inhabitants exercise, I



may say universally, that species of agriculture which I have



called a direct method of subsistence, and we shall find that the



articles of food and necessaries are hardly found in commerce: no



person purchases them; because the principal occupation of every



body is to procure them for himself. What answer would a Scotch



highlander have given any one, fifty years ago, who should have



asked him, for how much he sold a quart of his milk, a dozen of



his eggs, or a load of his turf? In many provinces, unacquainted



with trade and industry, there are many things which bear no



determinate price; because they are seldom or never sold.



    Sale alone can determine prices, and frequent sale only can



fix a standard. Now the frequent sale of articles of the first



necessity marks a distribution of inhabitants into labourers, and



what we have called free hands. The first are those who produce



the necessaries of life; the last are those who must buy them:



and as the fund with which they purchase is produced from their



industry, it follows, that without industry there can be no sale



of articles of subsistence; consequently, no standard price



determined.



    Another consequence of this reasoning, is, that the sale of



subsistence implies a superfluity of it in the hands of the



seller, and a proper equivalent for it in the hands of the buyer;



and when the equivalent is not money, it also implies a



superfluity of the produce of some sort of industry;



consequently, by the exchange of superfluities upon certain



articles, a man procures to himself a sufficiency upon every one.



This represents that gentle dependence which unites the members



of a free society.



    Does it not follow from this analysis of the question, that



the prices of articles of the first necessity depend rather upon



the occupation and distribution of the classes of inhabitants,



than either upon the abundance of these necessaries, or of the



money to purchase them; since many examples may be found, where



these articles have borne little or no price, even in countries



where money was not wanting. The reason therefore of low prices,



is not the vast abundance of the things to be sold, but the



little occasion any body has to buy them; every one being



provided with them in one way or other, without being obliged to



go to market.



    How many familiar examples occur every where of this



oeconomy! do we not find in every country, even where the numbers



of the industrious free are multiplied exceedingly, more than one



half of the inhabitants fed directly from the earth? Few of the



class of farmers ever go to market for subsistence. Ask a country



gentleman the expence of his living, he will tell you the sum of



money he yearly spends, perhaps the quantity of his rents in



kind, which he consumes in his house, and the rent of the lands



he holds himself in farm; but it will never come into his head to



reckon the value of every chicken, sheep, or bullock, with which



his farm provides him, which he consumes without estimation, and



which in many countries he could not dispose of for any



determinate value.



    From this I still conclude, that it is in countries of



industry only where the standard prices of articles of the first



necessity can be determined; and since in these, many



circumstances concur to render them either higher or lower than



in other places, it follows, that in themselves they bear no



determinate proportion whatsoever, to the quantity of gold and



silver in the country, as I hope presently to make still more



evident.



    What is it then which determines the standard value of these



articles, in countries of industry? Here follows the best answer



I can give to this question.



    The standard price of subsistence is determined from two



considerations. The first from the number of those who are



obliged to buy, that is to say, of those who have them not of



their own, and who are not provided with them, in lieu of



service, by those who have. The second is, from the degree of



employment found for those who are obliged to purchase them.



    The number of the buyers of subsistence, nearly determines



the quantity to be sold: because it is a necessary article, and



must be provided in a determinate proportion for every one: and



the more the sale is frequent, the more the price is determinate.



Next as to the standard: this, I apprehend, must depend upon the



faculties of the buyers; and these again must be determined by



the extent of those of the greatest numbers of them; that is to



say, by the extent of the faculties of the lower classes of the



people. This is the reason why bread, in the greatest famine,



never can rise above a certain price; for did it exceed the



faculties of the great classes of a people, their demand would be



withdrawn, which would leave the market overstocked for the



consumption of the rich; consequently, such persons, who in times



of scarcity are forced to starve, can be such only whose



faculties fall, unfortunately, below the standard of those of the



great class; consequently, in countries of industry, the price of



subsistence never can rise beyond the powers to purchase of that



numerous class who enjoy nothing beyond their physical necessary;



consequently, never to such an immoderate height as to starve



considerable numbers of the people; a thing which very commonly



happens in countries where industry is little known, where



multitudes depend merely upon the charity of others, and who have



no resource left, so soon as this comes to fail them.



    The faculties, therefore, of those who labour for a



physical-necessary, must, in industrious nations, determine the



standard value of subsistence, and the value in money which they



receive for their work will determine the standard of their



faculties, which must rise or fall according to the proportion of



the demand for their labour.



    By this exposition of the matter, I do not pretend to have



dissipated every obscurity. The question still remains complex,



as the nature of it requires it should do; and the solution of it



depends upon farther considerations, which now lead me to the



examination of the doctrine of Messrs de Montesquieu and Hume,



concerning the influence of riches upon the increase of prices. I



shall begin by shortly laying this doctrine before my readers, in



three propositions.



    First, The prices (say they) of commodities are always



proportioned to the plenty of money in the country. So that the



augmentation of wealth even fictitious, such as paper, affects



the state of prices, in proportion to its quantity.



    Secondly, The coin and current money in a country is the



representation of all the labour and commodities of it. So that



in proportion as there is more or less of this representation



(money), there goes a greater or less quantity of the thing



represented (commodities, &c.) to the same quantity of it. From



this it follows that



    Thirdly, Increase commodities, they become cheaper; increase



money, they rise in their value.



    Nothing can be more beautiful than these ideas. They appear,



at first sight, sufficiently extensive to comprehend every



variation of circumstances which can happen. Who was the first



author of this doctrine, I cannot say. I find it in Mr Locke, and



in the Spectator for the 19th of October 1711; but they have been



beautifully illustrated by Monsr de Montesquieu; and Mr Hume has



extended the theory, and diversified it prettily in his political



discourses; which have done much honour to that gentleman, and



drawn the approbation of the learned world so much, that there is



hardly a nation in Europe which has not the pleasure of reading



them in their own language.



    Upon examining this theory, when I came to treat of the



matters it is calculated to influence, I found I could not make



it answer to the principles I had pursued, in the most natural



order in which I had been able to deduce them: and this



consideration obliged me, with regret, to lay it aside, and to



follow another, much more complex. I have already expressed the



mortification I have always had upon finding myself forced to



strike out a general rule, and this, of all others, had at first



hit my fancy the most; but I am obliged to say, that upon a close



examination of the three propositions, I am forced to range this



ingenious exposition of a most interesting subject, among those



general and superficial maxims which never fail to lead to error.



    In order to set the matter in as clear a light as possible, I



shall make a short application of my own principles, relating to



the decision of the main question, namely the causes of the rise



and fall of prices, and conclude my chapter with some remarks



upon the three propositions above laid down, submitting the whole



to the better judgment of my reader. I have laid it down as a



principle, that it is the complicated operations of demand and



competition, which determines the standard price of everything.



If there be many labourers, and little demand, work will be



cheap. If the increase of riches, therefore, have the effect of



raising demand, work will increase in its value, because there



competition is implied; but if it has only the effect of



augmenting demand, prices will stand as formerly. What then will



become of the additional quantity of coin, or paper-money? I



answer, that in both cases it will enter into circulation, in



proportion to the rise or augmentation of demand; with this



difference, that in the first case, it will have the effect of



raising prices; because the supply is not supposed to augment in



proportion: in the second, prices will stand as they were;



because the supply is supposed to augment in proportion. These



are the consequences of the augmentation of wealth, when it has



the effect of either raising or augmenting demand. But if upon



the increase of riches it be found that the state of demand



remains without any variation, then the additional coin will



probably be locked up, or converted into plate; because they who



have it, not being inspired with a desire of increasing their



consumption, and far less with the generous sentiment of giving



their money away, their riches will remain without producing more



effect than if they had remained in the mine. As for paper-money,



so soon as it has served the first purpose of supplying the



demand of him who borrowed it, because he had at that time no



coin) it will return upon the debtor in it, and become realized;



because of the little use found for it in carrying on



circulation.



    Let the specie of a country, therefore, be augmented or



diminished, in ever so great a proportion, commodities will still



rise and fall according to the principles of demand and



competition; and these will constantly depend upon the



inclinations of those who have property or any kind of equivalent



whatsoever to give; but never upon the quantity of coin they are



possessed of.



    Let the quantity of the coin be ever so much increased, it is



the desire of spending it alone, which will raise prices. Let it



be diminished ever so low, while there is real property of any



denomination in the country, and a competition to consume in



those who possess it, prices will be high, by the means of



barter, symbolical money, mutual prestations, and a thousand



other inventions. Let me give an example.



    Suppose a country where prices are determined, and where the



specie is sufficient for the circulation: is it not plain, that



if this country have a communication with other nations, there



must, in carrying on trade, be a proportion between the prices of



many kinds of merchandize, and that the sudden augmentation or



diminution of the specie at home, supposing it could of itself



operate the effects of raising or sinking prices, would be



restrained in its operation by foreign competition? But let us



suppose it cut off from every communication whatsoever, which



seems the only case where this theory can operate with any



appearance of justness, will any body pretend, that the frugal or



extravagant turn of the inhabitants will have no influence upon



prices; and will it be asserted, that no variation in the spirit



of a people, as to frugality and dissipation, can take place,



except upon a variation in the quantity of their gold and silver?



    It may be answered, that as to articles of superfluity, no



doubt the genius of a people, together with the quantity of the



specie, may influence prices; but that in articles of



indispensible necessity, they must constantly remain in



proportion to the mass of riches. This I cannot admit to be just.



Let me take the example of grain, which is the most familiar. Is



it not plain, from what we have said above, that the proportion



of wealth, found in the hands of the lowest class of the people,



constantly regulates the price of it; consequently, let the rich



be ever so wealthy, the price of subsistence can never rise above



the faculties of the poor industrious. And is it not also plain,



that those of the lowest class of the people, who purchase



subsistence must buy it with the returns they receive from the



rich for their industry? Now if the quantity of the wealth of the



rich does not regulate their demand for the service of the poor,



must it not follow, that the price of grain, as well as of every



other thing offered to sale, must depend upon the degree of



competition among the rich for the labour of the poor, that is,



upon the demand for industry and not on the quantity of wealth in



the country?



    Nobody ever denied, that the extraordinary demand for a



commodity had the effect of raising the price of it: and



certainly nobody will deny, that the demand for a particular



commodity may be greater at one time than at another, though the



same quantity of this commodity be found at both times in the



country; and the same quantity of specie likewise not only in the



country, but also in circulation.



    I acknowledge that in a country where there is much coin, and



where credit is little known, a high and extraordinary demand for



an article of superfluity may raise the price more than in



another where the coin is more scarce; because, on certain



occasions, the price of a thing may have no other bounds than the



extent of the faculties of the buyer. In like manner, in other



countries, where there is scarcely coin, or credit, it may be



impossible for the highest demand to raise the price of such



things even to the common standard established in those where



there is great wealth. But these instances appear to be too



particular to serve for the foundation of a general rule, with



respect to the state of prices in the present situation of the



nations of Europe, which, less or more, are all in communication



with one another.



    I cannot here omit taking notice of two very remarkable



circumstances which we learn from undoubted historical authority,



which seem to contradict one another, and which throw a great



obscurity upon the principles I have been endeavouring to



explain. I shall therefore introduce them by way of illustration,



and when they are examined, I hope they will confirm my doctrine.



    The first is, that in Scotland, formerly, when coin and



credit were certainly very rare, the price of eight pounds weight



of oatmeal, which is now commonly sold at eight pence sterling,



was then valued at no more than two-thirds of one penny: and that



a labouring man used to receive one penny and one third of a



penny sterling for his week's subsistence; that is to say, the



value of sixteen pounds of oatmeal, which to this day is the



regulated quantity given for this purpose.



    There is a very curious confirmation of the authenticity of



this computation, in an hospital at old Aberdeen; where in former



times, some proprietors of lands had settled a certain quantity



of oatmeal in favour of the poor of the hospital, with a liberty



to the hospital to accept the meal in kind, or the conversion at



two-thirds of a penny for every eight pounds weight. They



imprudently chose the last, and to this very day they are paid



according to this standard. Now it is certainly impossible that



any degree of plenty whatsoever, or any failing of demand, could



at present reduce the price of this commodity so very low



consequently, it may be said that it is the augmentation of



wealth, not that of demand, which raises prices.



    The second fact we learn from antiquity, that at the time



when Greece and Rome abounded in wealth, when every rarity, and



the work of the choicest artists was carried to an excessive



price, an ox was bought for a mere trifle, and grain was cheaper



perhaps than ever it was in Scotland.



    If the application of our principles to the circumstances of



those times, produce a solution of these apparent



inconsistencies; and if we thereby can discover that the low



prices of grain, both in Scotland, where there was little money,



and at Rome where there was a great deal, was entirely owing to



the little demand for articles of subsistence; will it not



follow, that our principle is just, and that the other,



notwithstanding the ingenuity of the thought, must fail in



exactness; since it will appear, that low prices may be equally



compatible with wealth, and with poverty.



    Now as to Scotland in former times, as in all countries where



there is little industry; where the inhabitants are mostly fed



directly from the earth, without any alienation of her fruits



taking place; where agriculture is exercised purely as a method



of subsisting; where rents are low, and where, consequently, the



free hands, who live upon them for the price of their industry,



must be few; the demand for grain in the public markets must be



very small; consequently, prices will be very low, whether there



be little, or whether there be much money in the country. The



reason is plain. The demand is proportioned here, not to the



number of those who consume, but of those who. buy now those who



consume, are all the inhabitants, but those who buy, are the few



industrious only who are free, and who gain an independent



livelihood by their own labour and ingenuity: now the price of



their week's subsistence in Scotland was formerly one penny one



third, consequently the subsistence they bought could not rise



above this standard.



    Next as to the state of Greece and Rome, where slavery was



established. Those who were fed by the labour of their own



slaves, by those of the state, or by the grain gratuitously



distributed to the people, had no occasion to go to market;



consequently, they did not enter into competition with the



buyers. Farther, the simplicity of manners, and the few



manufactures then known, made wants in general less extensive;



consequently, the number of the industrious free was small, and



they were the only persons who could have occasion to purchase



food and necessaries; consequently, the competition of the buyers



must have been small in proportion, and prices low.



    Add to this the reflections which naturally present



themselves upon examining the nature of supplying the markets.



These were supplied partly from the surplus produced upon the



lands of the great men, laboured by slaves; who being fed from



the lands, the surplus cost in a manner nothing to the



proprietors; and as the number of those who had occasion to buy,



were very few, this surplus was sold cheap. Besides, the grain



distributed to the people gratis, must necessarily have kept down



the market, as a part of it would naturally, sometimes, be found



superfluous to those who received it; and consequently, come to



be sold in competition with that raised at private expence.



    But when a fine mullet was brought to market, or when an



artist appeared with a curious piece of work, the case was very



different. The rich had plenty of money, who all appeared in



competition for the preference; consequently, prices rose to an



extravagant height. The luxury of those times, though excessive,



was confined to a few, and as money, in general, circulated but



slowly through the hands of the multitude, it was constantly



accumulating in those of the rich, who found no measure, but



their own caprice, in regulating the prices of what they wished



to possess, and had money to purchase.



    From what has been said, it appears, that the riches of a



country have no determinate influence upon prices; although, I



allow, they may accidentally affect them: (what I mean is, that



they may influence them; but they cannot regulate them:) and if



we depart from the principles above laid down, to wit, that



prices are regulated by the complicated operation of demand and



competition, in order to follow the other, we must add a



restriction (which I observe Mr Hume has attended to on one



occasion, although he has lost sight of it on several others), to



wit, that the price of every commodity is in proportion to the



sum of money circulating in the market for that commodity; which



is almost my proposition in other words: for the money to be



employed in the purchase of any commodity, is just the measure of



the demand. But even here, the money in the market destined only



for the purchase of a particular commodity, does not regulate the



price of it. Nothing but the finishing of the transaction, that



is, the convention between the buyer and seller, can determine



the price, and this must depend upon inclination, not weight of



money, as an example will make plain.



    I shall suppose grain to have been at forty shillings per



quarter, in a country market, for several months together, where



the ordinary demand for the current consumption is twenty



quarters every market day. If at any time an extraordinary demand



should happen, which may exceed all that is to be found in the



market, there will be a competition among the buyers, which will



have the effect of raising the market. Now, according to the



doctrine of our learned author, it may be said, that the corn



rises in proportion to the quantity of the specie which is in the



market, and that it is because of this increase of specie, that



the grain rises in its price. I answer, first, allowing this to



be true, can it be said, that a particular temporary, or perhaps



accidental demand for a few quarters of corn, more than usual,



implies any augmentation of the quantity of money, or the



smallest diminution either upon the total consumption, or total



quantity of grain contained in the country? For if the demand



have risen in one market, it must probably have diminished in



another, since the Same inhabitants cannot consume in two places.



This I think every person must agree to, without farther



illustration. But I say farther, that prices will not rise in



proportion to the money in the market; but in proportion to the



desire of acquiring grain in those who have this money.



    Suppose the whole quantity of grain in the market to be



thirty quarters; if there be no demand for more, these will be



sold at forty shillings as the twenty quarters would have been.



But suppose the demand to be for sixty quarters, and that there



is a hundred and twenty pounds sterling ready to be employed for



corn, does it follow, that grain will rise to four pounds a



quarter, because the money in the market bears this proportion to



the quantity of grain? Certainly not.



    We must therefore, I think, adopt the other principle, and



follow the proportions of demand and competition; and then we



shall find, that if the sellers want to raise their price up to



the proportion of the money in the market, all demand will cease,



as effectually as if it had never been made; and the sellers will



afterwards be obliged to accept of such a moderate augmentation



as shall be in proportion to the urgency of the demand, but never



in proportion to the money ready to be employed.



    The circulation of every country, as we have shewn above,



must ever be in proportion to the industry of the inhabitants,



producing the commodities which come to market: whatever part of



these commodities is consumed by the very persons who produce



them, enters not into the it. If the coin circulation of grain,



nor does it in anywise affect prices of of a country, therefore,



fall below the proportion of the produce of industry offered to



sale, industry itself will come to a stop; or inventions, such as



symbolical money, will be fallen upon to provide an equivalent



for it. But if the specie be found above the proportion of the



industry, it will have no effect in raising prices, nor will it



enter into circulation: it will be hoarded up in treasures, where



it must wait not only the call of a desire in the proprietors to



consume, but of the industrious to satisfy this call.



    We may therefore conclude, in consequence of the principles



we have laid down, that, whatever be the quantity of money in any



nation, in correspondence with the rest of the world, there never



can remain in circulation, but a quantity nearly proportional to



the consumption of the rich, and to the labour and industry of



the poor inhabitants. The value of each particular species of



which consumption is determined by a complication of



circumstances at home and abroad; consequently, the proportion is



not determined by the quantity of money actually in the country.



    If the contrary is maintained, and if it be still affirmed



that the proportion between specie and manufactures must be



reciprocal and determinate, then I am authorised to draw this



conclusion, to wit: That if the greatest produce of industry must



be sold for what specie is found in the country, let the sum be



ever so small; so in like manner, the smallest produce of



industry must be sold for all the specie found in the country,



let the sum be ever so great. Consequently, in the first case, we



must suppose, that the industrious will never seek for a better



price from abroad; and in the second, that the moneyed people



must spend all they have in supplying their most moderate wants,



and never seek for cheaper merchandize than what they can find at



home. Consequently there can be no foreign trade, nor can there



ever be any hoarding.



    I shall now conclude my chapter, with a few observations upon



the three propositions as they stand in their order.



    Prop. 1. Prices are in proportion to the plenty of money. And



thus the augmenting even of fictitious wealth, such as paper,



affects the state of prices, according to its quantity.



    From this, Mr Hume disapproves of the introduction of paper



money, when specie is wanting, and says, that if nothing were



allowed to circulate but gold and silver, the quantity being



less, prices would be lower.



    This is neither more or less than a project to destroy



credit, with a view to support trade and industry. Because it



would effectually prevent any person from making a consumption,



except at the time he happened to be provided with ready money.



Does the paper-money in England keep up the prices of grain at



present, January 1759? And will not every article of necessaries



fall, in a short time, as low in this country as in any other in



Europe; if the same measures continue to be followed?



    Were all paper-money in this kingdom proscribed at once, no



doubt the prices of many things would fall very considerably; but



such a fall would neither be universal or equable. The reason of



this fall would not be, because the specie would become



proportionally divided among all the inhabitants, according to



the value of their property; nor because of the small quantity of



it, since prices abroad would still regulate many at home: but



because of the sudden revolution, and the violent overturn



thereby produced on the balance of work and demand. The scale of



the first would preponderate to such a degree, that those classes



of the industrious, who work for daily subsistence in furnishing



superfluities, would enter into so strong a competition with one



another, that the price of their work would fall to nothing,



while subsistence would remain at the price of exportation. If it



be asked what could occasion this difference, I answer, because



the workmen who supply superfluities, adapted to the taste of



their own nation, would find no more demand for them, from the



want of credit, or of a circulating fund at home to buy with; and



strangers would not profit of the fall in the price of a



superfluity not adapted to their own taste; but they would very



willingly become purchasers of every bushel of grain become



superfluous, and thereby starve so many of the inhabitants; and



this last circumstance would keep the price of subsistence upon a



pretty even level with that of other countries.



    But if we suppose all communication cut off with strangers,



would this proportion between money and prices then hold true? By



no means. Here is the reason: there are many ways of alienating



goods or natural produce, without the assistance of specie.



Immense quantities of both may be consumed by barter, or in lieu



of service, where money is never heard of; now all this portion



alienated, enters into the mass of what is called produce and



manufactures which come to market; but can have no influence upon



the specie, nor can specie have any upon it, since the money



remains inactive during these operations.



    Another reason is, that there is no such thing as preserving



specie of a country in an equal repartition, so as to serve the



occasions of every body in proportion to their worth. The reason



is manifest: money, like every other thing, will come into the



hands of those who give the greatest value for it, and when the



quantity of it is small in any country, where nothing can be



procured without it, such proprietors of lands as have the



greatest desire to consume, will purchase the specie by giving a



higher interest, or by selling their lands cheaper than other



people.



    This alone is sufficient to prove that the repartition of



specie can never be in proportion to property; and this also



destroys the supposition of prices rising and falling according



to the proportion of it, even in a country cut off from every



foreign communication. But here is still another proof: any



individual who has, by mortgaging his lands, got together a large



proportion of the specie of his country, will raise prices in his



own neighbourhood, by making an extraordinary demand for work;



and the rest of the same country, drained of their circulating



value, must diminish their demand; consequently, prices will fall



elsewhere. I now come to the second proposition.



    The coin and current money of a country, is the



representation of all its labour and commodities; so that in



proportion as there is more or less of this representation, a



greater or less quantity of it will go for the same quantity of



the thing represented.



    To this representation I cannot agree, and I apprehend this



to be the source of the error. A proper equivalent for labour and



manufactures may, in one sense, be called a representation; but



there is no necessity for this equivalent to consist in coin. Are



not meat and clothes an equivalent for personal service? Is not a



free house and a bit of land, a very good equivalent for all the



manufactures a country weaver can work up for me who am his



landlord? Were there not one penny of coin in the country, would



it follow, that there could be no alienation, or that every thing



might there be got for nothing?



    Coin has an intrinsic value; and when it comes into a



country, it adds to the value of the country, as if a portion of



territory were added to it: but it has no title to represent any



thing vendible, by preference, or to be considered as the only



equivalent for all things alienable. It is made a common price,



on no other account than because of its rarity, its solidity, its



being of a nature to circulate; and suffers a correct division



without end, and because it carries its value along with it,



which is a proper equivalent for every thing; and at the same



time is by its nature little liable to vary.



    Were, indeed, a statesman to perform the operation of



circulation and commerce, by calling in, from time to time, all



the proprietors of specie in one body, and all those of alienable



commodities, workmen, &c. in another'. and were he, after



informing himself of the respective quantities of each, to



establish a general tariff of prices, according to our author's



rule; this idea of representation might easily be admitted;



because the parcels of manufactures would then seem to be adapted



to the pieces of the specie, as the rations of forage for the



horses of an army are made larger or smaller, according as the



magazines are well or ill provided at the time: but has this any



resemblance to the operations of commerce?



    The idea of coin being the representation of all the industry



and manufactures of a country, is pretty; and has been invented



for the sake of making a general rule for operating an easy



distribution of things extremely complex in their nature. From



this comes error. We substitute a complex term, sometimes in one



sense, and sometimes in another, and we draw conclusions as if it



expressed a fixed and determinate idea.



    If in algebra, x, y, z, &c. ever stood for more than a single



idea, the science would become useless; but as they never



represent but the very same notion, they never change their



nature through all manner of transpositions.



    It is not the same of terms in any other science, as



abundantly appears from the question now before us: coin is



called a representation because it is an equivalent; and because



it is a representation, it must bear an exact proportion to the



thing represented. And since in some particular examples, this



representation appears to hold; therefore the rule is made



general, although circumstances may be different. If, for



example, a merchant, or a private person, has in hand a thousand



pounds worth of grain, no doubt that the thousandth part of the



merchandize is worth the thousandth part of the sum; because both



are determinate in their quantity and quality. but the parcels of



this corn, though exactly proportioned to the price of the whole,



do not draw their value from this proportion, but from the total



value of the whole mass; which is determined from the complicated



operations of demand and competition, as has been said, and not



from the specie of the country which can bear no proportion



either to the quantity or quality of the grain.



    There may be vast quantities of coin in a country of little



industry; and, vice versa, coin is constantly an equivalent, but



never a representation more than any other equivalent which may



be contrived. Were the doctrine of this second proposition true,



every commodity in a country should be sold like a parcel of the



grain in the foregoing example, by the rule of three; as the



property of all the labour and manufactures of the country is to



the part I intend to alienate, so is all the gold and silver in



the country to the part I am entitled to receive. This ideal of



regulating prices may be very philosophical, but it is not very



mercantile. I now proceed to the third and last proposition.



Increase the commodities, they become cheaper: increase the



money, they rise in their value.



    This proposition is much too general; the first part of it is



commonly true, the last part is more commonly false.



    What can increase commodities, but a demand for them? If the



demand be equal to the augmentation, there will be no alteration



in the price.



    Let extraordinary plenty increase subsistence, it will



naturally fall in the price; but it may be hoarded up, and made



to rise in spite of the plenty; it may be demanded from abroad;



this also will make it rise.



    Let the production of superfluities, not exportable, be



produced by workmen whose branch is overstocked, prices will



undoubtedly fall. The same observations are true of a diminution



in the quantity of commodities. If this diminish by degrees, from



a diminution of demand, the price of them will not rise.



    If the quantity of subsistence fall below the necessary



consumption of the inhabitants, the price of it will undoubtedly



rise.



    If the articles of superfluity be diminished, prices will



rise in proportion only to the eagerness to buy, that is, to the



competition, not to the deficiency. On the other hand, as to coin



or money.



    Increase the money, nothing can be concluded as to prices,



because it is not certain that people will increase their



expences in proportion to their wealth; and although they should,



the moment their additional demand has the effect of producing a



sufficient supply, prices will return to the old standard.



    But diminish the quantity of specie usually employed in



circulation, you both retard this, and hurt the industrious;



because we suppose the former quantity exactly sufficient to



preserve both in the just proportion to the desires and wants of



the inhabitants.



    These are but a few of the numberless modifications necessary



to be applied to this general rule; and I hope what I have said



will justify the observation I have made on the whole doctrine;



to wit, that it is much more specious than solid, in every one of



its three branches.



    Let me just propose one question more upon this subject, and



then I shall conclude.



    Suppose the specie of Europe to continue increasing in



quantity every year, until it amounts to ten times the present



quantity, will prices rise in proportion?



    I answer, that such an augmentation might happen, without the



smallest alteration upon prices, or that it might occasion a very



great one, according to circumstances. Were industry to increase



to ten times what it is at present, that is to say, were the



produce of it to increase to ten times its present value,



according to the actual standard of prices, the value of every



manufacture and produce might remain without alteration. This



supposition is possible: because no man can tell to what extent



demand may carry industry. If, on the other hand the scale of



demand could be supposed to preponderate, so as to draw all the



wealth into circulation, without having the effect of augmenting



the supply (which I take to be impossible) then prices would rise



to ten times the present standard, at least in many articles.



    This solution is entirely consistent both with Mr Hume's



principle and mine; because nothing is so easy in an hypothesis,



as to establish proportions between things, which in themselves



are beyond all the powers of computation.







Chap. XXIX







Circulation with foreign Nations, the same thing as the Balance



of Trade







    We have endeavoured to shew in a former chapter, how the



circulation of money, given in exchange for consumable



commodities, produces a vibration in the balance of domestic



wealth: we are now to apply the same principles to the



circulation of foreign trade; in order to find out, if there can



really be such a thing as a balance upon it, which may enrich one



country, and impoverish another.



    It has been said, that when money is given for a consumable



commodity, the person who gets it acquires a balance in his



favour, so soon as he with whom he has exchanged, has begun to



consume.



    That if two consumable commodities are exchanged, the balance



comes to a level, when both are consumed. That it is the wealth



only which is found in circulation, which can change its balance;



the remainder must be found locked up, made into plate, or



employed in foreign trade. And it has been observed, that the



quantity of money found in circulation, is ever in proportion to



the sale of the produce of industry and manufactures; and that



when the precious metals are not sufficient to carry on a



circulation, proportionable to the demands of those who have any



real equivalent to give, symbolical money may be made to fill up



the void, when the interest of the state comes to require it.



    We have also laid it down as a kind of general rule, that



while luxury tends only to keep up demand to the reasonable



proportion of the power and inclination in the industrious part



of a people to supply it, then it is advantageous to a nation;



and that so soon as it begins to make the scale of home-demand



preponderate, by forming a competition among the natives, to



consume what strangers seek for, then it is hurtful, and has an



evident tendency to root out foreign trade. These principles are



all analogous to one another, and should be retained while we



examine the question before us.



    I must still add, that the fluctuation of the balance of



wealth is constantly inclining in favour of the industrious, and



against the idle consumer. This however admits of a restriction,



viz. the industrious must be supposed to be frugal; and the idle,



extravagant. For if the industrious man consume the full produce



of his own industry, he will have laboured to increase his



consumption only, not his wealth: and if the idle person, by his



frugality, keeps within the bounds of his yearly income, he will



thereby repair every disadvantage incurred by his sloth, the



balance then will stand even between them; the industry in one



scale, and the fund already provided in the other, will keep both



parties on a level as before.



    In order, therefore, to make the balance of domestic wealth



turn in favour of a poor man, he must be both industrious and



frugal.



    Now let us apply these principles to a whole nation,



considered as an individual in the great society of mankind. An



industrious person who conducts his affairs with prudence, must



either be in a way of growing richer by his industry, or of



spending his income with oeconomy and discretion: so I must



suppose a nation which is well governed, either to be growing



richer by foreign trade, or at least in a state of not becoming



poorer by it.



    It is as much the duty of every statesman to watch over the



conduct of those who hold the foreign correspondence of his



people, as it is the duty of the master of a family to watch over



those he sends to market.



    I find it is the opinion of the learned Mr Hume, that there



is no such thing as a balance of trade, that money over all the



world is like a fluid, which must ever be upon a level, and that



so soon as in any nation this level is destroyed by any accident,



while the nation preserves the number of its inhabitants, and its



industry, the wealth must return to a level as before.



    To prove this, he supposes four fifths of all the money in



Great Britain to be annihilated in one night, the consequence of



which he imagines would be, that all labour and commodities would



sink in their price, and that foreign markets would therefore be



entirely supplied by this industrious people, who would



immediately begin to draw back such a proportion of wealth, as



would soon put them again upon a level with their neighbours.



    This reasoning is consistent with the principles we have



examined, and humbly rejected in the preceding chapter. both



stand upon the same foundation, and lead to a chain of



consequences totally different from the principles laid down in



this inquiry.



    My intention is not so much to refute the opinions of others,



as briefly to pass them in review. General propositions, such as



those we have been treating of, are only true or false, according



as they are understood to be accompanied with certain



restrictions, applications, and limitations: I shall therefore



say nothing as to the proposition itself, but examine only how



far the sudden annihilation of a great proportion of a nation's



wealth, can naturally be followed by the consequence which has



been supposed.



    For this purpose, let me suggest another consequence



(different from that of the author, and flowing from the doctrine



we have established) which possibly might happen, upon the



annihilation of four fifths of all the money in Great Britain. I



shall take no notice of the effects which so sudden a revolution



might occasion; these have not been attended to by the author,



and therefore I shall consider them as out of the question. I



shall suppose the event to have happened, prices to have been



reduced, and every immediate inconvenience to have been



prevented. My only inquiry shall be concerning the unavoidable



consequences of such a revolution, as to foreign trade, as to



drawing back the money annihilated, and as to the preserving the



same number of inhabitants, and the same degree of industry as



before. If I can shew, that the event alone of annihilating the



specie, and reducing prices in proportion (which I shall allow to



be the consequence of it) will have the effect of annihilating



both industry and the industrious, it cannot afterwards be



insisted on, that the revolution can have the effect of drawing



back a proportional part of the general wealth of Europe: because



the preservation of the industrious is considered as the



requisite for this purpose.



    Here then is the consequence, which, in my humble opinion,



would very probably happen upon so extraordinary an emergency;



and I flatter myself that my reader has already anticipated my



decision.



    The inhabitants of Great Britain, who, upon such an occasion,



would be found in possession of all the exportable necessaries of



life, and of many other kinds of goods demanded in foreign



markets, instead of selling them to their poor countrymen, for a



price proportioned to our author's tariff, namely to the



diminution of the specie, which he takes to be the representation



of them, would export them to France, to Holland, or to any other



country where they could get the best price, and the inhabitants



of Britain would starve.



    If it be replied, that the exportation would not be allowed.



I answer, that such a prohibition would be highly seasonable; but



quite contrary to the principle of laying trade open, and



impossible to be effectual, as this author justly observes, when



he says, 'Can one imagine, 'that all commodities could be sold in



France, for a tenth of the price 'they would yield on the other



side of the Pyrenées, without finding 'their way thither, and



drawing from that immense treasure?' Suppose this phrase to run



thus: Can any one imagine, that provisions could be sold in



Britain, for a fourth part of the price they would yield on the



other side of the water, without finding their way thither, and



drawing from that immense treasure? This is entirely inconsistent



with our principles, and ruins the whole of Mr Hume's former



supposition: because the exportation of them would annihilate the



inhabitants.



    From this I conclude, that a nation, though industrious and



populous, may reduce itself to poverty in the midst of wealthy



neighbours, as a private person, though rich, may reduce himself



to want, in the midst of the amusements and luxury of London or



of Paris. And that both the one and the other, by following a



different conduct, may amass great sums of wealth, far above the



proportion of it among their neighbours.



    This is not a matter of long discussion. It is not by the



importation of foreign commodities, and by the exportation of



gold and silver, that a nation becomes poor; it is by consuming



these commodities when imported. The moment the consumption



begins, the balance turns; consequently, it is evidently against



the principles which we now examine, either to sell at home, or



destroy, confiscated goods. The only way of repairing the damage



done by such frauds, is to export the merchandize, and, by



selling it cheap in other countries, to hurt the trade of the



country which first had furnished it. From this also we may



conclude, that those nations which trade to India, by sending out



gold and silver, for a return in superfluities of the most



consumable nature, the consumption of which they prohibit at



home, do not in effect spend their own specie, but that of their



neighbours who purchase the returns of it for their own



consumption. Consequently, a nation may become immensely rich by



the constant exportation of her specie, and importation of all



sorts of consumable commodities. But she would do well to beware



of this trade, when her inhabitants have taken a luxurious turn,



lest she should come to resemble the drunkard, who commenced



wine-merchant, in order to make excellent cheer in wine with all



his friends who came to see him; or the milliner, who took it



into her head to wear the fine laces she used to make up for her



customers.



    If a rich nation, where luxury is carried to the highest



pitch, where a desire of gain serves as a spur to industry, where



all the poor are at work, in order to turn the balance of



domestic wealth in their favour; if such a nation, I say, be



found to consume not only the whole work of the inhabitants, but



part of that of other countries, it must have a balance of trade



against it, equivalent to the amount of foreign consumption; and



this must be paid for in specie, or in an annual interest, to the



diminution of the former capital. Let this trade continue long



enough, they will not only come at the end of their metals, but



they may render themselves virtually tributary to other nations,



by paying to them annually a part of the income of their lands,



as the interest due upon the accumulated balances of many years'



unfavourable trade.



    Is it not, therefore, the duty of a statesman to prevent the



consumption of foreign produce? If tapestry or other elegant



furniture, such as is seen in a certain great capital in Europe,



were allowed to be imported into a neighbouring nation; who



doubts but this article would carry money out of that nation?



    It may be answered, that as much elegance of another kind may



be sent in return. True; and it would be very lucky if this could



be the case; but then you must suppose an equality of elegance in



both countries; and farther, you must suppose a reciprocal taste



for the respective species of elegance. Now the taste of one of



the countries may be common to both; but not that of the other,



though nothing inferior, perhaps, in the opinion of a third



party. And the difference may proceed from this; that the young



people of one country travel into the other, where the



inhabitants stay at home: a circumstance which would prove very



prejudicial to the country of the travellers, if a wise statesman



did not, by seasonable prohibitions upon certain articles of



foreign consumption, prevent the bad consequences of adopting a



taste for what his subjects cannot produce.



    This furnishes a hint, that it might not be a bad maxim in a



great monarchy, to have houses built and furnished in the capital



for every foreign minister, where the general distribution of the



apartments of each might be, as much as possible, analogous to



the taste of the country for whose minister it is calculated: but



as to the furniture, to have it made of the most elegant domestic



manufactures easily transportable, nicely adapted also to the



uses and fashions of each foreign country. Such a regulation



could never fail of being highly acceptable, as it would prove a



great saving to foreign ministers, and would insensibly give them



a taste for the manufactures and luxury of the country they



reside in. On the other hand, I should be so far from expecting a



return of this civility, that I would recommend the bestowing of



a set of furniture, as a gratification to every minister sent



abroad by the state, who should regularly sell it off in the



place of his residence, upon the expiration of his commission.



Such an expence would not cost one penny to the nation, and would



be a means of captivating unwary strangers, who might be thereby



made to pay dearly for such marks of politeness and civility. I



return.



    Without being expert in the computation of exports and



imports, or very accurate in examining the different courses of



exchange between the different cities of Europe, a statesman may



lay it down as a maxim, that whatever foreign commodity, of



whatsoever kind it be, is found to be consumed within the nation



he governs, so far the balance of trade is against her; and that



so far as any commodity produced either by the soil, or labour of



the inhabitants, is consumed by foreigners, so far the balance is



for her.



    A nation may in some measure be compared to a country



gentleman, who lives upon his land. This I suppose to be his all.



From it he draws directly his nourishment, perhaps his clothes



are wrought up in his family. If he be so very frugal as never to



go to market for any thing, all the spare produce which he can



sell will be clear money in his purse. If he indulge now and then



in a bottle of wine, which his farm does not produce, he must go



to market with his purse in his hand; and so soon as his bottle



is out, I think he is effectually so much poorer than he was



before. If he go on, and increase his consumption of such things



as he is obliged to buy, he will run out the money he had in his



purse, and be reduced to the simple production of his farm. If



then this country gentleman be poorer, certainly somebody must be



richer; and as it is nobody in his family it must be some of his



neighbours.



    Just so a nation which has no occasion to have recourse to



foreign markets, in order to supply her own consumption, must



certainly grow rich in proportion to her exportation.



    These riches again will not circulate at home, in proportion



to the domestic consumption of natural produce and manufactures,



but in proportion to the alienation of them for money: the



surplus wealth will stagnate in one way or other, in the hands of



the money gatherers, who are the small consumers.



    While there is found a sufficient quantity of money for



carrying on reciprocal alienations; those money gatherers will



not be able to employ their stagnated wealth within the nation;



but so soon as this gathering has had the effect of diminishing



the specie, below the proportion found necessary to carry on the



circulation, it will begin to be lent out, and so it will return



to circulate for a time, until by the operation of the same



causes it will fall back again into its former repositories.



    Should it be here objected, that upon the augmentation of a



nation's riches, no money can stagnate; because prices rising in



proportion to the augmentation of riches, all the additional



wealth must be thrown into circulation; surely both reason and



experience must point out the weakness of such an objection.



    While a favourable balance, therefore, is preserved upon



foreign trade, a nation grows richer daily; and still prices



remain regulated as before, by the complicated operations of



demand and competition; and when one nation is growing richer,



others must be growing poorer: this is an example of a favourable



balance of trade.



    When this superfluity of riches is profited of by the



luxurious individuals only, instead of being turned to profit by



the state itself, with a view to secure the advantages thereby



acquired, then the balance takes a contrary turn: this is the



case whenever foreign importations for consumption are either



permitted as a gratification to the luxurious desires of the



wealthy., or because of the rise in the price of goods at home,



in consequence of domestic competition. If it be permitted purely



in favour of the first, it marks a levity and want of attention



unworthy of a statesman; if on account of the second, it shows



either an ignorance of the real consequences of so temporary an



expedient, or a disregard for the welfare of the lower classes of



the people.



    Every augmentation of prices at home, must be a necessary



consequence of many domestic circumstances, and must be removed



by correcting them, as has been, I think, made clear. But let it



be supposed, that from the augmentation of wealth alone,



manufacturers can no more produce work so cheap as other nations;



I think that both in humanity and prudence, a people should



submit to the inconvenience of paying dearer. In humanity,



because by the introduction of foreign manufactures, you starve



those very people, who by their labour have enriched you: in



prudence, because by opening your ports to such importation you



deliberately throw away that superiority of riches you have been



at so much pains to acquire.



    I freely grant, that particular people do not regulate either



their expence or their schemes of getting money, with a view to



promote the public good. One who has a coat to buy, will be very



glad to find a piece of foreign manufacture at a cheap rate; a



merchant will wish to smuggle goods on which there is a high



duty. But the question is, Whether a statesman is to wink at such



abuses? I think it is much the same question, as if it were



asked, whether the master of a family should, in good oeconomy,



allow his servants to invite their friends to drink in his



cellar, instead of carrying them to a public house.



    But suppose it be said, that 'by laying trade open, you are



sure that wealth will naturally come to a balance, in all



countries, and that all fears of a wrong balance of trade are



only the effect of a gloomy imagination'. See Hume's Political



Discourses, Sect. v.



    Several answers may be made to this objection. The first,



that it is in order to prevent this kind of balance, that a



nation ever gives itself disquiet: for by balance here, is



understood an equality of wealth; and rich nations are they only



who are anxious, lest they should be brought to such an equality.



In the question here before us, it is the loss of this



superiority of wealth which is understood by a balance turning



against a trading nation. If, therefore, it be the interest of a



nation, poor in respect of its neighbours, to have trade laid



open, that wealth may, like a fluid, come to an equilibrium; I am



sure it is the interest of a rich nation, to cut off the



communications of hurtful trade, by such impediments as



restrictions, duties, and prohibitions, upon importation; in



order that, as by dykes, its wealth may be kept above the level



of the surrounding element.



    Another answer is, that laying trade open would not have the



effect proposed; because it would destroy industry in some



countries, at least, if not every where. A manufacture must be



very solidly established indeed, not to suffer any prejudice, by



a permission to import the like commodities from other countries.



The very nature of luxury is such, that it frequently prompts



people to consume, from caprice and novelty, what is really



inferior to home-production. It may be answered, that this



argument cuts two ways: for if a nation from caprice consume



foreign commodities, why may not other nations from caprice



likewise, take off those which are left on hand? This reasoning



may appear good, in a theory which does not take in every



political consideration. But a poor manufacturer who cannot find



work, because the branch he works in is supplied from abroad,



cannot live till the caprice of foreigners shall make them demand



his labour. If a certain number of inhabitants be employed in a



necessary branch of Consumption, there must be a certain demand



preserved for it; and whatever can render this precarious, will



ruin the undertaking, and those employed in it.



    A third answer is, that any nation who would open its ports



to all manner of foreign importation, without being assured of a



reciprocal permission from all its neighbours, would, I think,



very soon be ruined; and if this be true, it is a proof that a



balance of trade is a possible supposition, and that proper



restrictions upon importation may turn to the advantage of a



state.



    In order to promote industry, a statesman must act, as well



as permit and protect. Could ever the woollen manufacture have



been introduced into France, from the consideration of the great



advantage England had drawn from it, had not the king undertaken



the support of it, by granting many privileges to the



undertakers, and by laying strict prohibitions on all foreign



cloths? Is there any other way of establishing a new manufacture



any where?



    Laying, therefore, trade quite open would have this effect;



it would destroy, at first at least, all the luxurious arts;



consequently, it would diminish consumption; consequently,



diminish the quantity of circulating cash; consequently, it would



promote hoarding; and consequently, would bring on poverty in all



the states of Europe. Nothing, I imagine, but an universal



monarchy, governed by the same laws, and administered according



to one plan well concerted, can be compatible with an universally



open trade. While there are different states, there must be



separate interests; and when no one statesman is found at the



head of these interests, there can be no such thing as a common



good; and when there is no common good, every interest must be



considered separately. But as this scheme of laying trade quite



open, is not a thing likely to happen, we may save ourselves the



trouble of inquiring more particularly into what might be its



consequences; it is enough to observe, that they must, in their



nature, be exceedingly complex, and if we have mentioned some of



them, it has been to apply principles only, and shew how



consequences may follow one another: to foretel what must follow



is exceedingly difficult, if not impossible.



    In discoursing of the balance of trade, I have hitherto



considered it so far only as the specie of a country is augmented



by it. In the subsequent books, where we shall have occasion to



bring this subject once more upon the carpet, I shall shew how a



balance may be extremely favourable without augmenting the mass



of the precious metals; to wit, by providing subsistence for an



additional number of inhabitants; by increasing the quantity of



shipping, which is an article of wealth; by constituting all



other nations debtors to it; by the importation of many durable



commodities, which may be considered also as articles of wealth;



as a well furnished house, a well stored cellar, an ample



wardrobe, and a fine stable of horses, are articles which enhance



the value of the inheritance of a landed man.



    Then we shall have occasion to shew how industry heightens



the permanent value of a nation, as agriculture increases its



annual produce.







Chap. XXX







Miscellaneous Questions and Observations relative to Trade and



Industry







    In the former chapters, we have been treating of the nature



and consequences of circulation, the effects of augmentations and



diminutions of specie, and the doctrine of Mr Hume concerning the



balance of trade. The perspicuity with which this author writes,



renders his ideas easy to be conceived; and when people



understand one another, most disputes are soon at an end.



    In order, therefore, to throw a little more light upon the



nature of the balance of trade between nations, let me examine



the following questions while we have the subject of the last



chapter fresh in our memory.



    Quest. 1. Can any judgment be formed concerning the state of



the balance of trade of a nation, barely from the quantity of



specie that is found in it?



    I answer in the negative. A great proportion of all the



specie of Europe, may be found in a country against which the



balance of trade has stood regularly for many years. An



inconsiderable proportion of it may be found in another, which



has had it as regularly in its favour for the same time. Here



follows the proof of this proposition.



    The balance upon every article of trade may be favourable to



a nation, which squanders away more than the returns of it, upon



foreign wars. The balance of every article of trade may be



against a country, which receives more than all the loss



incurred, either from her mines, or from countries tributary to



her, or who willingly furnish subsidies upon many political



considerations.



    Besides these varieties, there are still other circumstances



to be combined, relative to the specie itself. The money found in



a country, may either be said to belong absolutely to the



country, when neither the state itself, or the particular people



of it, are in debt to foreigners; or only so by virtue of a loan.



Now, whether it is borrowed or not, the property of it belongs to



the country; but the difference consists in this, that when it is



borrowed, the acquisition of the metals adds nothing to the



national patrimony, that is to say, there is no acquisition of



wealth thereby made; but when it is gained by industry, the money



adds to the real value of the country, in consequence of the



principles laid down in the 26th chapter.



    May not a nation, then, having very little gold and silver,



open a subscription for millions, at so much per cent? Will not



strangers lend to her, when her own subjects cannot? May she not



yearly, by paying away the interest of the money borrowed, and by



a heavy balance of trade against her, be constantly diminishing



her specie, and yet by new contracts, keep up, and even increase



the mass of the circulating value, to such a degree, as to be



possessed of a greater proportion of specie than any of her



neighbours? Farther.



    Is it not certain, that all nations will endeavour to throw



their ready money, not necessary for their own circulation, into



that country where the interest of money is high with respect to



their own, and where consequently the value of property in land



is low; since they may either draw a high interest from it, or



make the acquisition of solid property? Forbidding therefore the



acquisition of solid property to strangers, is, in effect, a



prohibition upon the gratuitous importation of specie. I allow



there may be examples of people who make such purchases, with a



view to draw the rents of the lands bought, out of the country;



but whatever be the intention at the time of purchase, such



however is the effect of an established fortune in a country,



that, sooner or later, it draws the proprietor to it; and when



this does not happen, a subsequent alienation commonly takes



place.



    Were the purchase, therefore, of lands permitted universally,



and were it established, that property in land, to a certain



value, should give a right to naturalization, I have little doubt



but large sums would be brought into those countries, where lands



are found to be the cheapest; and as no exportable commodity is



given in return, the specie of such counties will mark the



quantity of lands sold, as well as that of merchandize exported.



For want of a sufficient extension of these and many other



combinations, which it would be easy to contrive, Mr Belloni, in



his Dissertation upon Commerce, Chap. 1. Sect. 5. falls into



several mistakes, when he judges of the exportation of



commodities of a particular country, by the quantities of money



found in it.



    'It being the case (says he) that the plenty of coin,



wherever it be found, points out the plenty of those goods of



which it is the measure: Such persons, therefore, have justly



been called rich, and such kingdoms wealthy, where there is found



a great quantity of coin. On the other hand again, if we consider



the state of a kingdom, and of the coin which is in it, supposing



always the intrinsic value of the coin to be preserved (which is



nothing else but the measure of the goods and of the price which



is given for them), we must necessarily conclude, as every one



must acknowledge, that in such countries where we find plenty of



coin there must be a considerable trade in exporting goods for



the use of strangers; and on the contrary, wherever coin is found



to be scarce we may conclude that a great importation of foreign



goods has taken place of the coin, which must have gone abroad



for the payment of them.'



    These consequences are just, only so far as money comes into



a country or goes out of it, as the price of merchandize exported



or imported. But how much money has not this author himself drawn



into Rome from England, for the exportation of nothing but the



bills of travellers?



    On the other hand, may not a country, which is actually in



possession of great quantities of gold and silver, call in these



metals and circulate, in their place, a symbolical money; may not



a nation then, as well as a private person, employ this specie in



a profitable foreign trade, and gain daily by it? May she not,



after some time, withdraw her stock, by calling in her debts? And



may she not also call in her paper, and remain with an additional



acquisition of specie in her pocket? Consequently, during the



circulation of the paper, no judgment can be formed as to the



balance of her trade, by examining the state of her specie;



because I can suppose that at this time every shilling of it may



be in the hands of strangers. Consequently, the richest nation in



Europe may be the poorest in circulating specie.



    'The writings of Mr Gee (says Mr Hume in his Political



Discourse upon the Balance of Trade) struck the nation with an



universal panic, when they saw it plainly demonstrated, by a



detail of particulars, that the balance was against them for so



considerable a sum as must leave them without a single shilling



in five or six years. But, luckily, twenty years have since



elapsed, along with an expensive foreign war; and yet 'tis



commonly supposed that money is still more plentiful among us



than in any former period.' I quote from the French translation.



    Mr Gee was in the wrong to conclude, that the balance of



trade would have the effect of carrying off the coin: and Mr Hume



has been misled by this mistake, to conclude, that Mr Gee's



calculations were false. I know nothing as to the matter of fact;



nor whether Mr Gee was a good or a bad judge of the question he



treated; but, from what has been said, I hope it appears, that



the state of the coin in England, at the time Mr Hume wrote, was



no proof on either side.



    To judge of the balance of trade is one thing; to judge of



the wealth of a nation as to specie is another. England may



greatly increase her specie by her trade, and greatly diminish it



by her wars: perhaps this may be the fact. She may also, at



certain times, have a balance of trade against her; and great



sums laid out in foreign wars may be the means of making it



return in her favour. Should this nation begin to pay off her



debts to strangers, in ready coin, might she not soon diminish,



perhaps exhaust, the specie she is now possessed of; yet surely



none ever became poorer by paying off their debts. Nothing is so



easy as to have specie, when one has solid property to pledge for



it; and nothing can be worse judged, than to purchase specie from



strangers, at the expence of paying an interest for it, when one



can contrive a circulating value in paper-money, representing the



solid value which must be pledged to strangers for the loan of



their metals.



    But still it may be asked, how it happens, that



notwithstanding the most unfavourable balance of trade, no nation



ever found herself entirely drained of her specie; and since we



have proved, that the specie of a country may be diminished by a



disadvantageous trade, what are the principles which prevent the



total dissipation of it?



    This is a very curious question, and opens a door to a



multitude of new ideas, which will furnish abundant matter of



speculation, when we come to treat more directly of credit. I



shall here examine it in general, for the sake only of applying



the principles we have laid down.



    First, It may be said, that as common prudence prevents a



private person from spending to his last shilling; so the like



prudence commonly engages a people to put a stop to trade, before



it has time totally to drain them. Although most people drink



wine, there is no reason why every body should be drunk.



    Secondly, Nothing is so complicated as the balance of trade,



considered among many nations. The general wealth circulates from



one to another, as the money which the farmer gives the landlord



circulates back to the farmer. In the number of hands through



which the money passes, some are of the class of the luxurious,



some of the frugal; the first represents those nations who lose



by the balance, the latter those who gain. But the most



industrious nations of all, and those who, considered



abstractedly from extraordinary accidents, appear in the way to



swallow up the wealth of all the rest, are, by the means of such



accidents, made liable to terrible restitutions. How many



millions, for example, has England restored to the continent, in



consequence of her wars and subsidies? She then lays a foundation



for many more years of favourable balance, and accordingly we see



it return to her, as the money which the state spends within the



nation returns into the Exchequer at the end of the year.



    Thirdly, It may be asked, how it happens that no nation has



ever spent to its last farthing, as many an individual has done?



I answer, that I am far from believing that this has never



happened; nay, I believe there is nothing more frequent or



familiar than this very case, provided the riches of a country be



here supposed to mean no more than the specie absolutely



belonging to herself, not borrowed from other nations.



    I have said above, that the acquisition of money by industry



increased the real value of a country, as much as the addition of



a portion of territory; now what should hinder a people from



spending their ready money, and preserving their land at the same



time? Because a young gentleman, whose father has left him a fine



estate in land, and ten thousand pounds in ready money, has spent



the ten thousand pounds, does it follow, that he is not worth a



shilling? Upon this view of the question, it will, I believe, be



granted, that Dr Swift's idea that all the specie of Ireland



would in a short time be exported, in consequence of an



unfavourable balance of trade, is very far from being chimerical,



and may be exactly true; although at this time there be six times



more coin in circulation than ever; just as a person who is



running through his fortune, has commonly more money in his hands



than his father used to have, when he was acquiring it. Let



Ireland pay her debts to England, and then reckon her specie. Let



England pay hers to all the world, and then weigh her gold and



silver. Suppose that on summing up the accounts, there is not



found one shilling in either country, is this any proof of their



being undone? By no means: coin is one article of our wealth, but



never can be the measure of it.



    I know little of the state of Ireland; but if it be true,



that paper money is increasing daily in that country, it is, I



suppose, because the specie is daily exported to England, as the



returns of estates belonging to people who reside there, and that



the Irish, instead of buying it back again for their own use in



circulation, augment their paper, in proportion to the progress



of their industry; and buy such quantities only of specie as are



necessary for paying the balance of their trade. Now by buying



specie, I do not suppose, that they bring any over to Ireland, in



order to send it back to England; but that they send over goods



to the value, which the English merchants pay in specie, or in



English paper, to those who are creditors upon Ireland, for the



value of their rents, &c.



    Suppose then, for a farther illustration of some principles,



that all the lands of Ireland belonged to Englishmen residing in



their own country, and annually drawing from Ireland the income



belonging to them, what would the consequence be? I answer, that



as long as this portion of the produce of lands, which goes for



rent, (and which we have said to be the fund provided for the



subsistence of the free hands who purchase their own



necessaries,) can be bought and consumed by the Irish themselves,



that is, in other words, while in Ireland there is a demand for



this portion of the fruits, it will be paid for, either in coin,



to the diminution of their specie, or in something which may be



converted into money; that is, by the produce of their industry,



and thus, by the means of trade, will come into the hands of the



English proprietors, either in specie, or in any other form they



judge proper.



    That so soon as the demand for this portion of fruits comes



to fail, for want of money, or industry, in Ireland, to purchase



it, what remains on hand will be sent over to England in kind;



or, by the way of trade, be made to circulate with other nations



(in beef, butter, tallow, &c.) who will give silver and gold for



it, to the proprietors of the Irish lands. By such a diminution



of demand in the country, for the fruits of the earth, the



depopulation of Ireland is implied; because they who consumed



them formerly, consume them no more; that is to say, they are



dead, or have left the country.



    To conclude; a great part of the value of a country is its



produce and manufactures; but it does not follow that these



should as necessarily draw into a country a proportional sum of



the gold and silver of Europe, as a shoal of small fishes draws



water-fowl, or as charity draws the poor, or as beauty draws



admiration.



    Quest. 2. Can no rule be found to judge of the balance of



trade from the state of specie, or at least to perceive the



effects of this balance in augmenting or diminishing the mass of



riches?



    Could it be supposed that specie never circulated between



nations, but in the way of trade, and in exchange for exportable



commodities, the following rules might be laid down.



    First, In nations where the earth produces neither gold or



silver, and where these metals are imported as the returns of



industry only, the balance in their favour, from the introduction



of specie, to this day, would be measured by the quantity of it



which they possess. Here Mr Belloni's opinion is just.



    Secondly, The consumption made by any nation for the same



term of years, is equal to the whole natural produce and labour



of the inhabitants for that time, minus the quantity of such



produce and labour, as is, or has been, equal in value to the



actual national specie.



    Thirdly, On the other hand, in nations where gold and silver



are produced by the earth, the balance of trade against them,



from the time these metals became the object of trade to this



day, may be estimated by the quantity of them which has been



exported.



    Fourthly, and farther; the consumption made by such nations,



for the same term of years, is equal to the whole natural produce



and labour of the inhabitants for that time, plus the quantity of



such produce and labour, as is, or has been, equal to the



quantity of these metals exported.



    These rules are by much too general to be laid down as



principles; because trade is not concerned in every acquisition



or alienation of specie; but they may serve, in the mean time, to



illustrate the doctrine we have been considering, and even in



many cases may be found pretty exact. For example:



    If it be true, that in any nation of Europe, there be now



just as much silver and gold as there was ten years ago, and if



that nation, during this period, has supported, without borrowing



from strangers, an expensive war which may have cost it, I



suppose, five millions fairly exported in coin, it is certain



that, during this period, the home-consumption must have been the



value of five millions less than the natural produce, labour, and



industry of the inhabitants; which sum of five millions must have



come from abroad in coin, and in return for a like value of the



production, labour, &c. remaining over and above their own



consumption, and exported for this return in ready specie.



    In this supposition, the national wealth (the metals) stands



as before; the balance of it only is changed. How this change is



performed, and what are its consequences, may be discovered by an



application of the principles already laid down.



    Quest. 3. What were the effects of riches before the



introduction of trade and industry?



    I never can sufficiently recommend to my readers to compare



circumstances in the economy of the ancients, with these of



modern politics; because I see a multitude of new doctrines laid



down, which, I think, never would have been broached, had such



circumstances been properly attended to. I have endeavoured to



shew, that the price of goods, but especially of articles of the



first necessity, have little or no connection with the quantities



of specie in a country The slightest inspection into the state of



circulation, in different ages, will fortify our reasoning: but



the general taste of dissipation, which is daily gaining ground,



makes people now imagine, that wealth and circulation are



synonymous terms; whereas nothing is more contrary both to reason



and matter of fact. A slight review of this matter, in different



ages, will set it in a clearer light than a more abstract



reasoning can do.



    It is a question with me, whether the mines of Potosi and



Brazil, have produced more riches to Spain and Portugal, within



these two hundred years, than the treasures heaped up in Asia,



Greece, and Egypt, after the death of Alexander, furnished to the



Romans, during the two hundred years which followed the defeat of



Perseus, and the conquest of Macedonia.



    From the treasures mentioned by all the historians who have



written of the conquest of these kingdoms by the Romans, I do not



think I am far from truth, when I compare the treasures of the



frugal Greeks to the mines of the new world.



    What effect, as to circulation, had the accumulation of these



vast treasures? Not any to accelerate it, surely: and no person,



the least conversant in antiquity, will pretend that the



circulating specie in those times bore as great a proportion to



their treasures, as what is at present circulating among us bears



to the wealth of the most oeconomising Prince in Europe. If any



one doubt of this particular, let him listen to Appian, who will



inform him, that the successors of Alexander, the possessors of



these immense riches, lived with the greatest frugality. These



treasures were then, as I have said, a real addition to the value



of their kingdoms but had not the smallest influence upon prices.



In those days of small circulation, the prices of every thing



must have been vastly low, not from the great abundance of them,



but because of the little demand; and as a proof of this, I cite



the example of a country, which, within the space of fifty years,



possessed in specie, at one time, considerably beyond the worth



of the land, houses, slaves, merchandize, natural produce,



moveables, and ready money, at another. The example is mentioned



by Mr Hume; and I am surprized the consequence of it did not



strike him. For if the money they possessed was greatly above the



worth of all their property, moveable and immoveable, surely it



never could be considered as a representation of their industry,



which made so small a part of the whole. Athens possessed, before



the Peloponnesian war, a treasure of ten thousand talents; and



fifty years afterwards, all Athens, in the several articles above



specified, did not amount to the value of six thousand. Hume's



Political Discourses upon the Balance of Trade.



    These treasures were spent in the war, and they had been laid



up for no other purpose. Therefore I was in the right, when I



observed above, Chap. 22., that war in ancient times had the



effect that industry has now: it was the only means of making



wealth circulate. But, peace producing a general stagnation of



circulation, people returned to the ancient simplicity of their



manners, and the prices of subsistence remained on the former



footing; because there was no increase of appetite, or rising of



demand upon any necessary article. So much for the state of



wealth during the days of frugality.



    The Romans subdued all those kingdom of the Greeks, and drew



their treasures to Rome. The republic went to destruction, and a



succession of the most prodigal princes ever known in history



succeeded one another for about two hundred years. Those



monstrous treasures were then thrown into circulation: and I must



now give an idea of the effects produced by such a revolution.



    I have already observed (Chap. 28.), that in consequence of



the great prodigality of those times, the price of superfluities



rose to a monstrous height; while the price of necessaries kept



excessively low. The fact is indisputable; and any one who



inclines to satisfy himself father, may look into that valuable



collection of examples of ancient luxury, wealth, and, at the



same time, of simplicity, found in Dr Wallace's Dissertation upon



the Numbers of Mankind in ancient and modern Times, p. 132. et



seq.



    But how is it to be accounted for, that the price of



superfluities should stand so high, while the price of



necessaries was so low? The reason is plain, from the principles



we have laid down. The circulation of money had no resemblance to



that of modern times: fortunes were made by corruption, fraud,



concussion, rapine, and penury; not by trade and industry. Seneca



amassed in four years 2,400,000 pounds sterling. An augur was



found to be worth 3 millions sterling. M. Antony owed on the ides



of March, 322,916 pounds sterling, and paid it before the calends



of April. We know of no such circulation. Every revolution was



violent: the powerful were rapacious and prodigal, the weak were



poor and lived in the greatest simplicity: consequently, the



objects of the desires for the rich were immensely dear; and the



necessaries for the poor were excessively cheap. This is a



confirmation of the principles we have laid down in Chap. 28.,



that the price of subsistence must ever be in proportion to the



faculties of the numerous classes of those who buy: that the



price of every thing must be in proportion to the demand for it;



and that in every case, where the supply can naturally be



increased in proportion to the demand, there must be a



determinate proportion between the price of such articles and



that of subsistence. Now in the examples given by Dr Wallace, of



things which sold at monstrous prices, we find such only as could



not be increased according to demand: here is the enumeration of



them. Large asses brought from Spain, peacocks, fine doves,



mullets, lampreys, peaches, large asparagus, purple, wool,



jewels, carpets, vestes Byssinae, slaves skilled in the finer



arts, pictures, statues, books, and rewards to those who taught



the sciences. By casting a glance upon the catalogue, we may



easily perceive that the extraordinary price must have proceeded



from the impossibility of augmenting the supply in proportion to



the demand; not from the abundance of the money, which had no



effect in raising the price of necessaries. The cheapness, again,



of these did not proceed from the vast plenty of them; but



because the price remained in proportion to the faculties of the



numerous poor; and because the augmentation of the wealth of the



rich never could increase their consumption of any necessary



article. Had the Roman empire been governed with order and



tranquillity, this taste of luxury, by precipitating money into



the hands of the numerous classes, would, in time, have wrought



the effects of multiplying the number of the industrious;



consequently, of increasing the demand for vendible subsistence;



consequently, of raising the price of it. And, on the other hand,



the introduction of a more adequate proportion between services



and rewards given by the public, would have checked the other



branch of circulation which produced those monstrous fortunes, to



wit, rapine and corruption: and, industry receiving a regular



encouragement, every article of extraordinary demand for delicate



aliments, birds, fishes, fruits, &c. would have been supplied



with sufficient abundance; and consequently, would have fallen in



its price. But while either despotism or slavery were the



patrimonial inheritance of every one on coming into the world, we



are not to expect to see the same principles operate, as in ages



where the monarch and the peasant are born equally free to enjoy



the provision made for them by their forefathers.







    Quest. 7. In what manner, therefore, may a statesman



establish industry, so as not to destroy simplicity, nor occasion



a sudden revolution in the manners of his people, the great



classes of which are supposed to live secure in ease and



happiness; and, at the same time, so as to provide with



necessaries every one who may be in want?



    The observations we are going to make will point out the



answer to this question: they will still farther unfold the



political economy of the ancients, and explain how manners



remained so pure from vicious luxury, notwithstanding the great



and sumptuous works carried on, which strike us with so lofty an



idea of their useful magnificence and noble simplicity. These



observations will also confirm the justness of a distinction



made, in the first chapter of this book, between labour and



industry; by shewing that labour may ever be procured, even by



force, at the expence of furnishing man with his



physical-necessary, from which no superfluity can proceed:



whereas industry cannot be established, but by means of an



adequate equivalent, proportioned, not to the absolutely



necessary, but to the reasonable desire of the industrious; which



equivalent becomes afterwards the means of diffusing a luxurious



disposition among all the classes of a people.



    If a statesman find certain individuals in want, he must



either feed them, in which case he may employ them as he thinks



fit; or he must give them a piece of land, as the means of



feeding themselves. If he give the land, he can require no



equivalent for it, because a person who has nothing can give



nothing but his labour; and if he be obliged to labour for his



food, he cannot purchase with labour the earth itself, which



produces it. If it be asked, whether a statesman does better to



give the food, or to give the land? I think it will appear very



evident, that the first is the better course, because he can then



exact an equivalent; and since in either way the person is fed,



the produce of his labour is always clear gain. But in order to



give the food, he must have it to give; in which case it must



either be a surplus-produce of public lands, or a contribution



from the people. In both which cases, is implied an industry



carried on beyond the personal wants of those who labour the



ground. If this fund be applied in giving bread to those whom he



employed in improving the soil of the country in general, it will



have no immediate effect in destroying the simplicity of their



manners; it will extend the fund only of their subsistence. If he



employs them in making highways, aqueducts, common sewers,



bridges, and the like; it will extend the correspondence between



the different places of the country, and render living in cities



more easy and agreeable: and these changes have an evident



tendency towards destroying simplicity. But here let it be



remarked, that the simplicity of individuals is not hurt by the



industry carried on at the expence of the public. The superfluous



food at the statesman's disposal, is given to people in



necessity, who are employed in relieving the wants of the public,



not of private persons. But if, for example, in consequence of



the roads made, any inhabitant shall incline to remove from place



to place in a chariot, instead of riding on horseback, or



walking, he must engage somebody to make the machine: this is a



farther extension to occupation, on the side of those who labour.



but the consequence of the employment is very different, when



considered with regard to the simplicity of manners. The reason



is plain: the ingenuity here must be paid for; and this



superfluity in the hands of the workman is a fund for his



becoming luxurious.



    Industry destroys simplicity of manners in him who gives an



equivalent for an article of superfluity; and the equivalent



given frequently gives rise to a subordinate species of luxury in



the workman. When industry therefore meets with encouragement



from individuals, who given an equivalent in order to satisfy



growing desires, it is a proof that they are quitting the



simplicity of their manners. In this case, the wants and desires



of mankind are the sources of industry, which was the supposition



in the first book; because, in fact, the industry of Europe is



owing to this cause alone.



    But the industry of ancient times was very different, when



the multitude of slaves ready to execute whatever was demanded,



either by the state or by their masters, for the equivalent of



simple maintenance only, prevented wealth from ever falling into



the hands of industrious free men; and he who has no circulating



equivalent to give for satisfying a desire for superfluity, must



remain in his former simplicity. The labour therefore of those



days producing no circulation, could not corrupt the manners of



the people; because, remaining constantly poor, they never could



increase their consumption of superfluity.



    I must, in this place, insert the authority of an ancient



author, in order both to illustrate and to prove the justness of



this representation of the political oeconomy of the ancients.



    There remains a discourse of Xenophon upon the improvement of



the revenue of the state of Athens. Concerning the authenticity



of this work, I have not the smallest doubt. It is a chef



d'oeuvre of its kind, and from it more light is to be had, in



relation to the subject we are here upon, than from any thing I



have ever seen, ancient or modern.



    From this ancient monument we learn the sentiments of the



author with regard to the proper employment of the three



principal classes of the Athenian people, viz. the citizens, the



strangers, and the slaves. From the plan he lays down we plainly



discover, that, in the state of Athens, (more renowned than any



other of antiquity for the arts of luxury and refinement,) it



never entered into the imagination of any politician to introduce



industry even among the lowest classes of the citizens; and



Xenophon 's plan was to reap all the benefits we at present enjoy



from it, without producing any change upon the spirit of the



Athenian people.



    The state at this time used to impose taxes upon their



confederate cities, in order to maintain their own common people,



and Xenophon's intention in this discourse was to lay down a plan



for improving the revenue of the state in such a manner as out of



it to give every citizen a pension of three oboli a day, or three



pence three farthings of our money.



    I shall not here go through every branch of his plan, nor



point out the resources he had fallen upon to form a sufficient



fund for this purpose; but he says, that in case of any



deficiency in the domestic revenue of the state, people from all



quarters, Princes and strangers of note, in all countries, would



be proud of contributing towards it, for the honour of being



recorded in the public monuments of Athens, and having their



names transmitted to posterity as benefactors to the state in the



execution of so grand a design.



    In our days, such an idea would appear ridiculous; in the



days of Xenophon, it was perfectly rational. At that time great



quantities of gold and silver were found locked up in the coffers



of the rich: this was in a great measure useless to them, in the



common course of life, and was the more easily parted with from a



sentiment of vanity or ostentation.



    In our days, the largest income is commonly found too small



for the current expence of the proprietor. From whence it



happens, that presents, great expence at funerals and marriages,



godfathers' gifts, &c. so very familiar among ourselves in former



times, are daily going out of fashion. These are extraordinary



and unforeseen expences which our ancestors were fond of; because



they Battered their vanity, without diminishing the fund of their



current expence: but as now we have no full coffers to fly to, we



find them excessively burthensome, and endeavour to retrench them



as soon as we can, not from frugality, God knows, but in



consequence of a change in our manners.



    Besides providing this daily pension of three pence three



farthings a day for every citizen of Athens, rich and poor, he



proposed to build, at the public charge, many trading vessels, a



great many inns and houses of entertainment for all strangers in



the sea-ports, to erect shops, warehouses, exchanges, &c. the



rents of which would increase the revenue, and add great beauty



and magnificence to the city. In short, Xenophon recommends to



the state to perform, by the hands of their slaves and strangers,



what a free people in our days are constantly employed in doing



in every country and industry. While the Athenian citizens



continued to receive their daily pensions, proportioned to the



value of their pure physical-necessary, their business being



confined to their service in the army in time of war, their



attendance in public assemblies, and the theatres in times of



peace, clothed like a parcel of capucins, they, as became



freemen, were taught to despise industrious labour, and to glory



in the austerity and simplicity of their manners. The pomp and



magnificence of the Persian Emperors were a subject of ridicule



in Greece, and a proof of their barbarity, and of the slavery of



their subjects. From this plain representation of Xenophon's



plan, I hope, the characteristic difference between the ancient



and modern economy is manifest; and for such readers as take a



particular delight in comparing the systems of simplicity and



luxury, I recommend the perusal of this most valuable discourse.



    To put this matter past all dispute, and to prove that the



simplicity of the manners, as well as the idleness of the common



people of Athens in Xenophon's time, proceeded from refinement



not from ignorance, I shall here insert a passage from President



Goguet's Origin of Laws, Arts, and Sciences, with the authorities



he cites in part 3d, book 4th, chap. 3d.



    'Hesiod and Plutarch have observed,' says he, 'that, in the



ages I am now speaking of (before the reign of Cyrus) commerce



was held in great honour among the Greeks. No labour, say these



authors, was accounted shameful, no art, no trade, placed any



difference among men. This maxim, so reasonable and so useful to



such a nation as the Greeks, was, nevertheless, altered. We see



by the works of Xenophon, of Plato, of Aristotle, and of many



other writers of merit, that, in their age, all professions which



were calculated to gain money, were regarded as unworthy of a



freeman. Aristotle maintains, that, in a well ordered state, they



will never give the right of citizens to artisans. Plato would



have a citizen punished who should enter into commerce. In fine,



we see these two philosophers, whose sentiments, on the



principles and maxims of government, are otherwise so opposite,



agreeing to recommend that the lands should be cultivated by



slaves: only. It is very surprising,' concludes the President,



'that with such principles, which all the Greeks appear to have



imbibed, they should ever have been so intelligent in commerce,



and so powerful at sea, as they are known to have been in some



ages.'



    Putting, therefore, all these circumstances together, and



comparing them with the contrast, which is found, as to every



particular, in our times, I think it is but doing justice to the



moderns, to allow, that the extensive luxury, which daily



diffuses itself through every class of a people, is more owing to



the abolishing of slavery, the equal distribution of riches, and



the circulation of an adequate equivalent for every service, than



to any greater corruption of our manners, than what prevailed



among the ancients.



    In order to have industry directed towards the object of



public utility, the public, not individuals, must have the



equivalent to give. Must not the employment be adapted to the



taste of him who purchases it? Now, in ancient times, most public



works were performed either by slaves, or at the price of the



pure physical-necessary of free men. We find the price of a



pyramid, recorded to us by Herodotus, in the quantity of turnips,



onions, and garlic, consumed by the builders of it. Those who



made the via appia, I apprehend, were just as poor when it was



finished as the day it was begun; and this must always be the



case, when the work requires no peculiar dexterity in the



workmen. If, on the other hand, examples can be brought where



workmen gained high wages, then the consequences must have been



the same as in our days.



    As long, therefore, as industry is not directed to such



objects as require a particular address, which, by the principles



laid down in the twenty-first chapter, raises profits above the



physical-necessary, the industrious never can become rich; and if



they be paid in money, this money must return into the hands of



those who feed them: and if no superfluity be found any where but



in the hands of the state, such industry may be the means of



consuming a surplus of subsistence, but never can draw one penny



into circulation. This I apprehend to be a just application of



our principles, to the state of industry under the Roman



republic: and it is this species of industry which we call



labour. We are not therefore to ascribe the taste for simplicity



in those days to the virtue of the times. A man who had riches,



and who spent them, spent them no doubt then, as at present, to



gratify his desires; and if the simplicity of the times furnished



no assistance to his own invention, in diversifying them, the



consequence was, that the money was not spent, but locked up. I



have heard many a man say, had I so much money I should not know



how to spend it. The thing is certainly true; for people do not



commonly take it into their head to lay it out for the public.



    Nobody, I believe, will deny that money is better employed in



building a house, or in producing something useful and permanent,



than in providing articles of mere transitory superfluity. But



what principle of politics can influence the taste of the



proprietors of wealth? This being the case, a statesman is



brought to a dilemma; either to allow industry to run into a



channel little beneficial to the state, little permanent in its



nature, or to deprive the poor of the advantage resulting from



it. May I not farther suggest, that a statesman, who is at the



head of a people, whose taste is directed towards a trifling



species of expence, does very well to diminish the fund of their



prodigality, by calling in, by the means of taxes, a part of the



circulating equivalent which they give for it? When once he is



enriched by these contributions, he comes to be in the same



situation with ancient statesmen, with this difference, that they



had their slaves at their command, whom they fed and provided



for; and that he has the free, for the sake of an equivalent with



which they feed and provide for themselves. He then can set



public works on foot, and by his example, inspire a taste for



industry of a more rational kind, which may advance the public



good and procure a lasting benefit to the nation.



    I have frequently said, that the acquisition of money, by the



sale of industry to strangers, or in return for consumable



commodities, was a way of augmenting the general worth of a



nation. Now I say, that whoever can transform the most consumable



commodities of a country into the most durable and most



beneficial works, makes a high improvement. If therefore meat and



drink, which are of all things the most consumable, can be turned



into harbours, high roads, canals, and public buildings, is not



the improvement inexpressible? This is in the power of every



statesman to accomplish, who has subsistence at his disposal; and



beyond the power of all those who have it not. There is no



absolute occasion for money to improve a country. All the



magnificent buildings which ornament Italy, are more properly the



representation of a scanty subsistence, than of the gold and



silver in that country at the time they were executed. Let me now



conclude with a few miscellaneous observations on what has been



said.



    Obser. 1. When I admire the magnificence and grandeur of



public works in any country, such as stupendous churches,



amphitheatres, roads, dykes, canals; in a word, when I examine



Holland, the greatest work perhaps ever done by man, I am never



struck with the expence. I compare them with the numbers of men



only who have lived to perform them. When I see another country



well inhabited, where no such works appear, the contrast suggests



abundance of reflections.



    As to the first, I conclude, that while these works were



carrying on, either slavery or taxes must have been established;



because it seldom happens, that a prince will, out of his own



patrimony, launch out into such expences, purely to serve the



public. Public works are carried on by the public; and for this



purpose, either the persons or purses of individuals, must be at



its command. The first I call slavery; that is service: the



second taxes; that is public contributions in money or in



necessaries.



    Obser. 2. I farther conclude, that nothing is to be gathered



from those works, which should engage us to entertain a high



opinion of the wealth, or other species of magnificence in the



people who executed them. All that can be determined positively



concerning their economy as to this particular, is, that at the



time they were performed, agriculture must have been exercised as



a trade, in order to furnish a surplus sufficient to maintain the



workmen; or that subsistence must have come from abroad, either



as a return for other species of industry, or gratuitously, that



is, by rapine, tribute, &c.



    Obser. 3. That the consequence of such works, is, to make



meat, drink, and necessaries circulate from the hands of those



who have a superfluity of them, into those who are employed to



labour; or to oblige those who formerly worked for themselves



only, to work also in part for others. To execute this, there



must be a subordination: for who will increase his labour,



voluntarily, in order to feed people who do not work for himself,



but for the public? This combination was neglected throughout the



first book; because we there left mankind at liberty to follow



the bent of their inclinations. This was necessary to give a



right idea of the subject we then intended to treat, and to point



out the different effects of slavery and liberty; but now, that



we have formed trading nations, and riveted a multitude of



reciprocal dependences, which tie the members of them together,



there is less danger in introducing restraints; because the



advantages which people find, from living in a well ordered



society, make them put up the better with the inconveniences of



supporting and improving it. It is an universal principle, that



instruction should be given with gentleness. A young horse is to



be carressed when the saddle is first put upon his back: any



thing that appears harsh, let it be ever so useful or necessary,



must be forborn in the beginning, in order to captivate the



inclination of the creature which we incline to instruct.



    Obser. 4. When a statesman knows the extent and quality of



the territory of his country, so as to be able to estimate what



numbers it may feed; he may lay down his plan of political



economy, and chalk out a distribution of inhabitants, as if the



number were already compleat. It will depend upon his judgment



alone, and upon the combination of circumstances, foreign and



domestic, to distribute, and to employ the classes, at every



period during this execution, in the best manner to advance



agriculture, so as to bring all the lands to a thorough



cultivation. A ruling principle here, is, to keep the husbandman



closely employed, that their surplus may be carried as high as



possible; because this surplus is the main spring of all



alienation and industry. The next thing is to make this surplus



circulate; no man must eat of it for nothing. What a prodigious



difference does a person find, when he considers two countries,



equally great, equally fertile, equally cultivated, equally



peopled, the one under the economy here represented; the other,



where every one is employed in feeding and providing for himself



only.



    A statesman, therefore, under such circumstances, should



reason thus: I have a country which maintains a million of



inhabitants, I suppose, and which is capable of maintaining as



many more; I find every one employed in providing for himself,



and considering the simplicity of their manners, a far less



number will be sufficient to do all the work: the consequence is,



that many are almost idle, while others, who have many children,



are starving. Let me call my people together, and shew them the



inconvenience of having no roads. He then proposes that every one



who chooses to apply to this work, shall be fed and taken care of



by the community, and his lands distributed to those who incline



to take them. The advantage is felt, the people are engaged to



work a little harder, so as to undertake the cultivation of the



portions of those who have abandoned them. Upon this revolution,



labour is increased, the soil continues cultivated as before, and



the additional labour of the farmers appears in a fine high road.



Is this any more than a method to engage one part of a people to



labour, in order to maintain another?



    Obser. 5. Here I ask, whether it be not better to feed a man,



in order to make him labour and be useful, than to feed him in



order to make him live and digest his victuals? This last was the



case of multitudes during the ages of ancient slavery, as well as



the consequence of ill-directed modern charity. One and the other



being equally well calculated for producing a simplicity of



manners: and Horace has painted it to the life, when he says,







             Nos numerus sumus, et fruges consumere nati.







    This I have heard humorously translated, though nastily I



confess; We add to the number of t-d mills. A very just



representation of many of the human species! to their shame be it



spoken, as it equally casts a reflection on religion and on



government.



    Consistently with these principles, we find no great or



public work carried on in countries of great liberty. Nothing of



this kind is to be seen among the Tartars or hunting Indians.



These I call free nations, but not our European republics, where



I have found just as much subordination and constraint as any



where else.



    I have on several occasions, let drop some expressions with



regard to charity, which I am sensible may be misinterpreted. It



will therefore be proper to make some apology, which nobody can



suspect of insincerity; because my reason for introducing it, is



with a view to a farther illustration of my subject.



    When I see a rich and magnificent monastery of begging



friars, adorned with profusion of sculpture, a stupendous pile of



building, stately towers, incrustations of marble, beautiful



pavements; when I compare the execution and the expence of all



these, with the faculties of a person of the largest fortune, I



find there is no proportion between what the beggars have



executed with the produce of private charities, and what any Lord



has done with his overgrown estate. Nay monasteries there are



which, had they been executed by princes, would have been cited



by historians, from generation to generation, as eternal



monuments of the greatest prodigality and dissipation. Here then



is an effect of charity, which I have heard condemned by many,



and I think without much reason. What prostitution of riches! say



they: how usefully might all this money have been employed, in



establishing manufactures, building a navy, and in many other



good purposes? Whereas I am so entirely taken up with the effects



arising from the execution of the work, that I seldom give myself



time to reflect upon the use of it. The building of this



monastery has fed the industrious poor, has encouraged the



liberal arts, has improved the taste of the inhabitants, has



opened the door to the curiosity of strangers: and when I examine



my purse, I find that instead of having contributed to the



building of it from a charitable disposition, my curiosity to see



it has obliged me to contribute my proportion of the expence. I



spend my money in that country, and so do other strangers,



without bringing any thing away for it. No balance of trade is



clearer than this. The miraculous tongue of St. Anthony of Padua,



has brought more clear money into that city than the industry of



a thousand weavers could have done: the charity given is not to



the monks, but to the poor whom they employ. If young wits,



therefore, make a jest of such a devotion; I ask, who ought to be



laughed at, those who give, or those who receive money for the



show?



    In a country where such works are usually carried on, they



cease in a great measure to be useful, whenever they are



finished; and a new one should be set on foot directly, or what



will become of those who are without employment? It must not be



concluded from this, that the usefUlness of public works is not a



principal consideration. The more a work is useful after it is



done, so much the better; because it may then have the effect of



giving bread to those who have not built it. But whether useful



or not afterwards, it must be useful while it is going on; and



many, who with pleasure will give a thousand pounds to adorn a



church, would not give a shilling to build Westminster bridge, or



the port of Rochefort; and the poor live equally by the execution



of either. Expensive public works, are therefore a mean of giving



bread to the poor, and of advancing industry, without hurting the



simplicity of manners; which is an answer to the seventh



question.



    Obser. 6. Great works found in one country and none found in



another, is no proof that the first have surpassed the second in



labour and industry: the contrast marks only the different



division of property, or taste of expence. Every undertaking



points out a particular interest. Palaces are a representation of



rich individuals; snug boxes, in the neighbourhood of cities,



represent small but easy fortunes; huts point out poverty;



aqueducts, highways, &c. testify an opulent common good: and if



these be found in a country where no vestige of private expence



appears, I then must conclude that they have been executed by



slaves, or by oppression; otherwise somebody, at least, would



have gained by the execution; and his gains would appear in one



species of expence or another.



    Obser. 7. In countries where fortunes have been unequally



divided, where there have been few rich and many poor, it is



common to find lasting monuments of labour; because great



fortunes only are capable of producing them. As a proof of this



let us compare the castles of ancient times (I mean four or five



hundred years ago) with the houses built of late. At that time



fortunes were much more unequal than at present, and accordingly



we find the habitations of the great in most countries not



numerous, but of an extraordinary bulk and solidity. Now a



building is never to be judged of by the money it cost, but by



the labour it required. From the houses in a country, I judge of



the opulence of the great, and of the proportion of fortunes



among the inhabitants. The taste in which these old castles are



built, marks the power of those who built them, and, as their



numbers are small, we may judge from the nature of man, who loves



imitation, that the only reason for it was, that there were few



in a condition to build them. Why do we find in modern times a



far less disproportion between the convenience with which every



body is lodged, than formerly; but merely because riches from the



operations of industry above-described are more equally divided.



    Obser. 8. From this we may conclude, that lasting monuments



are no adequate measure of the industry of a country. The expence



of a modern prince, in a splendid court, numerous armies,



frequent journeys, magnificent banquets, operas, masquerades,



tournaments, and shews, may give employment and bread to as many



hands, as the taste of him who built the pyramid; and the smoke



of the gun-powder at the reviews, and of the flambeaus and wax



lights at the entertainments, may be of as great use to



posterity, as the shadow of the pyramid, which is the only



visible effect producted by it; but the one remains for ever, the



other leaves no vestige behind it. The very remaining of the



work, however useless in itself, becomes advantageous, so far as



it is ornamental, and inspires sentiments of emulation to



succeeding princes, the effects of which will still be productive



of the good consequences of keeping people employed. The expence



of the other flatters the senses, and gives delight: there is no



choice here. All such useless expence gratifies vanity only;



accident alone makes one species permanent, another transitory.



    Those who have money may be engaged to part with it in favour



of the poor, but never forced to part with it to the prejudice of



their posterity. Inspire, if you can, a good and useful taste of



expence; nothing so right; but never check the dissipation of



ready money, with a view to preserve private fortunes. Leave such



precautions to the prudence of every individual. Every man, no



doubt, has as good a right to perpetuate and provide for his own



posterity, as a state has to perpetuate the welfare of the whole



community; it is the combination of every private interest which



forms the common weal. From this I conclude, that, without the



strongest reasons to the contrary, perpetual substitutions of



property should be left as free to those who possess lands, as



locking up in chests should be permitted to those who have much



money.



    Quest. 8. What are the principles which influence the



establishment of mercantile companies; and what effects do these



produce upon the interests of trade?



    There is a close connection between the principles relating



to companies and those we have examined in the twenty-third



chapter, concerning corporations. The one and the other have



excellent consequences, and both are equally liable to abuse. A



right examination of principles is the best method to advance the



first, and to prevent the latter.



    The advantages of companies are chiefly two.



    1. That by uniting the stocks of several merchants together,



an enterprise far beyond the force of any one, becomes



practicable to the community.



    2. That by uniting the interests of several merchants, who



direct their foreign commerce towards the same object, the



competition between them abroad is taken away; and whatever is



thus gained, is so much clear profit, not only to the company,



but to the society of which they are members.



    It is in consideration of the last circumstance, that



companies for foreign commerce have a claim to extensive



privileges. But no encouragement given to such associations



should be carried farther than the public good necessarily



requires it should be. The public may reward the ingenuity,



industry and inventions of particular members, and support a



private undertaking as far as is reasonable; but every



encouragement given ought to be at the expence of the whole



community, not at that of particular denominations of



inhabitants.



    The disadvantages proceeding from companies are easily to be



guessed at, from the very nature of the advantages we have been



setting forth: and the relation between the one and the other



will point out the remedies.



    First, the weight of money in the hands of companies, and the



public encouragement given them, crush the efforts of private



adventurers, while their success inspires emulation, and a desire



in every individual to carry on a trade equally profitable.



    Here a statesman ought nicely to examine the advantages which



the company reaps from the incorporation of their stock, and



those which proceed from the public encouragement given to the



undertaking; that with an impartial hand, he may make an equal



distribution of public benefits. And when he finds it impossible



to contribute to the advancement of the public good, by



communicating the privileges of companies to private adventurers,



he ought to facilitate the admittance of every person properly



qualified into such associations.



    Secondly, The second disadvantage of companies, is, a



concomitant of that benefit so sensibly felt by the state, from



the union of their interest, while they purchase in foreign



markets: the same union which, at the time of buying, secures the



company from all competitions, proves equally disadvantageous to



those who purchase from them at home. They are masters of their



price, and can regulate their profits by the height of demand;



whereas they ought to keep them constantly proportioned to the



real value of the merchandize.



    The advantage resulting from the union of many private stocks



is common to all companies; but those we have mentioned to



proceed from the union of their interest, is peculiar to those



who carry on an exclusive trade in certain distant parts of the



world. We have, in a former chapter, laid down the maxims which



influence the conduct of a statesman in regulating the prices of



merchandize, by watching over the balance of work and demand, and



by preserving the principles of competition in their full



activity. But here a case presents itself, where, upon one side



of the contract, competition can have no effect, and where its



introduction is forbidden for the sake of the public good,



because it destroys the exclusive privilege of the company to



trade in certain countries.



    What method, therefore, can be fallen upon to preserve the



advantage which the nation reaps from the company's buying in



foreign parts without being exposed to competition; and at the



same time to prevent the disadvantage to which the individuals of



the society are exposed at home, when they endeavour, in



competition with one another, to purchase from a company, who, in



virtue of the same exclusive privilege, are united in their



interest, and become masters to demand what price they think fit?



    It may be answered, that it cannot be said of companies as of



private dealers, that they profit of every little circumstance of



competition, to raise their price. Companies have a fixed



standard, and all the world buys from them at the same rate; so



that retailers, who supply the consumption, have in one respect



this notable advantage, that as all buy from them at the same



price, no one can undersell another; and the competition between



themselves secures the public from exorbitant prices.



    I agree that these advantages are felt, and that they are



real; but still they prove no more than that the establishment of



companies is not so hurtful to the interest of those who consume



their goods, as it would be could they profit to the utmost of



their exclusive privilege in selling by retail. But it does not



follow from this, that the profits upon such a trade do not rise



(in consequence of their privilege) above the standard proper for



making the whole commerce of a nation flourish. The very jealousy



and dissatisfaction, conceived by other merchants, equally



industrious and equally well deserving of the public, because of



the great advantages enjoyed by those who are incorporated, under



the protection of exclusive privileges, is a hurt to trade in



general, is contrary to that principle of impartiality which



should animate a good statesman, and should be prevented if



possible. Let us therefore go to the bottom of this affair; and,



by tracing the progress of such mercantile undertakings, as are



proper objects for the foundation of companies, and which entitle



them to demand and to obtain certain exclusive privileges, let us



endeavour to find out a method by which a statesman may establish



such societies, so as to have it in his power to lay their inland



sales under certain regulations, capable to supply the want of



competition; and to prevent the profits of exclusive trade from



rising, considerably, above the level of that which is carried on



without any such assistance from the public.



    While the interest of companies is in few hands, the union of



the members is more intimate, and their affairs are carried on



with more secrecy. This is always the case in the infancy of such



undertakings. But the want of experience frequently occasions



considerable losses; and while this continues to be the case, no



complaints are heard against such associations. Few pretend to



rival their undertaking, and it becomes at first more commonly



the object of raillery than of jealousy. During this period, the



statesman should lay the foundation of his authority; he ought to



spare no pains nor encouragement to support the undertaking; he



ought to inquire into the capacity of those at the head of it;



order their projects to be laid before him; and when he finds



them reasonable, and well planned, he ought to take unforeseen



losses upon himself: he is working for the public, not for the



company; and the more care and expence he is at in setting the



undertaking on foot, the more he has a right to direct the



prosecution of it towards the general good. This kind of



assistance given, entitles him to the inspection of their books;



and from this, more than any thing, he will come at the exact



knowledge of every circumstance relating to their trade. By this



method of proceeding, there will be no complaints on the side of



the adventurers, they will engage with chearfulness, being made



certain of the public assistance in every reasonable undertaking;



their stock becomes in a manner insured, individuals are



encouraged to give them credit, and from creditors they will



naturally become associates in the undertaking. So soon as the



project comes to such a bearing as to draw jealousy, the bottom



may be enlarged by opening the doors to new associates, instead



of permitting the original proprietors to augment, and thus the



fund of the company their stock with borrowed money; may be



increased in proportion to the employment found for it, and every



one will be satisfied.



    When things are conducted in this way, the authority of



public inspection is no curb upon the trade; the individuals who



serve the company are cut off from the possibility of defrauding;



no mysteries, no secrets, from which abuses arise, will be



encouraged; trade will become honourable and secure, not



fraudulent and precarious; because it will grow under the



inspection of its protector, who protects it for the public good



only.



    Why do companies demand exclusive privileges, and why are



they ever granted, but as a recompense to those who have been at



great expence in acquiring a knowledge which has cost nothing to



the state? And why do they exert their utmost efforts in order to



conceal the secrets of their trade, and to be the only sharers in



the profits of it, but to make the public refund tenfold the



expence of their undertaking?



    When companies are once firmly established, the next care of



a statesman is, to prevent the profits of their trade from rising



above a certain standard. We speak at present of those only, whom



by exclusive privileges, are exposed to no competition at their



sales. One very good method to keep down prices, is, to lay



companies under a necessity of increasing their stock as their



trade can bear it, by the admission of new associates; for by



increasing the company's stock, you increase, I suppose, the



quantity of goods they dispose of, and consequently diminish the



competition of those who demand of them: but as even this will



not have the effect of reducing prices to the adequate value of



the merchandize (a thing to be done by competition only), the



statesman himself may interpose an extraordinary operation. He



may support high profits to the company, upon all articles of



luxury consumed at home, and favour the keeping down of the



prices of such goods as are either for exportation or



manufacture.



    This can be done when he has companies only to deal with: in



every other case, the principles of competition between different



merchants, trading in the same goods, upon separate interests,



makes the thing impossible. But where the interests of the



sellers, which are the company, are united, and where there is no



competition, they are masters of their price, according to the



principles laid down in the seventh chapter. Now, provided the



dividend upon the whole stock be a sufficient recompense both for



the value of the fund, and the industry of those who are employed



to turn it to account, the end is accomplished. Extraordinary



profits upon any particular species of trade cast a



discouragement upon all others.



    We very frequently see that great trading companies become



the means of establishing public credit; on which occasions, it



is proper to distinguish between the trading stock of the



company, which remains in their possession, and the actions,



bonds, annuities, contracts, &c. which carry their name, and



which have nothing but the name in common. The price of the first



is constantly regulated by the profits upon the trade; the price



of the other, by the current value of money.



    Let me next observe the advantage which might result to a



nation, from a prudent interposition of the statesman, in the



regulation of a tariff of prices for such goods as are put to



sale without any competition on the side of the sellers.



    The principles we have laid down, direct us to proscribe, as



much as possible, all foreign consumption, especially that of



work: and to encourage as much as possible the exportation of it.



Now, if what the India company of England, for example, sells to



strangers, and exports for a return in money, be equal to the



money she herself has formerly exported, the balance upon the



India trade will stand even. But if the competition of the French



and Dutch be found hurtful to the English company in her outward



sales, may not the government of this nation lend a hand towards



rising the profits of the company, upon tea, china, and japan



wares, which are articles of superfluity consumed by the rich at



home, in order to enable the company to afford her silk and



cotton stuffs to strangers, at a more reasonable rate? These



operations, I say, are practicable, where a company sells without



competition, but are never to be undertaken, but when the state



of its affairs are perfectly well known; because the prices of



exportable goods might, perhaps, be kept up by abuse and



mismanagement, and not by the superior advantages which other



nations have in carrying on a like commerce. The only remedy



against abuse is reformation. But how often do we see a people



lid under contribution in order to support that abuse!



    Companies, we have said, owe their exclusive privileges to



the difficulties to which an infant commerce is exposed: these



difficulties once surmounted, and the company established upon a



solid foundation, new objects of profit present themselves daily;



so much, that the original institution is frequently eclipsed, by



the accessary interests of the society. It is therefore the



business of a statesman to take care that the exclusive



privileges granted to a society, for a certain purpose, be not



extended to other interests, nowise relative to that which set



the society on foot, and gave it a name. And when exclusive



privileges are given, a statesman should never fail to stipulate



for himself, a particular privilege of inspection into all the



affairs of the company, in order to be able to take measures



which may effectually prevent bad consequences to the general



interest of the nation, or to that of particular classes.



    Let this suffice at present, as to the privileges enjoyed by



companies in foreign trade. Let me now examine the nature of such



societies in general, in order to discover their influence on the



mercantile interests of a nation, and how they tend to bring



every branch of trade to perfection, when they are established



and carried on under the eye of a wise administration.



    Besides the advantages and disadvantages above mentioned,



there are others found to follow the establishment of trading



companies. The first proceed from union, that is, a common



interest; the last from disunion, that is, from separate



interests.



    A common interest unites, and a separate interest disunites



the members of every society; and did not the first preponderate



among mankind, there would be no society at all. Those of the



same nation may have a common interest relative to foreigners,



and a separate interest relative to one another. those of the



same profession may have a common interest relative to the object



of their industry, and a separate interest relative to the



carrying it on: the members of the same mercantile company may



have the same interest in the dividend, and a separate interest



in the administration of the fund which produces it. The children



of the same family, nay even a man and his wife, though tied by



the bonds of common interest, may be disjoined by the effects of



a separate one. Mankind are like loadstones, they draw by one



pole, and repel by another. And a statesman, in order to cement



his society, should know how to engage every one, as far as



possible, to turn his attracting pole towards the particular



centre of common good.



    From this emblematical representation of human society, I



infer, that it is dangerous to the common interest, to permit too



close an union between the members of any subaltern society. When



the members of these are bound together, as it were by every



articulation, they in some measure become independent of the



great body. when the union is less intimate, they admit of other



connections, which cement them to the general mass.



    Companies ought to be permitted, consistently with these



principles. Their mercantile interests alone ought to be united,



so far as union is required to carry on their undertaking with



reasonable profits; but beyond this, every collateral advantage



by which the associates might profit, in consequence of their



union, ought to be cut off; and the public should take care to



support the interest of private persons against them, on all



occasions, where they take advantage of their union to hurt the



right of individuals. Let me illustrate this by an example.



Several weavers, fishermen, or those of any other class of the



industrious, unite their stocks, in order to overcome those



difficulties to which single workmen are exposed, from a



multiplication of expences, which can be saved by their



association. This company makes a great demand for the materials



necessary for carrying on their business. By this demand they



attach to themselves a great many of the industrious not



incorporated, who thereby get bread and employment. So far these



find an advantage: but in proportion as the undertaking is



extended, and the company becomes able to engross the whole, or a



considerable part of such a manufacture, they destroy all



competition for it: and by forming a single interest, in the



purchase of it, as well as in the sale of their own manufactures,



they profit in the first case, by reducing the gains of those who



are not incorporated, below the proper standard; and in the



second, they raise their own profits too far above what is



necessary.



    The method, therefore, to prevent such abuses, is, for a



statesman to interpose; not by restraining the operations of the



company, but by opposing the force of principles similar to those



by which they profit, in such a manner as to render their unjust



dealings ineffectual. If the weavers oppress the spinners, for



instance, methods may be fallen upon, if not by incorporating the



last, at least by uniting their interests, so as to prevent a



hurtful competition among them. If the dealers in wool in



England, profiting of the prohibition to export this commodity,



should enter into a concert against the growers of it, in order



to have the wool at their own price; government may easily



disappoint them, by receiving in every county, at a reasonable



price, all the wool which remains unsold. This quantity



government may export, with far less hurt to England, than what



the nation suffers by the concert among the wool merchants



against the landed interest. He may likewise discourage too



extensive companies, by establishing and supporting others, which



may serve to preserve competition; and he may punish, severely,



every transgression of the laws tending to establish an arbitrary



dependence on the company. In short, while such societies are



forming, he ought to be their protector; and, when they are



formed, he ought to take those under his protection, whom they



might be apt to oppress.



    In establishing companies for manufactures, it is a good



expedient to employ none in such undertakings, but those who have



been bred to the different branches of their business. When



people of fortune, ignorant and projecting, interest themselves



in infant manufactures, under the pretext of public spirit,



though merely with a view to become suddenly rich, they are so



bent upon making vast profits, proportioned to their stock, that



their hopes are generally disappointed, and the undertaking



fails. Pains-taking people, bred to frugality, content themselves



with smaller gains; but under the public protection, these will



swell into a large sum, and the accumulation of small profits



will form a new class of opulent people, who adopt, or rather



retain the sentiments of frugality with which they were born.



    Thus, for instance, in establishing fisheries, instead of



private subscriptions from those who put in their money from



public spirit, and partly with a view to draw an interest for it;



or from those who are allured by the hopes of being great gainers



in the end, (the last I call projectors) the public should defray



the great expence: and coopers, sail-makers, rope-makers,



ship-carpenters, net-makers; in short, every one useful to the



undertaking, should be gratuitously taken in for a small share of



the profits; and by their being lodged together in a building, or



town, proper for carrying it on, every workman becomes an



undertaker to the company, for the articles of his own work. No



man concerned directly in the inter-prize, should reside



elsewhere than in the place: any one of the associates may



undertake to furnish what cannot be manufactured at home at fixed



prices. Thus the whole expence of the public in the support of



the undertaking, may circulate through the hands of those who



carry it on; and every one become a check upon another, for the



sake of the dividend upon the general profits. One great



advantage in carrying on undertakings in this manner, is, that



although those concerned draw no profit at all upon the



undertaking itself, they find their account in it, upon the



several branches of their own industry. The herring trade was at



first set on foot in Holland by a company of merchants, who



failed; and their stock of busses, stores, &c. being sold at an



under value, were bought by private people, who had been



instructed (at the expence of the company's miscarriage) in every



part of the trade, and who carried it on with success. Had the



company been set up at first in the manner here mentioned, their



trade never would have suffered any check.



    Quest. 9. What are the principles which influence the



fluctuations in the price of subsistence, in countries where



agriculture, trade, and industry are solidly established? And by



what rule can we form a judgment, when such prices are too high



for the prosperity of manufacturers, and when they are too low



for the interests of agriculture?



    The price of subsistence is fixed, as has been said, (chap.



28 of this book,) by the quantity which can be brought to market,



and the number of those who must buy it. This price may rise and



fall according to circumstances. When the quantity at any time



brought to market, exceeds the demand of the day, the sellers who



are the most pressed for money, lower the price. When the



quantity at any time brought to market, is less than the demand



of the day, the buyers who are the most pressed to have food



raise the price by their competition. In countries of



agriculture, of industry, and of free-trade with the world, such



fluctuations are confined within certain limits, namely, they



cannot rise higher than the faculties of the buyers can afford to



pay for the shortest subsistence; they cannot sink lower than



what the goods can be exported for with profit.



    The faculties of the buyers of subsistence, are very



different; because every man here may be supposed to be a buyer,



except the farmers, and such landlords whose rents are paid in



articles of subsistence. The faculties, therefore, of the lowest



and most numerous class, are these which circumscribe the rising



of the price.



    Let me call the classes who buy, by the letters of the



alphabet a, b, c, d, e, f. If there be subsistence to be sold,



amply sufficient, and no more than sufficient, for these six



classes, which I suppose to be ranged according to the ease of



their circumstances, from a, the highest, to f, the lowest; then



the price of full subsistence will be in proportion to the



faculties of f. Should the provision prove insufficient for the



ample subsistence of all the classes, the price will rise; and f



will be able to buy a part only. But should this part become less



than the shortest subsistence for f, the demand of f would be



withdrawn from the market, which then would be overstocked for



the demand of the higher classes.



    Now in countries of industry, this never can be the case;



because the class f is there the most numerous of any; and before



it can be reduced to the last stage of want, the diminution of



its consumption will far exceed all deficiencies of crops, and



will carry the supply for the higher classes far beyond the



proportion of their demand; and prices will fall: to prevent



which fall, the proprietors of the subsistence mechanically



adjust the price they sell at, to the abilities of the lowest



class to purchase the shortest subsistence; and beyond this



prices never can rise.



    Let me apply this reasoning to the situation of Scotland for



three years preceding March 1768.



    The price of oat-meal, in the southern parts of the country



was, during this period, constantly at or above one shilling per



peck of eight pounds Amsterdam weight; and no misery was



complained of by day-labourers who gain three shillings and



sixpence and four shillings per week. This I reckon the class f



in Scotland. From which I must conclude, that one shilling per



peck of oat-meal, is compatible with the faculties of the Scots



class of f. Again, four shillings per week is 10 l.8s. per annum;



and the usual computation for the food of a strong man in



oat-meal is six bolls one half per annum, (or 832 pounds



Amsterdam weight,) which, at one shilling per peck, is 5 l. 4s.



From this it appears, that in Scotland, and according to the



manner of living in this country, as long as the grain consumed



by our lowest class, does not exceed the value of one half of



their gains, no distress is found. I must further observe, that



this computation as to their gains, regards married men with



wives and children; and as it is a matter of fact, well known



here, that families do subsist on such gains, and at such prices;



the ascertaining of this circumstance is far more useful for



determining the important question concerning the proportion



between the faculties of the lowest classes, and the rate of



subsistence, than any calculation which can be made. From this I



am led to demand, if prices be higher, and wages lower in



England, than with us?



    A quarter of wheat is reckoned for the subsistence of an



inhabitant in England: and in France, where the people live in a



manner upon bread alone, three septiers, or thirteen Winchester



bushels, is a very reasonable allowance. There is also another



very good way of comparing gains in England, with the rate of



markets; namely, by observing how the sober married men among



foot soldiers are found to live.



    If a foot soldier have eight pence per diem, he is in a



higher class than a Scots labourer who gains eight pence per



diem; because he is paid for Sundays, as well as days of sickness



and interruption from labour. The gains of the soldier are four



shillings and eight pence every week in the year, the gains of



the Scots labourer are four shillings, when he meets with no



interruption.



    Now in England, the lowest class, except the foot soldier,



and the most numerous of any in the kingdom, is the country



labourer who gains at least one shilling a day, in all seasons,



of the year; as it appears from a late publication, intitled, 'A



Six Weeks Tower through the Southern Counties of England and



Wales.'



    This author informs us, that in 1767, when high prices were



so much complained of, bread was universally almost, at two-pence



per pound, beef and mutton at four-pence; and that two-pence per



diem is supposed to be equal to small beer; and in p. 179, he



observes, that one shilling per diem the year round, with small



beer, that is to say fourteen pence per diem, is excessively



cheap labour. Now allowing an English labourer one pound and an



half of bread, and three quarters of a pound of meat, with small



beer, the expence will be eight-pence a day; consequently his



food is but one penny more than one half of his wages, and day



labourers are evidently the lowest class of industrious people



all over England. What therefore are we to think of the universal



clamour raised in the nation at that time, upon account of the



distress of the industrious poor? What judgement are we to form



concerning the universal acquiescence to the truth of these



complaints by those who must have been the best informed



concerning the true state of the matter? unless we suppose it to



have been all a mere farce, or what the French call the secret of



the comedy, to wit, a thing which every one knows, although



nobody be supposed either to know it or to believe it.



    The soldiers are evidently the class f in England. But the



number of them is so small, when compared with any of the



industrious classes, especially with the day labourers, that were



it not for the frequent celibacy among them, I am persuaded high



prices would greatly distress them, before any other class of



men. The smallness of their numbers, I say, is an additional



disadvantage to them; because it is the great number of the



lowest class, which (for the reason already given) chiefly



prevents prices from rising above their abilities to purchase a



short subsistence.



    While a foot soldier, then, can subsist upon his pay, at the



rate of the English market, I never shall believe that any class



of industrious people there, can be in such want as to require an



extraordinary relief from the state; one especially which



involves the landed interest (that is the farmers) in so great a



distress, as to have the price of their grain diminished, without



augmenting the quantity of it. This is the material difference



between a reduction of prices when produced by plenty, and when



produced by importation.



    If it be said, that it is great severity to reduce people who



labour hard, to the subsistence of an idle soldier, I answer,



that people who labour hard, and those who added to their



diligence, have also a share of ingenuity in their several



professions, constantly receive wages proportionally higher. The



example of the soldier is taken in order to form an estimate only



of the price at which people may subsist; and not to determine



the rate of wages; which the rate of demand for their labour will



constantly regulate, independently of the price of subsistence;



and this leads me to another branch of this doctrine, which is,



That the rate of wages is in proportion to the value of the work



performed, relatively to the person who employs the workman, and



not in proportion to the price of subsistence.



    This I take to be an universal principle, in all countries of



industry. It is this which distinguishes the industrious free-man



from the poor slave. The industrious free-man must share in the



profits of him who employs him; the poor slave can demand of his



master no more than subsistence.



    Let therefore subsistence be ever so cheap, the free-man will



insist upon wages in proportion to the value of his work, when



brought to market. Should his employer tell him, that because



subsistence is at a low price, he must therefore work cheaper, he



will tell his employer, that since on this account he sells no



cheaper to his customers, neither will he work cheaper for him;



and his argument is good; because were subsistence to rise ever



so high, this would be no inducement to his employer to raise his



wages in proportion, as long as the rate of the market for goods



or labour, stands the same as at other times.



    When the rate of the market for goods or labour is therefore



raised upon any branch of industry; whether in consequence of a



rise in the price of subsistence, or in consequence of a higher



demand; then wages will rise, in spight of all attempts to



circumscribe them. If, on the other hand, the rate of the market



for goods or labour shall either stand the same, or even



diminish, the employer will give no augmentation of wages, let



provisions be ever so dear.



    The poor slave, again, who gets no more than his subsistence



at all times, is in the situation of the poor labouring horse,



who is fed with the same provender, let it be dear or cheap.



    What I have said, I take to be a fair and candid



representation of general principles, which no state can alter:



and when an attempt is made to counteract them, it will not



succeed. Some individuals, indeed, may be relieved by it; but by



stopping a small hole, a breach will be made in another part.



    In every industrious society, the lowest class is frequently



found reduced to the barely necessary. The competition among



themselves to obtain employment at any rate, produces this



effect; and competition must be allowed its free course.



    I must now set forth the strongest objection which can be



made against this whole doctrine; and, in my answer to it, I



shall have an opportunity of explaining my meaning better than as



yet I have done. The objection is this:



    If it be true that in an industrious nation where, upon the



average, grain is annually exported, the price of the shortest



subsistence can at no time rise above the faculties of the lowest



class of those who go to market; then we must say, that no



scarcity whatsoever can there reduce the quantity of subsistence



below what is barely necessary to feed the people.



    Were I at once frankly to avow this consequence, and say,



that in industrious nations, who on the average of years are



subsisted on their own growth, the difference of crops is not



greater than the difference between ample and bare subsistence,



many at first sight, might be startled at so bold an assertion.



    I must therefore say, that where crops are so precarious, as,



in some years, to deprive the people of the shortest subsistence,



no nation can be industrious. What trade, what industry can stand



its ground, while a part of the inhabitants are absolutely



starving?







    I have only one objection more to obviate, which is: That the



supposition I have been reasoning on, to wit that England



produces in the worst years a bare subsistence for all her



inhabitants, cannot be admitted to be true.



    The fact I apprehend to be really so: as I may, however, be



mistaken, I must next propose a proper remedy even against this



problematical want (of) subsistence.



    We cannot reasonably suppose this deficiency to exceed (on



the average of years) the greatest quantity of subsistence that



ever was imported in any one year. Now this quantity is not equal



to 200,000 quarters of all sorts of grain, as has been observed



above. Let government, therefore, be at the expence of laying up



upon the first appearance of plenty, 200,000 quarters of wheat



and rye. Let them be deposited in some of the most considerable



ports in the kingdom, and let none of this quantity ever be sold



cheaper than at the price which at present is thought so high as



to engage us to take off the duties on importation.



    Were it to be issued at a lower rate than this the whole



intention of such granaries would be defeated. Nay, were they to



contain many millions of quarters in place of 200,000, still were



they opened at a cheaper rate than at the highest price which



grain ever ought to bear, they would soon be exhausted; because



it is the high price only which circumscribes the consumption of



the lowest class to the barely necessary, even in the times of



free importation.



    I am very far from wishing to see any industrious person in



distress for want of food. The expedients I have been proposing,



namely the raising of their wages, and establishing a granary,



would, I am persuaded, prove much more certain and salutary



expedients than any other, to prevent so great a distress. But I



think, on the other hand, that the more soberly our lowest



classes are made to live at all times, the cheaper may our



manufactures be sold; and the better will foreign Markets for



them be supplied.



    Every one will acknowledge, that the cheapness of subsistence



is never attended with a proportional fall in the price of



commodities; and many know by experience, that it is more



commonly attended with the riot and idleness of those upon whom



the greatness of this nation principally depends, namely, the



lower classes of our people.



    I shall therefore conclude by observing, First, That the



best, and indeed the only way to judge of reasonable prices, is



to compare, as I have said, the gains of the lower classes with



the price of the shortest subsistence; and that as long as the



latter does not rise above the proportion of the first, nothing



is to be feared. Secondly, That while there remains some small



advantage in this proportion in favour of the lower classes, no



great harm can ensue; but as soon as all proportion is totally



lost, by the low price of provisions, industry runs a great risk



to suffer in place of gaining ground.



    Thirdly, That this proportion is to be maintained by



granaries in years of scarcity, and by bounties in years of



plenty. And, fourthly, That until experience shall evince, that



the expedients here proposed are ineffectual, all importation



should be laid aside, as a remedy violent in its nature;



destructive to agriculture, and tending to diminish the balance



of our trade, with which alone we can discharge the heavy debt we



owe to other nations.



    Bounties which promote exportation, and which raise the



prices of grain to the due proportion of the gains of the lowest



class, even in years of plenty, resemble, in a great measure, an



excise laid upon the luxury of the lower classes. The difference



consists in this; that in bounties, the public incurs an expence,



which not only remains at home, but has the effect of bringing in



a great addition of wealth from our neighbours. This first



circulates among ourselves, and at last finds its way into the



exchequer. An excise again, brings money directly thither,



without any circulation at all among ourselves, which is



undoubtedly less advantageous to a trading nation.



    Importation in England did not, while the ports were open in



1768 produce, I confess, any very hurtful consequences; because



it then happened, that no nation in Europe enjoyed so great



plenty of wheat, as to bring the price of this grain, so low as



to hurt the English farmer. But it was not so in Scotland; where



a very small importation of the poorest subsistence (oat-meal)



will at any time bring our markets so low as to throw many of our



farmers into the greatest distress.











NOTES:







1. The cities of the Austrian Netherlands are, from these causes, at present in a state of depopulation; and the industrious classes are assembling in the villages, which are beginning to rival the populousness of the cities. In these villages, the privileges of the cities are not established. Privileges which will in all probability end in their bankruptcy as well as depopulation. The depopulation will follow from the causes already mentioned; the bankruptcy from the sums these corporations lend to the sovereign, on the credit of new impositions constantly laying upon every branch of consumption. This is so true, that the acquisition of this country (one of the most fertile and most populous in Europe) would hardly be worth the having, if the debts due to the corporations were to be fairly paid, and their ruinous privileges (as they are called) allowed to subsist without alteration. 


