

Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia

by Maxime Kovalevsky

1891




Lecture 5.

Old Russian Parliaments.

    In our last lecture we showed what causes produced the rise
of monarchical power in Russia, and tried to prove that, powerful
as was the autocracy of the Czars of Moscovy, it was limited by
the political rights of the higher nobility. The exercise of
these rights was entrusted to the Douma or Council, and similar
powers in matters ecclesiastical were vested in a High
Commission, often mentioned by the authors of the time under the
name of the consecrated Sobor. This body was composed of the
Metropolitan, Archbishops, Bishops, Archimandrites or vicars of
the bishops, and the heads of the black clergy, the abbots or
chiefs of monastic congregations.
    In the year 1550 these two assemblies of which the one was an
almost complete representation of the higher nobility and
bureaucracy, and the second of the higher clergy, were changed
into a more democratic parliament by the addition of
representatives of the lower nobility, the regular military
force, and the inhabitants of cities and rural districts. We have
very little information as to the reason which induced the
Government to appeal to these "men of the people," as the members
of this assembly were galled by contemporary writers. We are
totally ignorant of its composition, and of the nature of the
business it was called upon to perform. The speech which Ivan the
Terrible delivered in its first session is, however, well known.
In it he accuses the boyars of the misgovernment which
characterised the first years of his reign and throws on them the
whole responsibility for the miseries of the people. He
acknowledged at the same time the impossibility of redressing old
wrongs by judicial means and entreated all classes of the people
to compound for them by means of compromises. The meaning of this
was that all the judges who were accused of illegal decisions,
and officials responsible for administrative wrongs, were
authorised to treat within a fixed time directly with those who
had complained to the Czar of their misrule. So far as appears
from later documents the wish of the Czar was complied with by
all classes of the people. Vast reforms followed this first essay
of representative assemblies; the principle of election, which
had formerly prevailed in the organisation of the commune and the
lower courts of justice, was reintroduced in the form of elected
judges and aldermen (goubnii starosti and zelovalniki). It is
very probable that those men were convened to the first Russian
parliament who had acknowledged the necessity for such reforms,
although we have no contemporary documents to establish this
fact.
    The amount of information we possess about the second Russian
parliament, which was summoned in the year 1566 is much greater.
We know the number of persons convened to it, the different
classes of the people to which they belonged, and the kind of
business they had to perform. We may even guess with a certain
degree of probability the way in which they exercised their
consultative and deliberative functions. In the year 1558 the
Russian military forces were engaged in a war with Poland. This
war had its rise in the disputes of the Teutonic Knights settled
in Livonia, with the growing power of Russia. Losing one after
another their chief fortresses, the Order, through their Grand
Master Gotthard Kettler, entered into correspondence with the
Polish king, Sigismund, and proposed to accept his suzerainty on
condition that he should with his army oppose the further
encroachments of Russia. This offer was accepted, and Russia had
to decide whether she should withdraw from the Livonian
strongholds which were already in her power or go to war with
Poland. Under these circumstances Ivan the Terrible, before
coming to a decision, wished to take the advice not only of the
higher clergy, the members of his Douma, and the high officers of
State, with the treasurers and secretaries at their head. but
also of the lower nobility, the class directly engaged in
military service, and those of the third estate, whose business
it was to collect the taxes from the urban population.
    If we scrutinise the composition of this second Russian
Parliament, we are startled by the fact that with the exception
of three gentlemen from Toropeczk, six from Louczk, and
twenty-two citizens from the city of Smolensk, all its members
were persons residing in Moscow Russian historians have generally
explained this anomaly by saying that the Government, having no
time to await the arrival of deputies from the provinces,
contented itself with consulting such military men as were then
present at Moscow, exception being made only as to the
inhabitants of some western cities and districts whose interests
were directly engaged in the impending war. Such was the case
with Smolensk, Louczk, and Toropeczk. If this was so, the
Assembly of 1566 would have no right to figure in the list of
Russian Parliaments, being nothing but a local Assembly,
something like those "etats generaux fractionnes," which were
known in France during a great part of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries. But such is not really the case.(1*) The way
in which the military class was represented at the Parliament of
1566 finds its explanation in the organisation of the army at
that time. It was then composed of five regiments, quartered in
different provinces, each regiment containing a greater or
smaller number of "district hundreds." The hundred was not a
numerical, but a local division. As a rule, the headship of every
hundred was entrusted, not to a local military man, but to some
Moscovite nobleman, residing in the metropolis, but possessing
estates in the district to which the hundred belonged. Under the
circumstances I have described, the Czar, before going into the
new war, was naturally desirous of consulting the men who had the
local command of his army, those Moscovite noblemen who were
placed at the head of the local hundreds. Their usual place of
abode being the metropolis, it is easy to understand why
inhabitants of Moscow were almost the only men summoned to attend
the Parliament. When the Sobor was convened the army had just
returned from its last expedition against Lithuania and all the
military chiefs would then be in Moscow. These chiefs, as has
been already mentioned, were paid for their services not by a
fixed salary, but by donations of land granted for the term of
service, which practically amounted to a life tenure, and were
known by the name of pomestie.(2*) The quantity of land
corresponded to the position held in the ranks of the army. Some
received only one hundred and fifty desiatin,(3*) some two
hundred and twenty-five, some even three hundred, and these
differences led to the division of the military classes into
three groups called statii. The Sobor of 1566 contained
ninety-seven members from the first class and ninety-nine of the
second; among the lower group we find only thirty-five from
Toropeczk and six from Louzck.
    As to the third estate, it was represented by seventy-five
men, all belonging to the Moscovite trading class. The reason of
this must be sought in the contemporary organisation of the
Russian bourgeoisie. During the second part of the sixteenth
century we find in Moscow two different classes of tradesmen: one
known under the name of "hosts" (gosti), the other under that of
"merchants" (koupzi). Both classes contained in their ranks not
only Moscovite tradesmen, but also tradesmen from other cities.
The wealthy and influential merchants of the whole empire were
inscribed in the list of the "hosts," the rest composed that of
the "merchants." This latter class was sub-divided into Moscovite
and Smolensk merchants, the latter being those, whose commerce
was chiefly confined to the western provinces of Russia and its
natural head Smolensk. In the sixteenth century these same
sub-divisions re-appear under somewhat different names, the one
being called the hundred of "hosts" (gostinnaia sotnia) and the
other the hundred of "drapers" (soukonnaia sotnia). The divisions
I have mentioned were the work of the central government, which
regarded the wealthier merchants as its direct helpers in the
difficult task of collecting customs and excise duties.
    No person belonging to the Guild of "hosts" could refuse to
perform these heavy and responsible duties. The man, on whom the
choice of his companions fell, was obliged to remove to the city
whose taxes he had to collect. So that the exercise of such
functions might be entrusted to persons of great local influence,
the election fell, as a rule, on a merchant possessing estates or
large stocks of merchandise in the city which he was called to
administer. Like the guild of hosts, the guilds of Moscovite and
Smolensk merchants were called upon to assist the Government in
the exercise of its financial authority and accordingly elected
among themselves the officers of the excise and customs
administration of the smaller urban districts.
    It is easy to understand that before engaging in a new war,
which would necessarily cause new and heavy expenses, the Czar
would desire to obtain information as to the pecuniary resources
of the country from those persons whose duty it would be to
collect the taxes. He, therefore, summoned to the Sobor the
tradesmen of the Guild of hosts and also the Moscovite and
Smolensk merchants, or, in other words, all those who had the
charge of collecting the revenues of indirect taxation, not only
in the metropolis, but throughout the empire. Composed as it was
of the high officials, the members of the council, the
archbishops, bishops, archimandrites, abbots, and the local heads
of the military and financial administration, the Sobor of 1566
was not so much the representative of the people as of the
governing class. It is, therefore, difficult to speak of its
analogy with the representative assemblies of Western Europe,
though some of the elements of which it was composed, are to be
found both in the Swedish and the German parliaments. In Sweden
the army was called upon to send its generals, colonels, and even
its majors to the sittings, at least from 1598 to 1778.(4*) In
the German Landestande, as well as in the Swedish States-General,
the cities were regularly represented by their officers, the
Rathmanner, members of the city council, or Ratta borgare, as
they were called in Sweden, just as the French cities and
boroughs were usually represented in the Etats Generaux, not by
elected deputies, but by their maires, echevins and consuls.(5*)
    Now that we are acquainted with the manner in which the first
Sobor, this real assembly of notables, was composed, let us take
a look at its proceedings. The question on which the Czar wanted
advice was whether he should engage in a new war with Poland, or
whether it would be better for him to restore to Kasimir the
cities which he had conquered in Lithuania. Each estate had to
give a separate answer. The clergy declared itself in favour of
war. They maintained that Livonia had always belonged to Russia,
a preposterous claim which was plainly contradicted by history.
Whilst insisting on the impossibility of concluding peace on the
terms proposed by Kasimir, they declared themselves incapable of
judging what means the Government ought to take for the safety of
its new conquests. "The Czar alone must decide the matter. It is
not our business to advise him on such questions, but to pray God
for the success of his undertakings." This plainly meant that
they feared a new imposition of subsidies, and had no desire to
take on themselves the initiative of this taxation.
    The boyars gave a similar answer. "It is impossible," said
they, "to leave in the hands of the Polish king the newly
conquered German cities, for in that case the important Russian
fortress of Polozk situated on the Dvina, would remain surrounded
by the lands of the enemy." They also declared themselves ready
to serve the Czar whatever might be his decision. "God alone and
the Czar," such was their conclusion, "ought to have the last
word in this matter." Some dissentient members of the Douma
presented their own opinion in writing. The noblemen of the first
and second class or statii, also expressed their opinions in two
different papers and were unanimous in their desire to retain the
Livonian cities. Those of Toropeczk and Louczk, who were more
directly concerned in the matter, declared that they would
sacrifice their lives for a single "dessiatine" of the cities
surrounding Polozk which were claimed by the Polish king. The
hosts and merchants of Moscow and Smolensk were not less
patriotic in their sentiments, the latter particularly insisting
on the impossibility of leaving Polozk without a territorial
district attached to it. "A village cannot exist without its own
district and still less a fortress," said they. "If the king of
Poland gets the territory of Polozk that city will be of no use
to the Russians, and nothing will prevent the king building a new
fortress just opposite the Russian fortress."
    The general result of the conference was that the Czar
decided on war.
    We find no other General Assembly in the reign of Ivan the
Terrible, but we must not infer from that fact that the Czar
altogether forbore to apply to the people. On two different
occasions we find him addressing the mob of Moscow, once in 1564,
in order to get their approval of the prosecution of the boyars
for their supposed treason against the State and open plundering
of the people; and a second time to ascertain their feelings on
the occasion of a fresh discomfiture of the Russian troops by the
Poles and the loss, not only of Livonia, but of Polozk and
Smolensk. This last convention was in the year 1597 and was the
occasion of a long and patriotic speech delivered, in the name of
the Czar, by his secretary Schelkalov. This speech, which
announced the loss of thousands of Russian soldiers, produced a
great impression, chiefly on the women, who, fearing their
husbands were dead, went crying through the streets and asking
for new ones. Whereupon the secretary made a second speech in
which he threatened to have them flogged if they did not cease
their lamentations. We thus find the experiment of admitting the
people to the discussion of public affairs degenerating, either
into appeals to the Moscow mob to sanction, by its consent, acts
of cruelty towards the members of the higher nobility, or into
threats of flogging made to poor weeping women in their
bereavement.
    It is difficult to discover in the facts which I have just
related any resemblance to a regular consultation of the people
in Parliament assembled. The meetings are more like a parody of
the ancient folkmotes, the veche.
    The representative system remained unknown to Russia
throughout the sixteenth century. The Assembly which in 1584
confirmed the right of the eldest son of Ivan, Theodor, to occupy
the Russian throne, although called "a parliament" by the English
Resident Hoarsav was, according to the same author, composed of
nothing but the chief clergy and members of the higher and lower
nobility. Another assembly, that of 1585, called to deliberate on
the question of clerical immunities and the necessity for
subjecting the lands of monasteries to general taxation,
contained in its ranks only the higher clergy, the chief officers
of the State, and the members of the Council or Douma.
    The Rurik family became extinct on the death of the Czar
Theodor, and a new dynasty had to be chosen. The higher nobility
seized this opportunity to impose certain limitations on the
exercise of the Sovereign power. But the nearest candidate to the
throne, Boris Godounov, not being willing to consent to such
limitations, refused to accept the throne offered him by the
boyars and insisted on the necessity of summoning the cities to
decide who should occupy the throne of the Rurik family. He did
this in the expectation that the people would oppose any measure
limiting the principle of autocracy. The Sobor, which was called
together according to his wish, was widely different from the
ideal of a truly National Assembly. Of the 457 members who were
present at its sittings, 83 belonged to the higher clergy, and
338 to the bureaucracy and the higher and lower nobility. As to
the third estate, it was composed of only 21 hosts, of the head
of the Guild of hosts and of 13 deputies from the rural
districts. This assembly was presided over by the Patriarch, the
Chief of the Russian clergy,and unanimously expressed itself
favourable to Boris Godounov, to whom the Russian throne was
offered unconditionally.
    Representatives of the lower classes of the city of Moscow
appeared in 1605 at the Sobor to which the false Demetrius
entrusted the right of judging the boyar and future Czar,
Basilius Schouisky, on account of a rebellion which he had
instigated. The Sobor condemned Schouisky to death, but the Czar
Demetrius commuted this punishment to perpetual banishment to the
City of Viatka, whence he soon returned at the gracious order of
the monarch.
    The Assembly which in 1606, after the death of the false
Demetrius, elected Schouisky as the Czar of Russia, was not a
Sobor in the true sense of the word, for it was chiefly composed
of the boyars. The Moscow mob nevertheless sanctioned the
election, and the new Czar was eagerly proclaimed at the
so-called "read place," in front of the palace.
    This election of Schouisky has some claim to our attention,
as it was the first at which constitutional limits were imposed
on Russian autocracy. The newly elected Czar had no immediate
relation with the dynasty of Rurik, and was but the equal of the
other boyars. He was known to be vindictive and to have a great
number of relations and friends who would be ready enough to make
use of his power for their own advantage. All this induced the
boyars to protect their own interests by the creation of rules
which their nominee was obliged to accept. According to
Strahlenberg, the well-known author of the "historical and
Geographical Description of the Northern and Eastern parts of
Europe and Asia" (a book written in German and published at
Stockholm in the year 1703), the constitutional limitations
imposed were as follows: "No new law was to be made and no
innovations were to be introduced in the old legislation without
the consent of the Douma. (Strahlenberg calls it senatus.) No new
contributions were to be levied unless previously discussed and
accepted by the same Council."(6*) These constitutional
limitations as you may easily perceive, were exactly the same as
those established in England by the Magna Charta and the statute
of Edward the First, de tallagio non concedendo, but whilst the
English people entrusted the care of their liberty to the lords,
gentlemen, and citizens in Parliament assembled, the Russian
boyars wanted to keep to themselves the exclusive control of the
sovereign power. This caused the failure of their constitution,
and was the chief reason why, on the occasion of a new election,
the control of the Constitutional compromise entered into by the
people and the Czar, was no longer entrusted to the Douma of the
boyars, but to the representative Assembly of the whole nation --
that is to the Sobor.
    Schouisky reigned only a few years. In 1610 he lost the crown
by the decision of a new Assembly which assumed the title of
Zemski Sobor, although it was chiefly composed of the boyars and
the Moscow mob. This took place in the middle of July. A month
later a treaty was signed by the boyars and the chief of the
Polish army, by which Vladislas, son of Sigismund, king of
Poland, was called to the throne of Russia. Like his predecessor,
the new Czar accepted certain constitutional limitations, amongst
others that of administering justice according to the existing
customs and the rules by law established. No alterations in the
latter could be made, except with the consent of the Council
(Douma) of "the whole land." These last words meant the Zemski
Sobor, the States-General or Parliament of Russia.
    I shall not attempt to narrate the events which prevented the
accession of a Polish and Catholic prince to the throne of
Russia. It will be enough for my purpose to state that the people
and the clergy were unanimous in their dislike to this foreign
and "heretical" ruler. The folkmotes, or veches, not only in
Novgorod, but also in those parts where they had hitherto been
quite unknown, as in Kasan, or Nijni Novgorod, entered into
correspondence with each other, local militia united, and an
army, called into existence by the patriotic sentiments of simple
burgesses like Minin, marched from Nijni Novgorod to Moscow,
under the command of Pojarsky. At the same time a correspondence
was begun with the object of forming a new Sobor, which was to be
a really representative body, composed of delegates sent by all
the estates. The writs of summons sent out by the head of the
army, Pojarsky, have fortunately been preserved, so that we can
get a clear notion of what was meant at that time by the term
"General Council of the land," a term employed more than once in
the documents of the time. Addressing the people of Poutivl or of
Wichegodsk, the commander-in-chief insists on the necessity of
sending to Jaroslav, the place selected for the meeting of the
new Assembly, two or three men from each of the estates (chinov)
of the nation. From Jaroslav the Sobor, following the army,
removed to Moscow, where it sat in common with the boyars of the
council, the high commission of the clergy (osviaschenini Sobor),
and the representatives of the regular and irregular military
forces, that is, the Strelzi and the Cossacks. It was this
Assembly which elected Michael Theodorovich Romanov to be Czar of
Russia.
    Before proceeding to the election of the Czar, the Sobor
called on all the inhabitants of the country to fast for three
consecutive days. It then passed a law, due mainly to the
influence of the popular section of the Assembly, prohibiting the
election of any foreign prince. The nobility would have had no
objection to the placing of a Swedish or Polish pretender on the
vacant throne. The higher and lower orders differed widely as to
the man they wished to choose from among the Russian boyars; the
names of Golitzin, Vorotinsky, Troubezkoy, and even that of the
dethroned Basilius Schouisky, were, for a time, to be found on
the list of candidates supported by the nobility. The first to
declare himself in favour of the young Romanov was one of his
relations named Scheremetiev, and his proposal was favourably
listened to by the lower nobility, the Cossacks and the
burgesses. His election, however, was so unexpected an event that
his own father, a bishop then closely imprisoned by the Poles,
was the first to suggest, in a letter written to Scheremetiev,
that certain constitutional limits should be imposed On the power
of the future Czar. Strahlenberg(7*) is quite correct in his
statement that the idea of these limitations was borrowed from
Poland where already in the middle of the sixteenth century,
under Stephen Bathory, the States-General, or Seim, and the
Council possessed considerable rights. The reasons which operated
in favour of the young Michael Romanov were, first of all, his
relationship with the extinct dynasty of Rurik through his great
aunt, Anastasia Romanov, who was one of the wives of ivan the
Terrible; secondly, the small number of relations which was
looked upon as a safeguard against further depredations on the
demesne lands in the form of beneficiary donations; and thirdly,
the popularity of his family, which had been persecuted by the
boyars from the time of Boris Godounov. His father, Philarete,
who had been forced to become a monk, was especially endeared to
the nation by his virtues; he had attained a high position among
the clergy, having been made Bishop of Jaroslav.
    The late Patriarch Germogen, who had been much beloved by the
people, had also been favourably disposed towards the election of
young Romanov, and this fact contributed greatly to secure him
the sympathy of the clergy. At the time of his election Michael
was but a boy of fifteen, and his father being a prisoner in
Magdeburgh, Scheremetiev and the members of his party looked upon
it as highly probable that the real government would pass into
their hands.
    The Sovereign power which was offered to young Romanov was
far from being the same as that enjoyed by Ivan the Terrible.
Autocratic power had had to yield before the new theories of
constitutional limitations directly imported from Poland. That
Michael had to sign a compromise is a fact briefly mentioned by
Russian eye-witnesses, such as Kotoschichin, as well as by
foreigners then residing in Russia. The chronicles of the city of
Pskov speak of it in contemptuous terms. It was not enough, say
they, for the boyars to have reduced the country to the miserable
state to which they had brought it. They wanted to go on in the
same way of pillage and oppression; they had no regard for the
Czar, did not fear him on account of his youth, and all the more
so since they had induced him, at the time of his accession to
the throne, to take an oath, by which he renounced the right of
inflicting capital punishment on persons belonging to the higher
nobility. Capital punishment was to be superseded by close
imprisonment. No mention is made in the chronicles of any further
limitation of the Sovereign power of the Czar.
    The well-known Kotoschichin, who was alive at the time,
speaking of the accession of the Czar Alexis, son of Michael
Romanov, notices the fact that, "contrary to the custom
established by his predecessor, the new Czar signed no charter by
which he undertook to inflict capital punishment only in
accordance with law and justice, and to consult the boyars and
men of the Douma on each and every question concerning the
government of the land, so that no decision might be come to
without their assent." Although Kotoschichin speaks more
positively as to the constitutional character of the limitations
imposed on Russian autocracy in the first quarter of the
seventeenth century, we must notice the fact that he says nothing
of the part which the Sobor or Parliament was called upon to play
in this experiment in limited monarchy. He mentions only the
boyars and the men of the Douma, not "those of the land," a
phrase used at that time when speaking of the members of the
Zemski Sobor.
    The Swedish writer, Fokkerodt, is more explicit when he
affirms that in the compromise signed by Michael, the young Czar
promised to give free course to the judicial proceedings of the
courts, so as to inflict no punishment on his own authority, to
introduce no new law without the consent of the Sobor, to abstain
from levying any tax without the consent of this representative
Assembly, and to begin no war without its counsel and
approbation.
    As to Strahlenberg, his statement is as follows: Before the
coronation Michael was forced to accept the following conditions:
He promised to (1) uphold and protect the existing creed of
Russia; (2) to keep no memory of injuries inflicted on his
family, to forget and to forgive all past animosities; (3) He
took also the obligation to make no new laws or alter old ones,
and to take no important measure which might contradict the
existing laws, or suspend the legal proceedings of the court of
justice. (4) He promised as well  to begin no wars and to make no
peace by his own will.(8*)
    This view of the power of the Sobor is confirmed by the fact
of its quasi-permanent presence at Moscow during the whole reign
of the first Romanov. The laws and proclamations issued at that
time generally contain the following characteristic expression:
"According to our order (oukas) and the decision of the whole
land (po vsei zemli prigovorou)." The whole land cannot mean
anything else than the representatives in Parliament assembled.
    Many important questions were discussed and settled by the
Sobor. In the first years of the reign want of money obliged the
Czar more than once to have recourse to forced loans and
benevolences. These were levied side by side with the regular
taxes on the goods of merchants and peasants (torgovii i soschnii
liudi); the taxes received the consent of the Sobor, the
benevolences were endorsed by it. The nomination of a new
Patriarch in 1619 was also their work. The annals of the time
tell us that the boyars, the dignitaries of the Court, and all
the people of the "Moscovite State" called on Michael and asked
him to induce his father Philarete to accept the primacy of the
Russian church. Two years later, in 1621, a new Sobor was
consulted on the question as to whether Russia should go to war
with Poland. The Estates gave an answer in the affirmative, but
the want of money and soldiers forced the Government to postpone
the execution of this decision.
    From 1622 the Sobors lose their character of quasi-constant
assemblies, each remaining in session for several years and begin
to be called only on special occasions, whenever their services
were required for the settlement of important questions of State.
    In 1632 war with Poland necessitated the levying of new
subsidies. The Sobor Was accordingly assembled and gave its
consent to the imposition of a general tax on all the estates of
the empire, on the tradesmen as on the "men of service." The
amount of money to be demanded from the latter was not fixed;
each person could pay what he liked. The sums produced by the tax
were intended for the payment of the army. During the next two
years we find the Sobor consulting the Czar on matters of war and
taxation, on the relations of the land with Poland and the
Tartars of the Crimea. The Czar complained of the ill-treatment
to which his envoy was subjected by the Khan. The superior
clergy, whose answer alone has been preserved, insisted on the
necessity of building fortresses on the Southern boundaries of
the Moscovite empire, in those cities of the Ukraine, which like
Belgorod or Voroneg, remained for centuries the pioneers of
Christianity and culture in the southern steppes of Russia, and
which were periodically plundered by the Tartars.
    Two years later the military occupation of Asov by the
Cossacks of the Don and the impending necessity of a war with the
Crimean Tartars for the preservation of the conquest, caused a
new Sobor to be convened. This Assembly was in favour of war and
accordingly ordered the levy of military forces, "even from the
villages belonging to the crown land and the lands of the
clergy." In 1642 matters concerning the fortress of Asov again
became the immediate cause of a new assembling of the Russian
Estates. As the Turks had no intention of leaving Asov in the
hands of the Cossacks, who were not able to hold it themselves,
the question of annexing it to the Russian state suggested itself
to the Government, though it involved the risk of incurring the
responsibility of a new and almost imminent war. The Czar finding
it necessary to know the feeling of the nation, summoned one
hundred and ninety-five persons elected by the Estates, besides
the Douma or Privy Council and the superior clergy, to Moscow.
Nearly all classes of society sent representatives, each class
gave its opinion or advice separately on papers bearing the
signatures of all the members of the same Estate, while the
dissentients sent in their opinions on separate and private
papers.
    The superior clergy, faithful to their old habits, assured
the Czar that they were quite unable to advise him on the
question; it was not, they said, their custom to do So, for it
was the Business of the Czar and his Douma; their sole duty was
to invoke God's blessing on the Czar's undertakings. Should the
Czar, however, want military aid, they declared themselves ready
to make the necessary sacrifices in order to pay the soldiers,
and that according to their means. The majority of the Moscovite
nobility expressed themselves in favour of annexation. The Czar
ought to hold the newly acquired fortress, but he should merely
order the Cossacks to continue their occupation of it. Volunteers
alone ought to be necessary to give help and assistance. Some
advised that soldiers should Be sent to Asov, not only from the
cities of the Ukraine, but even from Moscow. All sorts of men,
with the exception of serfs and such as had lost their liberty
through not having paid their debts, ought to be selected for
that purpose. If money were wanted, each Estate ought to nominate
two or three persons whom the Czar might authorise to levy
subsidies from all persons and goods, from officers (prikasnii)
and the Czar's suite, from widows and orphans, from "hosts" and
merchants, and from each and every person not engaged in military
service.
    Some of the nobility, amongst others those of Vladimir,
simply promised to obey the Czar's orders, pointing at the same
time to the miserable state of their cities and country, which
they said was wellknown to the Czar and to the boyars of his
Douma. Much more peremptory was the advice given by the local
nobility of certain larger cities, such as Sousdal, Juriev (the
modern Dorpat), Novgorod, and Rostov. They were of opinion that
the surrender of Asov would bring down the wrath of God: "The
Czar cannot leave in the hands of the infidels," said they, "the
holy images of John the Baptist and of St. Nicholas." If the army
wanted victuals they might be taken out of the magazines
belonging to the cities of the Ukraine. Military aid could be
given from Moscow and the expenses for the victualling of the
army ought to be laid upon the whole land, without exception.
Complaining of the great quantity of land given in benefices to
the boyars and of the large amount of money got by bribes and
extortions by the officers of the State (prikasnii), who
afterwards invested it in vast buildings and palaces, the
burgesses insisted on the necessity of laying part of the burden
of the future war on the shoulders of that class, and of obliging
them to arm the soldiers; they maintained, moreover, that their
fortunes should be taxed like those of all other classes of the
State. The same measures ought also to be taken with the clergy,
the bishops and abbots being equally called on to equip warriors,
according to the number of serfs they possessed. The Czar ought
to issue an ukase, stating the number of serfs a soldier ought to
possess, or rather the proportion existing between the number of
his serfs and the service required of him. This proportion should
be strictly maintained in future, and those who had not serfs
enough ought to receive new gifts of serfs from the government.
Money for purposes of war, they also insisted, might be taken out
of the treasuries of the Patriarch and the monasteries.
    The lower nobility, or what is the same thing, the men-of-war
of the cities of Toula, Kolomna, Serpouchov, Riazan, Kalouga,
etc., were even more precise in their demands that the proportion
of military service should tally with the number of serfs which
each man-of-war or knight possessed. Those who had over fifty
serfs ought to serve without pay, and also contribute to the
expenses of the war by supplying food to the army, whist those
who had not more than fifty ought to be free from the latter
obligation.
    If we turn our attention to the "written opinions" given in
by the members of the third estate, we find them complaining of
the miserable state into which they had recently fallen, partly
because all the commerce of Moscow was in the hands of
foreigners, and partly because of the oppression of the voivodes,
or Governors of provinces, who had superseded the freely elected
heads of districts (the goubnii starosti of the sixteenth
century). The delegates of the hosts and merchants of Moscow
nevertheless insist on the necessity of holding Asov, pointing
out at the same time that they receive no lands from the Crown,
and have more trouble than profit in the levying of taxes and
excise duties, and generally suggesting to the Czar the
impossibility of increasing their payments.
    The "memorial" of the hundredmen and headmen of the black
hundreds and townships, under which name must be understood the
representatives of the rural population, contains more or less
the same complaints and similar desires. The people are exhausted
by taxes, forced labour, military service, etc.; they have also
suffered much from fire; the voivodes have ruined them by their
exactions; so miserable is their condition that many of them have
run away, leaving their houses and lands. The conclusion of this
very interesting document has unfortunately not come down to us.
    Our general impression on reading the memorials or petitions
of this Sobor is that, although all Estates were unanimous in
their patriotic desire to keep their hold on the newly conquered
fortress, they still felt themselves scarcely in a position to
bear the expense of a new war with the Turks; and sharing in
these apprehensions the Czar did not dare to incur the
responsibility, and sent orders to the Cossacks to withdraw from
Asov.
    The Sobor of 1642 was the last general Assembly convened by
the first of the Romanovs.
    Although the direct successor of Michael, Alexis
Michaelovich, ascended the throne without entering into any
covenant with his people, nevertheless the Sobor was called to
confirm the act of his coronation. This happened in 1645. Four
years later the Sobor was called upon to aid in the important
business of codification. Modern inquirers have brought to light
the fact that the petitions presented at this Assembly more than
once furnished important materials for the reformation of the
Russian law, and that their influence may be traced through the
whole code of Alexis (known under the title of Oulogenie). During
the following year the Sobor was again convened at Moscow in
order to advise the Government as to the suppression of
insurrectionary movements in different parts of the empire, and
especially at Pskov. The Assembly advised lenient treatment of
the insurgents, and the Government acted accordingly.
    In 1651 and 1653 the Sobor on two different occasions
declared itself in favour of the annexation of Little Russia.
This country had been liberated from the Poles by the "Hetman" of
the Cossacks, Bogdan Chmelnizky, who soon afterwards offered it
to the Czar of Russia. It was feared that the acceptance of this
offer might involve Russia in a new war with Poland; therefore
the advice of the Sobor of 1651 was only conditional. If Poland
acquiesced in the demands of the Czar, Russia was to abstain from
annexation; if not, the risk of a new war ought not to be
avoided, and Christian brethren were to be taken under the
protection of the orthodox Czar. Three years later, when the
Polish king Jan Kasimir entered into direct alliance with the
ancient enemies of Russia -- the Swedes and the Crimean Tartars
-- and when therefore no doubt could be entertained as to the
necessity for war, the Sobor openly invited the Czar to take the
Hetman and the Cossacks of the Dnieper "under his high hand,
together with their cities and lands, and that in order to
preserve the true Orthodox Church." The delegates spoke of their
readiness to fight the Polish king and to lose their lives for
the honour of the Czar.
    The Sobor of 1653 was the last general Assembly called in the
time of Alexis. Following the example of bis predecessors, the
Czar on several occasions also convened representatives of one
single estate to consult with them on matters directly concerning
their order. Such an assembly of notables sat in Moscow in the
year 1617. It consisted chiefly of Moscovite merchants. It was
convened to hear the opinion of Russian tradesmen as to the
desirability of granting to English merchants trading in Moscow,
and to their chief agent, John Merrick, the right of making
explorations in search of a new road to China and India "by way
of the river Ob." The majority of the delegates were opposed to
the project.
    The same feeling of animosity towards foreigners found its
expression in 1626, when on the demand of English merchants to be
allowed to trade with Persia, the members of the guild of guests
and the Moscow merchants insisted on the necessity of upholding
the monopoly which the Moscovite tradesmen enjoyed in going to
Astrachan to buy Persian goods. The majority of the merchants
declared themselves unable to compete with foreign merchants, and
even the minority were of opinion that if free trade were
permitted to English traders in return for large payments made by
them to the crown, this liberty ought not to be extended to the
traffic in Russian commodities. Half a century later, in 1667,
the same Moscovite merchants, consulted by Alexis, stoutly
opposed the demand of Armenian merchants for free trade in
Persian commodities, and begged the Government not to endanger
their own trade by foreign competition. Ten years later the
Moscow tradesmen, together with the delegates of the black
hundreds and villages, were called together to give their opinion
as to the causes which tended to raise the price of corn. They
complained of engrossers and asked that their practices might be
forbidden in future. They also spoke of the great damage
agriculture had sustained through recent wars. The increase in
the number of distilleries was also mentioned as one of the
principal reasons for the dearness of corn.
    In 1681-2 the "men of service" were convened together with
the Douma to reform the military administration. it was this
memorable Assembly which abolished the old custom of appointing
men to the chief posts in the army, not according to their
personal merit, but to the rank of their family, and the length
of time it had served the State; and which also ordered the
heraldic books to be burnt.
    The last instances we have of the convening of the Russian
Sobors belong to the period of Eternal trouble which followed the
death of the Czar Theodore. In 1682 a Sobor to which the
inhabitants of Moscow alone were summoned, pronounced itself in
favour of the occupation of the vacant throne by the youngest son
of Alexis, the future emperor, Peter the Great. A new Assembly,
which in its composition answered even less than its predecessor
to the idea of a general representative council, was convoked a
few months later by the party that favoured the political designs
of the Princess Sophia, sister to Peter the Great. It insisted on
the division of the sovereign power between the two brothers of
Theodore, Peter and John. Princess Sophia became from that time
the real ruler of the empire. Again Moscow alone was represented
though the Acts speak of the presence of delegates from all the
provinces and cities of the empire.
    It was in 1698 that the Sobor was convoked for the last time.
It was called together to pronounce judgment on the Princess
Sophia who, during the absence of Peter the Great in the Western
States of Europe, had tried by the help of the strelzi (a kind of
Life-Guards) to seat herself on the Russian throne. The only
contemporary writer who mentions this Assembly is a German of the
name of Korb, who was secretary of the German Legation. According
to him the young monarch insisted on this occasion on the
presence of two delegates from each of the Estates, beginning
with the highest and ending with the lowest. Unfortunately no
information has come down to us as to the decision arrived at by
this quasi-general representative body of the Russian people.
    One fact especially merits our attention: The Sobors were
never abolished by law. They simply ceased to exist just as did
the States-General of France from the beginning of the
seventeenth (1613) to the end of the eighteenth century. No legal
act, therefore, lies in the way of a new convocation of the
representatives of the empire. Should the present Emperor convoke
them, in so doing he would be in perfect accord with the first
founders of his dynasty, and also with the promises contained in
the Magna Charta of the first Romanov.
    Turning from the political history of the old Russian
Parliaments, we will now consider their internal constitution. As
we have seen, the seventeenth century introduced a complete
change in their composition. During the reign of Ivan the
Terrible the administrative and military classes had alone been
represented; from the time of the interregnum they became
meetings of delegates from all the different Estates. The
following were the classes of the people who were represented:
the superior clergy, the higher nobility, the lower clergy, and
the lower nobility, or what is the same thing the ministerial or
knightly class as they were called at that time, the three Guilds
of Moscovite merchants, the citizens of the different urban
districts and, on two different occasions, in 1614 and 1682, the
black hundreds and villages, which meant in the technical
language of the time, the peasants established on the lands of
the State. Serfs, and persons who had lost their personal liberty
on account of debts or any other reason, were never admitted to
the right of representation. The army was very often represented
by delegates from the regular regiments, such as the strelzi, and
some irregular troops, the Cossacks for instance. The large
extent of the Russian dominions and the consequent remoteness of
certain places from the metropolis, was a natural barrier to the
appearance of certain delegates at the Sobor. It was for this
reason that the cities of Siberia remained without
representation. Other places less remote got exemption from the
duty of choosing delegates on account of the bad state of the
roads and the difficulty and even danger connected with
travelling. Some few considered it a great burden, on account of
the expense of the journey and the maintenance of the delegates.
In this they acted like those mediaeval English cities and
boroughs, which under the Plantagenets did their best to shirk
the duty of representation. The number of persons sent by each
electoral circuit was not strictly fixed. Generally the writs of
summons speak of two or three delegates.
    The electoral district was, as a rule, the city and its
outlying parts. Larger cities, as Novgorod, constituted by
themselves several districts; in Novgorod there were no less than
five such districts. The Metropolis (Moscow) was largely
represented by delegates from the lower nobility, by those of the
three classes of Moscovite traders and the representatives of the
black hundreds and villages.
    The writs of summons were addressed to the voivodes, or
Governors of provinces, and to the goubnii starosti, or elective
district heads.
    To give you a clear notion of the mode in which the elections
were managed, I will translate one of these writs. The writ in
question was issued on the 9th of September, 7128, counting from
the beginning of the world (that is the year 1619): "In the name
of the Czar Michael, the voivode of Oustujna, named Boutourlin,
is ordered to elect among the clergy, one man or two, and from
the nobility (the sons of boyars) two persons, and two more from
the inhabitants of the urban district (posadskii liudi). The
persons must be well-to-do and intelligent, capable of narrating
the wrongs they have sustained, and the oppression and
destruction which they have suffered. The election rolls must be
sent by the voivode to Moscow, and should be received not later
than on St. Nicholas's day."
    The voivode, or goubuoi starosta, as soon, as the writ was in
his hands, summoned the electors and ordered them to proceed to
the nomination of their delegates. Each estate or order acted
separately. In answer to the writs they had received, the
voivodes sent in a detailed account of the election proceedings.
Several of these very interesting documents have been found in
the archives of the Ministry of Justice in Moscow. Professor
Latkin has published a great many of them in his valuable
"Materials for a history of the Sobors," and, in reading them,
the conclusion is arrived at, that the election as a rule was
made by the Estates themselves, without the intervention of the
voivode or oubnoi storasta. "The nobility of voroneg," states the
voivode of this place, Prince Alexis Krapotkin, in the year 1651,
"have elected from among themselves two persons, the one called
Trofim Michnev, and the other Theodor Philoppof. The citizens
only one person named Sacharof, and I, your Majesty's slave
(cholop), have sent you these three men to Moscow." The action of
those voivodes, who, instead of consulting the electors,
proceeded to a direct nomination of the delegates, was sometimes
disavowed. Such was, for instance, the case of the voivode of
Kropivna, a certain Astafiev. In the letters sent to him in the
name of the Government, he was greatly blamed for having
misunderstood the orders given to him, "the nobility were asked
to elect a good nobleman from among themselves, and you had no
justification for making the nomination of the delegate
yourself."
    The delegate belonged, as a rule, to the same estate as his
elector, but it sometimes happened that on account of the small
number of persons capable of supporting the burden of
representation, a person of another order was intrusted with the
duty of delegate. The voivodes and starostas mention more than
once such facts as the following. In 1651 the starosta of
Zvenigorod, Elizar Marcov, declares in a letter addressed to the
Czar, that it was impossible for him to nominate a delegate from
among the inhabitants of the city district (posadskii liudi), for
the best of them were engaged in masonry work at the Storojevoy
monastery, accomplishing their "hedge duty," which they owed to
the crown (ograduaia povinnost). Another starosta from Kropivna
wrote at the same time, that in his district the number of city
residents was not more than three. They were all very poor and
gained their livelihood by going from one household to another to
work at cleaning the court-yards. Therefore, he found it more
suitable to name a gentleman to represent them at the Sobor.
    The delegates, as a rule, received instructions called
Nakasi, in which the electors stated their opinions on the chief
subjects to be discussed at the General Assembly. Unfortunately
no documents of this kind have been preserved, and we know of
their existence only through their being by chance mentioned in
some contemporary documents. Speaking of the delegates summoned
to the Sobor of 1613, the charters of the time directly state,
that they brought with them from Moscow "complete instructions"
(dogovori) concerning the election of the Czar. The delegates
received from their electors the supply of victuals (zapassi),
which they would need during their stay in Moscow. Nevertheless
they very often made an application to the Government for money
to cover their expenses. This fact is mentioned more than once in
the documents of the time. The writs of summons establish no rule
as to the amount of fortune which a delegate was required to
possess; they only recommend the election of "good sensible, and
wealthy persons, accustomed to treat of matters of State." This
did not imply that the delegates were required to know the rules
of grammar or to be able to sign their names on the rolls of the
Sobor correctly. The number of illiterate persons was rather
large even at so late an Assembly as that of 1649, and they were
to be found, not only among the lower nobility and the
representatives of cities, but also in the ranks of the boyars;
not, however, in those of the higher clergy.
    The ordinary place of meeting was the palace in the Hall
called the granovitaia Palata. Sometimes the Sobor sat in the
palace of the Patriarch, or in the Cathedral (Ouspenski Sobor).
The session was opened either by the Czar in person, or, as was
more often the case, by one of his secretaries, who, in a written
paper or in a speech, declared the reason for which the Assembly
was called together, and the questions it had to discuss. The
reading of this address was listened to by all the delegates and
all the members of the Douma, and of the clerical synod. The
division by Estates took place immediately after, and each order
deliberated separately on the questions which the Government had
proposed. The result of the discussions was presented to the Czar
in writing separately by each Estate. The documents were drawn up
by secretaries, specially attached for this purpose to the
Assemblies of the different Estates. On two occasions only, in
1649 and 1682, were the members of the Sobor assembled in two
different chambers, a higher and lower. The Upper House was
formed by the Douma and the higher clergy, and the lower by the
delegates of the lower orders But the custom according to which
each Estate deliberated separately, prevailed even on these two
occasions, the higher and lower chambers being subdivided into as
many sections as there were Estates.
    In answering the demands of the Government, the delegates
very often expressed their own sentiments as to the course of
Russian politics. They complained bitterly of the wrongs done to
the people by the officers of the State and judges; they pointed
to the necessity of amending the whole executive and military
administration; and by written petitions (chelobitnia), they
insisted on the necessity of introducing certain amendments into
the existing laws. The large part which these petitions played in
the work of codifying the laws of Russia, a work which rendered
illustrious the reign of Alexis Michaelovitch, has been amply
recognised by recent inquirers, and especially by Ditiatin,
Zagoskin, and Latkin.
    The decisions to which the different Estates arrived were at
the end of the session condensed into one single document, known
under the name of Zemskii prigovor, which means the general
verdict of the land. Several documents of this kind have been
preserved. They are sealed, as a rule, with the seals of the
Czar, of the Patriarch, and of the higher orders. As to the lower
orders, their members kissed the cross in sign of approval.
    Having thus considered the political history and internal
constitution of the Sobors we will now examine the functions
which they discharged. Foreign residents, and among them the
well-known Fletcher, have noticed certain weak points in their
organisation which prevented our representative Assemblies from
rising to the level of English Parliaments. Fletcher makes the
ingenious observation that the members of the Sobor had no right
to present bills. This does not imply that the initiative of all
reforms could proceed only from the Government; more than once
the Estates complained of wrongs which were not mentioned in the
address from the crown and asked for reforms which had not been
thought of by the Government. But their right to petition the
crown did not go further than that of the French Estates-General.
Like them the Sobors were unable to provide for the fulfilment of
their demands, and for the same reason which prevented the
Estates-General of France from getting into their own hands the
legal power. The right of initiating reforms, which the English
Parliament began to exercise under the Lancastrian kings remained
totally unknown in France as well as in Russia. At the time when
the English Parliament were replacing petitions by bills, the
French Estates continued to present their cahiers de doleances,
leaving to the Government the right of taking in its ordonnances
no notice whatever of their demands. The same was also the case
in Russia, where new laws were directly decreed by the Czar and
his Douma and the "general verdict of the land" remained for
years and years inoperative.
    If the Sobors only played a secondary part in matters of
legislation, the control that they exercised over the executive
machinery of the State was even less efficacious. I cannot
mention a single case, in which royal councillors were removed
and new persons appointed in their stead at the express desire of
the Sobor. The Moscovite Government was, it is true, in no way a
Parliamentary Government. Nevertheless the fact does not prove
that the Sobors had nothing in common with English Parliaments or
French States-General. We must not forget that medieval Europe
was, as a rule, ignorant of Parliamentary Government, and that
Assemblies, like the Mad Parliament of Oxford or the
revolutionary French Estates of 1355, both of which tried to
establish a kind of cabinet, were but exceptions. Although the
Sobor had no right to impose on the Czar the obligation of
calling certain persons to his counsels, the part it took in the
general politics of the country was a large one. We have had
occasion to show that questions of war and peace were settled by
its advice. Both the surrender of Asov and the annexation of
Little Russia took place in compliance with its desires. And
though the Sobor was denied the right of choosing the Ministry,
it had a much higher right, that of choosing the Czars. On this
point it had no grounds to envy either the English Parliaments,
or the States-General of France.
    So long as the new dynasty of the Romanovs remained faithful
to the engagements entered into by the Czar Michael, that is to
say during the first part of the seventeenth century, the voting
subsidies was as much the function of the Russian representative
Assembly as it was of the representative Assemblies of England,
France, Germany, or Spain. During the greater part of the reign
of the first Romanov no subsidy was levied, no benevolence
extorted without the consent of the Sobor. This scrupulous
observance of its financial authority required its periodical
convocation just as much as the meeting of the English
representatives was needed many years before the introduction of
triennial and septennial parliaments. Excepting during the period
just mentioned, the Sobors were summoned at irregular periods and
only when the needs of the Government required their help. Like
other representative Assemblies they were convened and dissolved
by the sovereign, and had no right to assemble according to their
own will.
    If we would know what good they have done to Russia we must
study the part they have played in the removal of public
grievances and the reform of justice. We must remember that more
than once they opposed the oligarchical Government of the boyars,
the local despotism of provincial Governors or voivodes, and the
bribery and exactions of the bureaucracy of Moscow. We must
remember how often they were the champions of justice and
equality in opposing the system of judicial immunities, the
extravagant donations of crown lands, and the exemption from
taxation of the nobility and clergy. We shall then have no
difficulty in acknowledging that their influence was truly
beneficial. On several occasions they had the honour of
participating in large administrative and judicial reforms, such
as the codification of the law and the abolition of the abnormal
custom by which offices in the army were held, not by men of
ability and talent, but by those of aristocratic birth. Foreign
politics were more than once treated by the Sobors with
discernment and practical good sense. Their patriotic and
religious feelings did not keep them from recognising the danger
of a new war and the necessity of relinquishing a conquest which
had been easily made. On the other hand their natural dislike of
new taxes did not prevent them from stretching out a helping hand
to their orthodox brethren in their endeavours to emancipate
themselves from the religious persecution of Catholic Poland.
Though they opposed on one occasion the annexation of Asov,
nevertheless on another occasion these representatives of the
people of Great Russia openly manifested their desire for union
with Little Russia, notwithstanding the possibility of a new war
that would necessarily be followed by an increase in taxation, In
the so-called period of troubles they stood forth as the
champions of the national idea by the opposition which they made
to every political combination which might have resulted in the
submission of Russia to a foreign prince. In those unhappy days
when so many provinces were occupied by Polish and Swedish
soldiers, and the boyars were half gained over to the interests
of Vladislas, the son of the Polish king, when Novgorod made a
separate peace with the Swedes, and was on the point of
recognising the doubtful rights of a Swedish pretender, the
political unity of Russia found champions only in the ranks of
the lower orders represented at the Sobor.
    The history of these old Russian Parliaments presents
certainly a less dramatic interest than the history of English
Parliaments or French States-General. Cases of conflict between
the different orders convened to the National Councils occur very
seldom. We read of no vehement invectives, like those which the
deputies of the nobility thundered forth against the third estate
at the etats generaux of 1613. We hear also of no compacts or
associations between estates, like those, which more than once
allowed the English barons and burgesses to achieve a manifest
victory over the king. The language employed by Russian
representatives in speaking to their sovereign is moderate, and
sometimes even servile. They like to call themselves the "slaves
of his Majesty," but, in so doing, they never forget their
obligations towards their electors, to open the eyes of the
Government to "all the wrongs, depredations, and oppressions,
committed by its officers." They are subjects, conscious of their
duty towards sovereign and country, ready to sacrifice their life
and estates for the defence of its essential interest; they are
not slaves, afraid of opening their mouths or of offending the
ear of the monarch by a truthful description of their wrongs.
Their loyalty towards the Czar finds a parallel in that which
they entertain towards the Greek Church. They are orthodox, and,
therefore, ready to shed. their blood in the defence of their
creed, simply represented, as it sometimes is, by the images of
the saints; but they have no inclination towards clericalism, and
no objection to imposing taxes on the clergy and even to
secularising their estates for the good of the country and the
advantage of the military class. Illiterate as were their
members, it is not surprising that the Sobors took no measure to
increase the number of schools and educational establishments.
They are probably the sole representative Assemblies which never
uttered a word about science or scholarship. It was chiefly due
to their ignorance that their opinions about commercial
intercourse with foreign countries were so little rational. it is
not surprising if the whole policy of trade reduced itself,
according to their understanding, to the elimination of the
competition of the Eastern and Western merchants.
    With such helpers as these no general reform, like that of
Peter the Great, was likely to be accomplished. It may be easily
understood, therefore, why this greatest of Russian
revolutionists never tried to associate the Sobors in his work.
The reforms at which he aimed: the subversion of the civil and
military organisation, the introduction of a totally new
provincial administration, copied from Swedish originals; of a
standing army, like those of the French and German autocrats; the
opening of Russian markets to the competition of foreign
merchants; the establishment of technical schools and such like
innovations, were not to be carried out by "the decision of the
whole land," to employ the consecrated term for Russian legal
enactments during the period directly preceding that of Peter the
Great. "Enlightened despostism" found in Russia the same
difficulty in going hand in hand with the old Assemblies of
estates, as it did in Austria at the time of Joseph the Second.
    Fully to understand the reasons which prevented the Wither
development of the Russian national councils, we must also bear
in mind that the period in which Russia, by the genius of Peter,
was thrown into active intercourse with European powers, was far
from being the golden age of representative Government. When the
Sobors began to take root in the Russian soil, Parliaments and
States-General were rapidly advancing to a state of complete
annihilation or temporary suppression. What importance can we
attach to the deliberations of the English Parliaments under the
Tudors, or even under the Stuarts, up to the year 1640? What
National Assembly can we mention in France after the year 1613?
The fall of representative institutions, which we notice both in
England and in France, was a common fact of European history. The
German Reichstag and the Landstande of the different States which
composed the Holy Roman Empire had fallen into the same state of
political insignificance during the period following the treaty
of Munster. The same fate had overtaken the Cortes of Castille
and Aragon, and the provincial estates of Hungary and Bohemia.
All over Europe monarchical power was steadily increasing, and
autocracy becoming the ruling principle of the day. Was it
likely, therefore, that Peter, who declared that he would
willingly have given to Richelieu a good moiety of his dominions
on condition of being taught by him how to rule the remainder,
was it likely, I ask, that that same Peter should bring home from
his long voyages in the West any particular respect for
representative institutions? It is, therefore, easily understood
why, from the beginning of the eighteenth century, the Sobors,
without being abolished, should have ceased to be convened.
    It was not until there was a general revival of
representative institutions throughout Europe that Russian
statesmen were found once more occupied with the question of the
Sobors.
    Alexander I, to judge by the liberality with which he endowed
the Poles with a representative assembly, was, at least in the
first part of his reign, not directly opposed to the idea of
re-calling to life those venerable institutions of the past.
Among the papers of his most intimate Councillor, Speransky,
there has been found the project of a constitution, according to
which the Council of State, this natural heir of the old Russian
Douma, was to be strengthened by the introduction of
representatives and notables, chosen from the different Estates
of the Empire. In much more recent days a similar project was
presented by Loris Melikoff to Alexander II, and an imperial
ukase summoning this new Assembly of notables was already signed,
when the premature death of the Emperor put an end to the
expectations of the Liberal party. In the first weeks of his
reign Alexander III himself was not opposed to the idea of
reviving the old national institution of the Sobors, and his
first two ministers for Home Affairs, Loris Melikoff and
Ignatiev, were both in favour of such a reform. It was only from
the day when Count Dimitri Tolstoi took upon his shoulders the
burthen of the home politics of Russia, that all thoughts were
given up of convoking a representative assembly. The Government
then entered on the fatal task of the subversion of all recent
reforms. Nobody can tell how long will be the duration of the
period of reaction upon which we have entered; but on the other
hand nobody can doubt that the convocation of a national council
is the most natural way of satisfying the wishes of the
constantly increasing party of malcontents -- a body of men which
has been nick-named by its opponents "the Intelligent Party"
(intelligentia) -- a nick-name, which certainly cannot offend
those on whom it is conferred.
    The convocation of a national representative assembly would
no doubt close the era of misunderstanding between the Russian
people and the imperial power of the Czars; it would unite the
Russian past with the present and future; and would once more
open a large field to the co-operation of society for the redress
of old wrongs and the establishment of personal liberty and
social justice.

NOTES:

1. Compare Kluchevsky's recent article, "On the Representative
System of the Sobors," in Russian Thought, a monthly periodical,
published at Moscow, January, 1890.

2. The were much the same as the Carlovingian benefices.

3. A desiatin is approximately three English acres.

4. Nordenflicht, "Die Schwedische Staatsverfassung in ihrer
geschichlichen Entwickelung," p. 23.

5. Bavelier, "Essai Historique sur le Droit d'Election et sur les
Anciennes Assemblees Representatives en France," p. 92.

6. "Historisch-Geographische Beschreibung der Nordl und Oestl.
Theile von Europa und Asien," p. 202.

7. p. 284.

8.  "Vor dem Cronungs Act hat Michael folgende Puncte und
conditiones acceptirt und unterschrieben, nahmlich: (1) Die
Religion zu erhalten und zu schutzen: (2) alles was semem Vater
widerfahren zu vergessen und zu vergeben, und keine particulare
Feindschaft, sie moge Nahmen haben wie sie wowlle zu gedenken;
(3) keine neue Gesetze zu machen, oder alte zu undern, hohe und
wichtige Sachen nach dem Gesetze und nicht allein vor sich
selbst, sondern durch ordentlichen Procez urtheilen zu lassen;
(4) weder Krieg noch Frieden allein und vor sich selbst mit dem
Nachbar vorzunehmen und; (5) seine Guter zur Bezeugung der
Gerechtigkeit und Vermeidung aller Procesz mit particularen
Leuten, entweder an seine Familie abzutreten oder solche denen
Kron-Guthern einzuverleiben." (p. 209).

