






BOOK II





I



To return to Eteonicus and his troops in Chios. During summer they

were well able to support themselves on the fruits of the season, or

by labouring for hire in different parts of the island, but with the

approach of winter these means of subsistence began to fail. Ill-clad

at the same time, and ill-shod, they fell to caballing and arranging

plans to attack the city of Chios. It was agreed amongst them, that in

order to guage their numbers, every member of the conspiracy should

carry a reed. Eteonicus got wind of the design, but was at a loss how

to deal with it, considering the number of these reed-bearers. To make

an open attack upon them seemed dangerous. It would probably lead to a

rush to arms, in which the conspirators would seize the city and

commence hostilities, and, in the event of their success, everything

hitherto achieved would be lost. Or again, the destruction on his part

of many fellow-creatures and allies was a terrible alternative, which

would place the Spartans in an unenviable light with regard to the

rest of Hellas, and render the soldiers ill-disposed to the cause in

hand. Accordingly he took with him fifteen men, armed with daggers,

and marched through the city. Falling in with one of the reed-bearers,

a man suffering from ophthalmia, who was returning from the surgeon's

house, he put him to death. This led to some uproar, and people asked

why the man was thus slain. By Eteonicus's orders the answer was set

afloat, "because he carried a reed." As the explanation circulated,

one reed-bearer after another threw away the symbol, each one saying

to himself, as he heard the reason given, "I have better not be seen

with this." After a while Eteonicus called a meeting of the Chians,

and imposed upon them a contribution of money, on the ground that with

pay in their pockets the sailors would have no temptation to

revolutionary projects. The Chians acquiesced. Whereupon Eteonicus

promptly ordered his crews to get on board their vessels. He then

rowed alongside each ship in turn, and addressed the men at some

length in terms of encouragement and cheery admonition, just as though

he knew nothing of what had taken place, and so distributed a month's

pay to every man on board.



After this the Chians and the other allies held a meeting in Ephesus,

and, considering the present posture of affairs, determined to send

ambassadors to Lacedaemon with a statement of the facts, and a request

that Lysander might be sent out to take command of the fleet.

Lysander's high reputation among the allies dated back to his former

period of office, when as admiral he had won the naval victory of

Notium. The ambassadors accordingly were despatched, accompanied by

envoys also from Cyrus, charged with the same message. The

Lacedaemonians responded by sending them Lysander as second in

command,[1] with Aracus as admiral, since it was contrary to their

custom that the same man should be admiral twice. At the same time the

fleet was entrusted to Lysander.[2]



[1] Epistoleus. See above.



[2] "At this date the war had lasted five-and-twenty years." So the

    MSS. read. The words are probably an interpolation.



It was in this year[3] that Cyrus put Autoboesaces and Mitraeus to

death. These were sons of the sister of Dariaeus[4] (the daughter of

Xerxes, the father of Darius).[5] He put them to death for neglecting,

when they met him, to thrust their hands into the sleeve (or "kore")

which is a tribute of respect paid to the king alone. This "kore" is

longer than the ordinary sleeve, so long in fact that a man with his

hand inside is rendered helpless. In consequence of this act on the

part of Cyrus, Hieramenes[6] and his wife urged upon Dariaeus the

danger of overlooking such excessive insolence on the part of the

young prince, and Dariaeus, on the plea of sickness, sent a special

embassy to summon Cyrus to his bedside.



[3] B.C. 406.



[4] Dariaeus, i.e. Darius, but the spelling of the name is correct,

    and occurs in Ctesias, though in the "Anabasis" we have the

    spelling Darius.



[5] These words look like the note of a foolish and ignorant scribe.

    He ought to have written, "The daughter of Artaxerxes and own

    sister of Darius, commonly so called."



[6] For Hieramenes cf. Thuc. viii. 95, and Prof. Jowett ad loc.



B.C. 405. In the following year[7] Lysander arrived at Ephesus, and

sent for Eteonicus with his ships from Chios, and collected all other

vessels elsewhere to be found. His time was now devoted to refitting

the old ships and having new ones built in Antandrus. He also made a

journey to the court of Cyrus with a request for money. All Cyrus

could say was, that not only the money sent by the king was spent, but

much more besides; and he pointed out the various sums which each of

the admirals had received, but at the same time he gave him what he

asked for. Furnished with this money, Lysander appointed captains to

the different men-of-war, and remitted to the sailors their arrears of

pay. Meanwhile the Athenian generals, on their side, were devoting

their energies to the improvements of their navy at Samos.



[7] The MSS. add "during the ephorate of Archytas and the archonship

    at Athens of Alexias," which, though correct enough, is probably

    an interpolation.



It was now Cyrus's turn to send for Lysander. It was the moment at

which the envoy from his father had arrived with the message: "Your

father is on his sick-bed and desires your presence." The king lay at

Thamneria, in Media, near the territory of the Cadusians, against whom

he had marched to put down a revolt. When Lysander presented himself,

Cyrus was urgent with him not to engage the Athenians at sea unless he

had many more ships than they. "The king," he added, "and I have

plenty of wealth, so that, as far as money goes, you can man plenty of

vessels." He then consigned to him all the tributes from the several

cities which belonged to him personally, and gave him the ready money

which he had as a gift; and finally, reminding him of the sincere

friendship he entertained towards the state of Lacedaemon, as well as

to himself personally, he set out up country to visit his father.

Lysander, finding himself thus left with the complete control of the

property of Cyrus (during the absence of that prince, so summoned to

the bedside of his father), was able to distribute pay to his troops,

after which he set sail for the Ceramic Gulf of Caria. Here he stormed

a city in alliance with the Athenians named Cedreae, and on the

following day's assault took it, and reduced the inhabitants to

slavery. These were of a mixed Hellene and barbaric stock. From

Cedreae he continued his voyage to Rhodes. The Athenians meanwhile,

using Samos as their base of operations, were employed in devastating

the king's territory, or in swooping down upon Chios and Ephesus, and

in general were preparing for a naval battle, having but lately chosen

three new generals in addition to those already in office, whose names

were Menander, Tydeus, and Cephisodotus. Now Lysander, leaving Rhodes,

and coasting along Ionia, made his way to the Hellespont, having an

eye to the passage of vessels through the Straits, and, in a more

hostile sense, on the cities which had revolted from Sparta. The

Athenians also set sail from Chios, but stood out to open sea, since

the seaboard of Asia was hostile to them.



Lysander was again on the move; leaving Abydos, he passed up channel

to Lampsacus, which town was allied with Athens; the men of Abydos and

the rest of the troops advancing by land, under the command of the

Lacedaemonian Thorax. They then attacked and took by storm the town,

which was wealthy, and with its stores of wine and wheat and other

commodities was pillaged by the soldiery. All free-born persons,

however, were without exception released by Lysander. And now the

Athenian fleet, following close on his heels, came to moorings at

Elaeus, in the Chersonesus, one hundred and eighty sail in all. It was

not until they had reached this place, and were getting their early

meal, that the news of what had happened at Lampsacus reached them.

Then they instantly set sail again to Sestos, and, having halted long

enough merely to take in stores, sailed on further to Aegospotami, a

point facing Lampsacus, where the Hellespont is not quite two miles[8]

broad. Here they took their evening meal.



[8] Lit. fifteen stades.



The night following, or rather early next morning, with the first

streak of dawn, Lysander gave the signal for the men to take their

breakfasts and get on board their vessels; and so, having got all

ready for a naval engagement, with his ports closed and movable

bulwarks attached, he issued the order that no one was to stir from

his post or put out to sea. As the sun rose the Athenians drew up

their vessels facing the harbour, in line of battle ready for action;

but Lysander declining to come out to meet them, as the day advanced

they retired again to Aegospotami. Then Lysander ordered the swiftest

of his ships to follow the Athenians, and as soon as the crews had

disembarked, to watch what they did, sail back, and report to him.

Until these look-outs returned he would permit no disembarkation from

his ships. This performance he repeated for four successive days, and

each day the Athenians put out to sea and challenged an engagement.



But now Alcibiades, from one of his fortresses, could espy the

position of his fellow-countrymen, moored on an open beach beyond

reach of any city, and forced to send for supplies to Sestos, which

was nearly two miles distant, while their enemies were safely lodged

in a harbour, with a city adjoining, and everything within reach. The

situation did not please him, and he advised them to shift their

anchorage to Sestos, where they would have the advantage of a harbour

and a city. "Once there," he concluded, "you can engage the enemy

whenever it suits you." But the generals, and more particularly Tydeus

and Menander, bade him go about his business. "We are generals now--

not you," they said; and so he went away. And now for five days in

succession the Athenians had sailed out to offer battle, and for the

fifth time retired, followed by the same swift sailors of the enemy.

But this time Lysander's orders to the vessels so sent in pursuit

were, that as soon as they saw the enemy's crew fairly disembarked and

dispersed along the shores of the Chersonesus (a practice, it should

be mentioned, which had grown upon them from day to day owing to the

distance at which eatables had to be purchased, and out of sheer

contempt, no doubt, of Lysander, who refused to accept battle), they

were to begin their return voyage, and when in mid-channel to hoist a

shield. The orders were punctually carried out, and Lysander at once

signalled to his whole squadron to put across with all speed, while

Thorax, with the land forces, was to march parallel with the fleet

along the coast. Aware of the enemy's fleet, which he could see

bearing down upon him, Conon had only time to signal to the crews to

join their ships and rally to the rescue with all their might. But the

men were scattered far and wide, and some of the vessels had only two

out of their three banks of rowers, some only a single one, while

others again were completely empty. Conon's own ship, with seven

others in attendance on him and the "Paralus,"[9] put out to sea, a

little cluster of nine vessels, with their full complement of men; but

every one of the remaining one hundred and seventy-one vessels were

captured by Lysander on the beach. As to the men themselves, the large

majority of them were easily made prisoners on shore, a few only

escaping to the small fortresses of the neighbourhood. Meanwhile Conon

and his nine vessels made good their escape. For himself, knowing that

the fortune of Athens was ruined, he put into Abarnis, the promontory

of Lampsacus, and there picked up the great sails of Lysander's ships,

and then with eight ships set sail himself to seek refuge with

Evagoras in Cyprus, while the "Paralus" started for Athens with

tidings of what had taken place.



[9] The "Paralus"--the Athenian sacred vessel; cf. Thuc. iii. 33 et

    passim.



Lysander, on his side, conveyed the ships and prisoners and all other

spoil back to Lampsacus, having on board some of the Athenian

generals, notably Philocles and Adeimantus. On the very day of these

achievements he despatched Theopompus, a Milesian privateersman, to

Lacedaemon to report what had taken place. This envoy arrived within

three days and delivered his message. Lysander's next step was to

convene the allies and bid them deliberate as to the treatment of the

prisoners. Many were the accusations here levied against the

Athenians. There was talk of crimes committed against the law of

Hellas, and of cruelties sanctioned by popular decrees; which, had

they conquered in the late sea-fight, would have been carried out;

such as the proposal to cut off the right hand of every prisoner taken

alive, and lastly the ill-treatment of two captured men-of-war, a

Corinthian and an Andrian vessel, when every man on board had been

hurled headlong down the cliff. Philocles was the very general of the

Athenians who had so ruthlessly destroyed those men. Many other tales

were told; and at length a resolution was passed to put all the

Athenian prisoners, with the exception of Adeimantus, to death. He

alone, it was pleaded, had taken exception to the proposal to cut off

the prisoners' hands. On the other hand, he was himself accused by

some people of having betrayed the fleet. As to Philocles, Lysander

put to him one question, as the officer who had thrown[10] the

Corinthians and Andrians down the cliff: What fate did the man deserve

to suffer who had embarked on so cruel a course of illegality against

Hellenes? and so delivered him to the executioner.



[10] Reading {os . . . katekremnise}.







II



When he had set the affairs of Lampsacus in order, Lysander sailed to

Byzantium and Chalcedon, where the inhabitants, having first dismissed

the Athenian garrison under a flag of truce, admitted him within their

walls. Those citizens of Byzantium, who had betrayed Byzantium into

the hands of Alcibiades, fled as exiles into Pontus, but subsequently

betaking themselves to Athens, became Athenian citizens. In dealing

with the Athenian garrisons, and indeed with all Athenians wheresoever

found, Lysander made it a rule to give them safe conduct to Athens,

and to Athens only, in the certainty that the larger the number

collected within the city and Piraeus, the more quickly the want of

necessaries of life would make itself felt. And now, leaving

Sthenelaus, a Laconian, as governor-general of Byzantium and

Chalcedon, he sailed back himself to Lampsacus and devoted himself to

refitting his ships.



It was night when the "Paralus" reached Athens with her evil tidings,

on receipt of which a bitter wail of woe broke forth. From Piraeus,

following the line of the long walls up to the heart of the city, it

swept and swelled, as each man to his neighbour passed on the news. On

that night no man slept. There was mourning and sorrow for those that

were lost, but the lamentation for the dead was merged in even deeper

sorrow for themselves, as they pictured the evils they were about to

suffer, the like of which they themselves had inflicted upon the men

of Melos, who were colonists of the Lacedaemonians, when they mastered

them by siege. Or on the men of Histiaea; on Scione and Torone; on the

Aeginetans, and many another Hellene city.[1] On the following day the

public assembly met, and, after debate, it was resolved to block up

all the harbours save one, to put the walls in a state of defence, to

post guards at various points, and to make all other necessary

preparations for a siege. Such were the concerns of the men of Athens.



[1] With regard to these painful recollections, see (1) for the siege

    and surrender of Melos (in B.C. 416), Thuc. v. 114, 116; and cf.

    Aristoph. "Birds," 186; Plut. ("Lysander," 14); (2) for the

    ejection of the Histiaeans, an incident of the recovery of Euboea

    in 445 B.C., see Thuc. i. 14; Plut. ("Pericles," 23); (3) for the

    matter of Scione, which revolted in 423 B.C., and was for a long

    time a source of disagreement between the Athenians and

    Lacedaemonians, until finally captured by the former in 421 B.C.,

    when the citizens were slain and the city given to the Plataeans,

    see Thuc. iv. 120-122, 129-133; v. 18, 32; (4) for Torone see

    Thuc. ib., and also v. 3; (5) for the expulsion of the Aeginetans

    in 431 B.C. see Thuc. ii. 27.



Lysander presently left the Hellespont with two hundred sail and

arrived at Lesbos, where he established a new order of things in

Mitylene and the other cities of the island. Meanwhile he despatched

Eteonicus with a squadron of ten ships to the northern coasts,[2]

where that officer brought about a revolution of affairs which placed

the whole region in the hands of Lacedaemon. Indeed, in a moment of

time, after the sea-fight, the whole of Hellas had revolted from

Athens, with the solitary exception of the men of Samos. These, having

massacred the notables,[3] held the state under their control. After a

while Lysander sent messages to Agis at Deceleia, and to Lacedaemon,

announcing his approach with a squadron of two hundred sail.



[2] Lit. "the Thraceward districts." See above, p. 16.



[3] Or, "since they had slain their notables, held the state under

    popular control." See Grote, "Hist. of Greece," vol. viii. p. 303

    note 3 (2d ed.), who thinks that the incident referred to is the

    violent democratic revolution in Samos described in Thuc. viii.

    21, B.C. 412.



In obedience to a general order of Pausanias, the other king of

Lacedaemon, a levy in force of the Lacedaemonians and all the rest of

Peloponnesus, except the Argives, was set in motion for a campaign. As

soon as the several contingents had arrived, the king put himself at

their head and marched against Athens, encamping in the gymnasium of

the Academy,[4] as it is called. Lysander had now reached Aegina,

where, having got together as many of the former inhabitants as

possible, he formally reinstated them in their city; and what he did

in behalf of the Aeginetans, he did also in behalf of the Melians, and

of the rest who had been deprived of their countries. He then pillaged

the island of Salamis, and finally came to moorings off Piraeus with

one hundred and fifty ships of the line, and established a strict

blockade against all merchant ships entering that harbour.



[4] For this most illustrious of Athenian gymnasia, which still

    retains its name, see Leake, "Topography of Athens," i. 195 foll.



The Athenians, finding themselves besieged by land and sea, were in

sore perplexity what to do. Without ships, without allies, without

provisions, the belief gained hold upon them that there was no way of

escape. They must now, in their turn, suffer what they had themselves

inflincted upon others; not in retaliation, indeed, for ills received,

but out of sheer insolence, overriding the citizens of petty states,

and for no better reason than that these were allies of the very men

now at their gates. In this frame of mind they enfranchised those who

at any time had lost their civil rights, and schooled themselves to

endurance; and, albeit many succumbed to starvation, no thought of

truce or reconciliation with their foes was breathed.[5] But when the

stock of corn was absolutely insufficient, they sent an embassage to

Agis, proposing to become allies of the Lacedaemonians on the sole

condition of keeping their fortification walls and Piraeus; and to

draw up articles of treaty on these terms. Agis bade them betake

themselves to Lacedaemon, seeing that he had no authority to act

himself. With this answer the ambassadors returned to Athens, and were

forthwith sent on to Lacedaemon. On reaching Sellasia,[6] a town in[7]

Laconian territory, they waited till they got their answer from the

ephors, who, having learnt their terms (which were identical to those

already proposed to Agis), bade them instantly to be gone, and, if

they really desired peace, to come with other proposals, the fruit of

happier reflection. Thus the ambassadors returned home, and reported

the result of their embassage, whereupon despondency fell upon all. It

was a painful reflection that in the end they would be sold into

slavery; and meanwhile, pending the return of a second embassy, many

must needs fall victims to starvation. The razing of their

fortifications was not a solution which any one cared to recommend. A

senator, Archestratus, had indeed put the question in the senate,

whether it were not best to make peace with the Lacedaemonians on such

terms as they were willing to propose; but he was thrown into prison.

The Laconian proposals referred to involved the destruction of both

long walls for a space of more than a mile. And a decree had been

passed, making it illegal to submit any such proposition about the

walls. Things having reached this pass, Theramenes made a proposal in

the public assembly as follows: If they chose to send him as an

ambassador to Lysander, he would go and find out why the

Lacedaemonians were so unyielding about the walls; whether it was they

really intended to enslave the city, or merely that they wanted a

guarantee of good faith. Despatched accordingly, he lingered on with

Lysander for three whole months and more, watching for the time when

the Athenians, at the last pinch of starvation, would be willing to

accede to any terms that might be offered. At last, in the fourth

month, he returned and reported to the public assembly that Lysander

had detained him all this while, and had ended by bidding him betake

himself to Lacedaemon, since he had no authority himself to answer his

questions, which must be addressed directly to the ephors. After this

Theramenes was chosen with nine others to go to Lacedaemon as

ambassadors with full powers. Meanwhile Lysander had sent an Athenian

exile, named Aristoteles, in company of certain Lacedaemonians, to

Sparta to report to the board of ephors how he had answered

Theramenes, that they, and they alone, had supreme authority in

matters of peace and war.



[5] Or, "they refused to treat for peace."



[6] Sellasia, the bulwark of Sparta in the valley of the Oenus.



[7] The MSS. have "in the neighbourhood of," which words are

    inappropriate at this date, though they may well have been added

    by some annotator after the Cleomenic war and the battle of

    Sellasia, B.C. 222, when Antigonus of Macedon destroyed the place

    in the interests of the Achaean League.



Theramenes and his companions presently reached Sellasia, and being

there questioned as to the reason of their visit, replied that they

had full powers to treat of peace. After which the ephors ordered them

to be summoned to their presence. On their arrival a general assembly

was convened, in which the Corinthians and Thebans more particularly,

though their views were shared by many other Hellenes also, urged the

meeting not to come to terms with the Athenians, but to destroy them.

The Lacedaemonians replied that they would never reduce to slavery a

city which was itself an integral portion of Hellas, and had performed

a great and noble service to Hellas in the most perilous of

emergencies. On the contrary, they were willing to offer peace on the

terms now specified--namely, "That the long walls and the

fortifications of Piraeus should be destroyed; that the Athenian

fleet, with the exception of twelve vessels, should be surrendered;

that the exiles should be restored; and lastly, that the Athenians

should acknowledge the headship of Sparta in peace and war, leaving to

her the choice of friends and foes, and following her lead by land and

sea." Such were the terms which Theramenes and the rest who acted with

him were able to report on their return to Athens. As they entered the

city, a vast crowd met them, trembling lest their mission have proved

fruitless. For indeed delay was no longer possible, so long already

was the list of victims daily perishing from starvation. On the day

following, the ambassadors delivered their report, stating the terms

upon which the Lacedaemonians were willing to make peace. Theramenes

acted as spokesman, insisting that they ought to obey the

Lacedaemonians and pull down the walls. A small minority raised their

voice in opposition, but the majority were strongly in favour of the

proposition, and the resolution was passed to accept the peace. After

that, Lysander sailed into the Piraeus, and the exiles were

readmitted. And so they fell to levelling the fortifications and walls

with much enthusiasm, to the accompaniment of female flute-players,

deeming that day the beginning of liberty to Greece.



Thus the year drew to its close[8]--during its middle months took

place the accession of Dionysius, the son of Hermocrates the

Syracusan, to the tyranny of Syracuse; an incident itself preceded by

a victory gained over the Carthaginians by the Syracusans; the

reduction of Agrigentum through famine by the Carthaginians

themselves; and the exodus of the Sicilian Greeks from that city.



[8] For the puzzling chronology of this paragraph see Grote, "Hist. of

    Greece," vol. x. p 619 (2d ed.) If genuine, the words may perhaps

    have slipt out of their natural place in chapter i. above, in

    front of the words "in the following year Lysander arrived," etc.

    L. Dindorf brackets them as spurious. Xen., "Hist. Gr." ed.

    tertia, Lipsiae, MDCCCLXXII. For the incidents referred to see

    above; Grote, "Hist. of Greece," vol. x. pp. 582, 598 (2d ed.)







III



B.C. 404. In the following year[1] the people passed a resolution to

choose thirty men who were to draft a constitution based on the

ancestral laws of the State. The following were chosen to act on this

committee:--Polychares, Critias, Melobius, Hippolochus, Eucleides,

Hiero, Mnesilochus, Chremo, Theramenes, Aresias, Diocles, Phaedrias,

Chaereleos, Anaetius, Piso, Sophocles, Erastosthenes, Charicles,

Onomacles, Theognis, Aeschines, Theogones, Cleomedes, Erasistratus,

Pheido, Dracontides, Eumathes, Aristoteles, Hippomachus, Mnesitheides.

After these transactions, Lysander set sail for Samos; and Agis

withdrew the land force from Deceleia and disbanded the troops,

dismissing the contingents to their several cities.



[1] The MSS. here add "it was that year of the Olympiad cycle in which

    Crocinas, a Thessalian, won the Stadium; when Endius was ephor at

    Sparta, and Pythodorus archon at Athens, though the Athenians

    indeed do not call the year by that archon's name, since he was

    elected during the oligarchy, but prefer to speak of the year of

    'anarchy'; the aforesaid oligarchy originated thus,"--which,

    though correct, probably was not written by Xenophon. The year of

    anarchy might perhaps be better rendered "the year without

    archons."



In was at this date, about the time of the solar eclipse,[2] that

Lycophron of Pherae, who was ambitious of ruling over the whole of

Thessaly, defeated those sections of the Thessalians who opposed him,

such as the men of Larissa and others, and slew many of them. It was

also about this date that Dionysius, now tyrant of Syracuse, was

defeated by the Carthaginians and lost Gela and Camarina. And again, a

little later, the men of Leontini, who previously had been amalgamated

with the Syracusans, separated themselves from Syracuse and Dionysius,

and asserted their independence, and returned to their native city.

Another incident of this period was the sudden despatch and

introduction of Syracusan horse into Catana by Dionysius.



[2] This took place on 2d September B.C. 404.



Now the Samians, though besieged by Lysander on all sides, were at

first unwilling to come to terms. But at the last moment, when

Lysander was on the point of assaulting the town, they accepted the

terms, which allowed every free man to leave the island, but not to

carry away any part of his property, except the clothes on his back.

On these conditions they marched out. The city and all it contained

was then delivered over to its ancient citizens by Lysander, who

finally appointed ten governors to garrison the island.[3] After

which, he disbanded the allied fleet, dismissing them to their

respective cities, while he himself, with the Lacedaemonian squadron,

set sail for Laconia, bringing with him the prows of the conquered

vessels and the whole navy of Piraeus, with the exception of twelve

ships. He also brought the crowns which he had received from the

cities as private gifts, and a sum of four hundred and seventy

talents[4] in silver (the surplus of the tribute money which Cyrus had

assigned to him for the prosecution of the war), besides other

property, the fruit of his military exploits. All these things

Lysander delivered to the Lacedaemonians in the latter end of

summer.[5]



[3] A council of ten, or "decarchy." See Grote, "H. G." viii. 323 (1st

    ed.)



[4] About 112,800 pounds.



[5] The MSS. add "a summer, the close of which coincided with the

    termination of a war which had lasted twenty-eight and a half

    years, as the list of annual ephors, appended in order, serves to

    show. Aenesias is the first name. The war began during his

    ephorate, in the fifteenth year of the thirty years' truce after

    the capture of Euboea. His successors were Brasidas, Isanor,

    Sostratidas, Exarchus, Agesistratus, Angenidas, Onomacles,

    Zeuxippus, Pityas, Pleistolas, Cleinomachus, Harchus, Leon,

    Chaerilas, Patesiadas, Cleosthenes, Lycarius, Eperatus,

    Onomantius, Alexippidas, Misgolaidas, Isias, Aracus, Euarchippus,

    Pantacles, Pityas, Archytas, and lastly, Endius, during whose year

    of office Lysander sailed home in triumph, after performing the

    exploits above recorded,"--the interpolation, probably, of some

    editor or copyist, the words "twenty-eight and a half" being

    probably a mistake on his part for "twenty-seven and a half." Cf.

    Thuc. v. 26; also Buchsenschutz, Einleitung, p. 8 of his school

    edition of the "Hellenica."



The Thirty had been chosen almost immediately after the long walls and

the fortifications round Piraeus had been razed. They were chosen for

the express purpose of compiling a code of laws for the future

constitution of the State. The laws were always on the point of being

published, yet they were never forthcoming; and the thirty compilers

contented themselves meanwhile with appointing a senate and the other

magistracies as suited their fancy best. That done, they turned their

attention, in the first instance, to such persons as were well known

to have made their living as informers[6] under the democracy, and to

be thorns in the side of all respectable people. These they laid hold

on and prosecuted on the capital charge. The new senate gladly

recorded its vote of condemnation against them; and the rest of the

world, conscious of bearing no resemblance to them, seemed scarcely

vexed. But the Thirty did not stop there. Presently they began to

deliberate by what means they could get the city under their absolute

control, in order that they might work their will upon it. Here again

they proceeded tentatively; in the first instance, they sent (two of

their number), Aeschines and Aristoteles, to Lacedaemon, and persuaded

Lysander to support them in getting a Lacedaemonian garrison

despatched to Athens. They only needed it until they had got the

"malignants" out of the way, and had established the constitution; and

they would undertake to maintain these troops at their own cost.

Lysander was not deaf to their persuasions, and by his co-operation

their request was granted. A bodyguard, with Callibius as governor,

was sent.



[6] Lit. "by sycophancy," i.e. calumnious accusation--the sycophant's

    trade. For a description of this pest of Athenian life cf. "Dem."

    in Arist. 1, S. 52; quoted in Jebb, "Attic Orators," chap. xxix.

    14; cf. Aristoph. "Ach." 904; Xen. "Mem." II. ix. 1.



And now that they had got the garrison, they fell to flattering

Callibius with all servile flattery, in order that he might give

countenance to their doings. Thus they prevailed on him to allow some

of the guards, whom they selected, to accompany them, while they

proceeded to lay hands on whom they would; no longer confining

themselves to base folk and people of no account, but boldly laying

hands on those who they felt sure would least easily brook being

thrust aside, or, if a spirit of opposition seized them, could command

the largest number of partisans.



These were early days; as yet Critias was of one mind with Theramenes,

and the two were friends. But the time came when, in proportion as

Critias was ready to rush headlong into wholesale carnage, like one

who thirsted for the blood of the democracy, which had banished him,

Theramenes balked and thwarted him. It was barely reasonable, he

argued, to put people to death, who had never done a thing wrong to

respectable people in their lives, simply because they had enjoyed

influence and honour under the democracy. "Why, you and I, Critias,"

he would add, "have said and done many things ere now for the sake of

popularity." To which the other (for the terms of friendly intimacy

still subsisted) would retort, "There is no choice left to us, since

we intend to take the lion's share, but to get rid of those who are

best able to hinder us. If you imagine, because we are thirty instead

of one, our government requires one whit the less careful guarding

than an actual tyranny, you must be very innocent."



So things went on. Day after day the list of persons put to death for

no just reason grew longer. Day after day the signs of resentment were

more significant in the groups of citizens banding together and

forecasting the character of this future constitution; till at length

Theramenes spoke again, protesting:--There was no help for it but to

associate with themselves a sufficient number of persons in the

conduct of affairs, or the oligarchy would certainly come to an end.

Critias and the rest of the Thirty, whose fears had already converted

Theramenes into a dangerous popular idol, proceeded at once to draw up

a list of three thousand citizens; fit and proper persons to have a

share in the conduct of affairs. But Theramenes was not wholly

satisfied, "indeed he must say, for himself, he regarded it as

ridiculous, that in their effort to associate the better classes with

themselves in power, they should fix on just that particular number,

three thousand, as if that figure had some necessary connection with

the exact number of gentlemen in the State, making it impossible to

discover any respectability outside or rascality within the magic

number. And in the second place," he continued, "I see we are trying

to do two things, diametrically opposed; we are manufacturing a

government, which is based on force, and at the same time inferior in

strength to those whom we propose to govern." That was what he said,

but what his colleagues did, was to institute a military inspection or

review. The Three Thousand were drawn up in the Agora, and the rest of

the citizens, who were not included in the list, elsewhere in various

quarters of the city. The order to take arms was given;[7] but while

the men's backs were turned, at the bidding of the Thirty, the

Laconian guards, with those of the citizens who shared their views,

appeared on the scene and took away the arms of all except the Three

Thousand, carried them up to the Acropolis, and safely deposited them

in the temple.



[7] Or, "a summons to the 'place d'armes' was given; but." Or, "the

    order to seize the arms was given, and." It is clear from

    Aristoph. "Acharn." 1050, that the citizens kept their weapons at

    home. On the other hand, it was a custom not to come to any

    meeting in arms. See Thuc. vi. 58. It seems probable that while

    the men were being reviewed in the market-place and elsewhere, the

    ruling party gave orders to seize their weapons (which they had

    left at home), and this was done except in the case of the Three

    Thousand. Cf. Arnold, "Thuc." II. 2. 5; and IV. 91.



The ground being thus cleared, as it were, and feeling that they had

it in their power to do what they pleased, they embarked on a course

of wholesale butchery, to which many were sacrificed to the merest

hatred, many to the accident of possessing riches. Presently the

question rose, How they were to get money to pay their guards? and to

meet this difficulty a resolution was passed empowering each of the

committee to seize on one of the resident aliens apiece, to put his

victim to death, and to confiscate his property. Theramenes was

invited, or rather told to seize some one or other. "Choose whom you

will, only let it be done." To which he made answer, it hardly seemed

to him a noble or worthy course on the part of those who claimed to be

the elite of society to go beyond the informers[8] in injustice.

"Yesterday they, to-day we; with this difference, the victim of the

informer must live as a source of income; our innocents must die that

we may get their wealth. Surely their method was innocent in

comparison with ours."



[8] See above.



The rest of the Thirty, who had come to regard Theramenes as an

obstacle to any course they might wish to adopt, proceeded to plot

against him. They addressed themselves to the members of the senate in

private, here a man and there a man, and denounced him as the marplot

of the constitution. Then they issued an order to the young men,

picking out the most audacious characters they could find, to be

present, each with a dagger hidden in the hollow of the armpit; and so

called a meeting of the senate. When Theramenes had taken his place,

Critias got up and addressed the meeting:



"If," said he, "any member of this council, here seated, imagines that

an undue amount of blood has been shed, let me remind him that with

changes of constitution such things can not be avoided. It is the rule

everywhere, but more particularly at Athens it was inevitable there

should be found a specially large number of persons sworn foes to any

constitutional change in the direction of oligarchy, and this for two

reasons. First, because the population of this city, compared with

other Hellenic cities, is enormously large; and again, owing to the

length of time during which the people has battened upon liberty. Now,

as to two points we are clear. The first is that democracy is a form

of government detestable to persons like ourselves--to us and to you;

the next is that the people of Athens could never be got to be

friendly to our friends and saviours, the Lacedaemonians. But on the

loyalty of the better classes the Lacedaemonians can count. And that

is our reason for establishing an oligarchical constitution with their

concurrence. That is why we do our best to rid us of every one whom we

perceive to be opposed to the oligarchy; and, in our opinion, if one

of ourselves should elect to undermine this constitution of ours, he

would deserve punishment. Do you not agree? And the case," he

continued, "is no imaginary one. The offender is here present--

Theramenes. And what we say of him is, that he is bent upon destroying

yourselves and us by every means in his power. These are not baseless

charges; but if you will consider it, you will find them amply

established in this unmeasured censure of the present posture of

affairs, and his persistent opposition to us, his colleagues, if ever

we seek to get rid of any of these demagogues. Had this been his

guiding principle of action from the beginning, in spite of hostility,

at least he would have escaped all imputation of villainy. Why, this

is the very man who originated our friendly and confidential relations

with Lacedaemon. This is the very man who authorised the abolition of

the democracy, who urged us on to inflict punishment on the earliest

batch of prisoners brought before us. But to-day all is changed; now

you and we are out of odour with the people, and he accordingly has

ceased to be pleased with our proceedings. The explanation is obvious.

In case of a catastrophe, how much pleasanter for him once again to

light upon his legs, and leave us to render account for our past

performances.



"I contend that this man is fairly entitled to render his account

also, not only as an ordinary enemy, but as a traitor to yourselves

and us. And let us add, not only is treason more formidable than open

war, in proportion as it is harder to guard against a hidden assassin

than an open foe, but it bears the impress of a more enduring

hostility, inasmuch as men fight their enemies and come to terms with

them again and are fast friends; but whoever heard of reconciliation

with a traitor? There he stands unmasked; he has forfeited our

confidence for evermore. But to show you that these are no new tactics

of his, to prove to you that he is a traitor in grain, I will recall

to your memories some points in his past history.



"He began by being held in high honour by the democracy; but taking a

leaf out of his father's, Hagnon's, book, he next showed a most

headlong anxiety to transform the democracy into the Four Hundred,

and, in fact, for a time held the first place in that body. But

presently, detecting the formation of rival power to the oligarchs,

round he shifted; and we find him next a ringleader of the popular

party in assailing them. It must be admitted, he has well earned his

nickname 'Buskin.'[9] Yes, Theramenes! clever you may be, but the man

who deserves to live should not show his cleverness in leading on his

associates into trouble, and when some obstacle presents itself, at

once veer round; but like a pilot on shipboard, he ought then to

redouble his efforts, until the wind is fair. Else, how in the name of

wonderment are those mariners to reach the haven where they would be,

if at the first contrary wind or tide they turn about and sail in the

opposite direction? Death and destruction are concomitants of

constitutional changes and revolution, no doubt; but you are such an

impersonation of change, that, as you twist and turn and double, you

deal destruction on all sides. At one swoop you are the ruin of a

thousand oligarchs at the hands of the people, and at another of a

thousand democrats at the hands of the better classes. Why, sirs, this

is the man to whom the orders were given by the generals, in the sea-

fight off Lesbos, to pick up the crews of the disabled vessels; and

who, neglecting to obey orders, turned round and accused the generals;

and to save himself murdered them! What, I ask you, of a man who so

openly studied the art of self-seeking, deaf alike to the pleas of

honour and to the claims of friendship? Would not leniency towards

such a creature be misplaced? Can it be our duty at all to spare him?

Ought we not rather, when we know the doublings of his nature, to

guard against them, lest we enable him presently to practise on

ourselves? The case is clear. We therefore hereby cite this man before

you, as a conspirator and traitor against yourselves and us. The

reasonableness of our conduct, one further reflection may make clear.

No one, I take it, will dispute the splendour, the perfection of the

Laconian constitution. Imagine one of the ephors there in Sparta, in

lieu of devoted obedience to the majority, taking on himself to find

fault with the government and to oppose all measures. Do you not think

that the ephors themselves, and the whole commonwealth besides, would

hold this renegade worthy of condign punishment? So, too, by the same

token, if you are wise, do you spare yourselves, not him. For what

does the alternative mean? I will tell you. His preservation will

cause the courage of many who hold opposite views to your own to rise;

his destruction will cut off the last hopes of all your enemies,

whether within or without the city."



[9] An annotator seems to have added here the words, occurring in the

    MSS., "the buskin which seems to fit both legs equally, but is

    constant to neither," unless, indeed, they are an original

    "marginal note" of the author. For the character of Theramenes, as

    popularly conceived, cf. Aristoph. "Frogs," 538, 968 foll., and

    Thuc. viii. 92; and Prof. Jowett, "Thuc." vol. ii. pp. 523, 524.



With these words he sat down, but Theramenes rose and said: "Sirs,

with your permission I will first touch upon the charge against me

which Critias has mentioned last. The assertion is that as the accuser

of the generals I was their murderer. Now I presume it was not I who

began the attack upon them, but it was they who asserted that in spite

of the orders given me I had neglected to pick up the unfortunates in

the sea-fight off Lesbos. All I did was to defend myself. My defence

was that the storm was too violent to permit any vessel to ride at

sea, much more therefore to pick up the men, and this defence was

accepted by my fellow-citizens as highly reasonable, while the

generals seemed to be condemned out of their own mouths. For while

they kept on asserting that it was possible to save the men, the fact

still remained that they abandoned them to their fate, set sail, and

were gone.



"However, I am not surprised, I confess, at this grave

misconception[10] on the part of Critias, for at the date of these

occurrences he was not in Athens. He was away in Thessaly, laying the

foundations of a democracy with Prometheus, and arming the

Penestae[11] against their masters. Heaven forbid that any of his

transactions there should be re-enacted here. However, I must say, I

do heartily concur with him on one point. Whoever desires to exclude

you from the government, or to strength the hands of your secret foes,

deserves and ought to meet with condign punishment; but who is most

capable of so doing? That you will best discover, I think, by looking

a little more closely into the past and the present conduct of each of

us. Well, then! up to the moment at which you were formed into a

senatorial body, when the magistracies were appointed, and certain

notorius 'informers' were brought to trial, we all held the same

views. But later on, when our friends yonder began to hale respectable

honest folk to prison and to death, I, on my side, began to differ

from them. From the moment when Leon of Salamis,[12] a man of high and

well-deserved reputation, was put to death, though he had not

committed the shadow of a crime, I knew that all his equals must

tremble for themselves, and, so trembling, be driven into opposition

to the new constitution. In the same way, when Niceratus,[13] the son

of Nicias, was arrested; a wealthy man, who, no more than his father,

had never done anything that could be called popular or democratic in

his life; it did not require much insight to discover that his

compeers would be converted into our foes. But to go a step further:

when it came to Antiphon[14] falling at our hands--Antiphon, who

during the war contributed two fast-sailing men-of-war out of his own

resources, it was then plain to me, that all who had ever been zealous

and patriotic must eye us with suspicion. Once more I could not help

speaking out in opposition to my colleagues when they suggested that

each of us ought to seize some one resident alien.[15] For what could

be more certain than that their death-warrant would turn the whole

resident foreign population into enemies of the constitution. I spoke

out again when they insisted on depriving the populace of their arms;

it being no part of my creed that we ought to take the strength out of

the city; nor, indeed, so far as I could see, had the Lacedaemonians

stept between us and destruction merely that we might become a handful

of people, powerless to aid them in the day of need. Had that been

their object, they might have swept us away to the last man. A few

more weeks, or even days, would have sufficed to extinguish us quietly

by famine. Nor, again, can I say that the importation of mercenary

foreign guards was altogether to my taste, when it would have been so

easy for us to add to our own body a sufficient number of fellow-

citizens to ensure our supremacy as governors over those we essayed to

govern. But when I saw what an army of malcontents this government had

raised up within the city walls, besides another daily increasing host

of exiles without, I could not but regard the banishment of people

like Thrasybulus and Anytus and Alcibiades[16] as impolitic. Had our

object been to strengthen the rival power, we could hardly have set

about it better than by providing the populace with the competent

leaders whom they needed, and the would-be leaders themselves with an

army of willing adherents.



[10] Reading with Cobet {paranenomikenai}.



[11] I.e. serfs--Penestae being the local name in Thessaly for the

    villein class. Like the {Eilotes} in Laconia, they were originally

    a conquered tribe, afterwards increased by prisoners of war, and

    formed a link between the freemen and born slaves.



[12] Cf. "Mem." IV. iv. 3; Plat. "Apol." 8. 32.



[13] Cf. Lysias, "Or." 18. 6.



[14] Probably the son of Lysidonides. See Thirlwall, "Hist. of

    Greece," vol. iv. p. 179 (ed. 1847); also Lysias, "Or." 12. contra

    Eratosth. According to Lysias, Theramenes, when a member of the

    first Oligarchy, betrayed his own closest friends, Antiphon and

    Archeptolemus. See Prof. Jebb, "Attic Orators," I. x. p. 266.



[15] The resident aliens, or {metoikoi}, "metics," so technically

    called.



[16] Isocr. "De Bigis," 355; and Prof. Jebb's "Attic Orators," ii.

    230. In the defence of his father's career, which the younger

    Alcibiades, the defendant in this case (B.C. 397 probably) has

    occasion to make, he reminds the court, that under the Thirty,

    others were banished from Athens, but his father was driven out of

    the civilised world of Hellas itself, and finally murdered. See

    Plutarch, "Alcibiades," ad fin.



"I ask then is the man who tenders such advice in the full light of

day justly to be regarded as a traitor, and not as a benefactor?

Surely Critias, the peacemaker, the man who hinders the creation of

many enemies, whose counsels tend to the acquistion of yet more

friends,[17] cannot be accused of strengthening the hands of the

enemy. Much more truly may the imputation be retorted on those who

wrongfully appropriate their neighbours' goods and put to death those

who have done no wrong. These are they who cause our adversaries to

grow and multiply, and who in very truth are traitors, not to their

friends only, but to themselves, spurred on by sordid love of gain.



[17] Or, "the peacemaker, the healer of differences, the cementer of

    new alliances, cannot," etc.



"I might prove the truth of what I say in many ways, but I beg you to

look at the matter thus. With which condition of affairs here in

Athens do you think will Thrasybulus and Anytus and the other exiles

be the better pleased? That which I have pictured as desirable, or

that which my colleagues yonder are producing? For my part I cannot

doubt but that, as things now are, they are saying to themselves, 'Our

allies muster thick and fast.' But were the real strength, the pith

and fibre of this city, kindly disposed to us, they would find it an

uphill task even to get a foothold anywhere in the country.



"Then, with regard to what he said of me and my propensity to be for

ever changing sides, let me draw your attention to the following

facts. Was it not the people itself, the democracy, who voted the

constitution of the Four Hundred? This they did, because they had

learned to think that the Lacedaemonians would trust any other form of

government rather than a democracy. But when the efforts of Lacedaemon

were not a whit relaxed, when Aristoteles, Melanthius, and

Aristarchus,[18] and the rest of them acting as generals, were plainly

minded to construct an intrenched fortress on the mole for the purpose

of admitting the enemy, and so getting the city under the power of

themselves and their associates;[19] because I got wind of these

schemes, and nipped them in the bud, is that to be a traitor to one's

friends?



[18] Cf. Thuc. viii. 90-92, for the behaviour of the Lacedaemonian

    party at Athens and the fortification of Eetioneia in B.C. 411.



[19] I.e. of the political clubs.



"Then he threw in my teeth the nickname 'Buskin,' as descriptive of an

endeavour on my part to fit both parties. But what of the man who

pleases neither? What in heaven's name are we to call him? Yes! you--

Critias? Under the democracy you were looked upon as the most arrant

hater of the people, and under the aristocracy you have proved

yourself the bitterest foe of everything respectable. Yes! Critias, I

am, and ever have been, a foe of those who think that a democracy

cannot reach perfection until slaves and those who, from poverty,

would sell the city for a drachma, can get their drachma a day.[20]

But not less am I, and ever have been, a pronounced opponent of those

who do not think there can possibly exist a perfect oligarchy until

the State is subjected to the despotism of a few. On the contrary, my

own ambition has been to combine with those who are rich enough to

possess a horse and shield, and to use them for the benefit of the

State.[21] That was my ideal in the old days, and I hold to it without

a shadow of turning still. If you can imagine when and where, in

conjunction with despots or demagogues, I have set to my hand to

deprive honest gentlefolk of their citizenship, pray speak. If you can

convict me of such crimes at present, or can prove my perpetration of

them in the past, I admit that I deserve to die, and by the worst of

deaths."



[20] I.e. may enjoy the senatorial stipend of a drachma a day = 9 3/4

    pence.



[21] See Thuc. viii. 97, for a momentary realisation of that "duly

    attempered compound of Oligarchy and Democracy" which Thucydides

    praises, and which Theramenes here refers to. It threw the power

    into the hands of the wealthier upper classes to the exclusion of

    the {nautikos okhlos}. See Prof. Jowett, vol. ii. note, ad loc.

    cit.



With these words he ceased, and the loud murmur of the applause which

followed marked the favourable impression produced upon the senate. It

was plain to Critias, that if he allowed his adversary's fate to be

decided by formal voting, Theramenes would escape, and life to himself

would become intolerable. Accordingly he stepped forward and spoke a

word or two in the ears of the Thirty. This done, he went out and gave

an order to the attendants with the daggers to stand close to the bar

in full view of the senators. Again he entered and addressed the

senate thus: "I hold it to be the duty of a good president, when he

sees the friends about him being made the dupes of some delusion, to

intervene. That at any rate is what I propose to do. Indeed our

friends here standing by the bar say that if we propose to acquit a

man so openly bent upon the ruin of the oligarchy, they do not mean to

let us do so. Now there is a clause in the new code forbidding any of

the Three Thousand to be put to death without your vote; but the

Thirty have power of life and death over all outside that list.

Accordingly," he proceeded, "I herewith strike this man, Theramenes,

off the list; and this with the concurrence of my colleagues. And

now," he continued, "we condemn him to death."



Hearing these words Theramenes sprang upon the altar of Hestia,

exclaiming: "And I, sirs, supplicate you for the barest forms of law

and justice. Let it not be in the power of Critias to strike off

either me, or any one of you whom he will. But in my case, in what may

be your case, if we are tried, let our trial be in accordance with the

law they have made concerning those on the list. I know," he added,

"but too well, that this altar will not protect me; but I will make it

plain that these men are as impious towards the gods as they are

nefarious towards men. Yet I do marvel, good sirs and honest

gentlemen, for so you are, that you will not help yourselves, and that

too when you must see that the name of every one of you is as easily

erased as mine."



But when he had got so far, the voice of the herald was heard giving

the order to the Eleven to seize Theramenes. They at that instant

entered with their satellites--at their head Satyrus, the boldest and

most shameless of the body--and Critias exclaimed, addressing the

Eleven, "We deliver over to you Theramenes yonder, who has been

condemned according to the law. Do you take him and lead him away to

the proper place, and do there with him what remains to do." As

Critias uttered the words, Satyrus laid hold upon Theramenes to drag

him from the altar, and the attendants lent their aid. But he, as was

natural, called upon gods and men to witness what was happening. The

senators the while kept silence, seeing the companions of Satyrus at

the bar, and the whole front of the senate house crowded with the

foreign guards, nor did they need to be told that there were daggers

in reserve among those present.



And so Theramenes was dragged through the Agora, in vehement and loud

tones proclaiming the wrongs that he was suffering. One word, which is

said to have fallen from his lips, I cite. It is this: Satyrus, bade

him "Be silent, or he would rue the day;" to which he made answer,

"And if I be silent, shall I not rue it?" Also, when they brought him

the hemlock, and the time was come to drink the fatal draught, they

tell how he playfully jerked out the dregs from the bottom of the cup,

like one who plays "Cottabos,"[22] with the words, "This to the lovely

Critias." These are but "apophthegms"[23] too trivial, it may be

thought, to find a place in history. Yet I must deem it an admirable

trait in this man's character, if at such a moment, when death

confronted him, neither his wits forsook him, nor could the childlike

sportiveness vanish from his soul.



[22] "A Sicilian game much in vogue at the drinking parties of young

    men at Athens. The simplest mode was when each threw the wine left

    in his cup so as to strike smartly in a metal basin, at the same

    time invoking his mistress's name; if all fell into the basin and

    the sound was clear, it was a sign he stood well with her."--

    Liddell and Scott, sub. v. For the origin of the game compare

    curiously enough the first line of the first Elegy of Critias

    himself, who was a poet and political philosopher, as well as a

    politician:--



"{Kottabos ek Sikeles esti khthonos, euprepes ergon

on skopon es latagon toxa kathistametha.}"

Bergk. "Poetae Lyr. Graec."

Pars II. xxx.





[23] Or, "these are sayings too slight, perhaps, to deserve record;

    yet," etc. By an "apophthegm" was meant originally a terse

    (sententious) remark, but the word has somewhat altered in

    meaning.







IV



So Theramenes met his death; and, now that this obstacle was removed,

the Thirty, feeling that they had it in their power to play the tyrant

without fear, issued an order forbidding all, whose names were not on

the list, to set foot within the city. Retirement in the country

districts was no protection, thither the prosecutor followed them, and

thence dragged them, that their farms and properties might fall to the

possession of the Thirty and their friends. Even Piraeus was not safe;

of those who sought refuge there, many were driven forth in similar

fashion, until Megara and Thebes overflowed with the crowd of

refugees.



Presently Thrasybulus, with about seventy followers, sallied out from

Thebes, and made himself master of the fortress of Phyle.[1] The

weather was brilliant, and the Thirty marched out of the city to repel

the invader; with them were the Three Thousand and the Knights. When

they reached the place, some of the young men, in the foolhardiness of

youth, made a dash at the fortress, but without effect; all they got

was wounds, and so retired. The intention of the Thirty now was to

blockade the place; by shutting off all the avenues of supplies, they

thought to force the garrison to capitulate. But this project was

interrupted by a steady downfall of snow that night and the following

day. Baffled by this all-pervading enemy they beat a retreat to the

city, but not without the sacrifice of many of their camp-followers,

who fell a prey to the men in Phyle. The next anxiety of the

government in Athens was to secure the farms and country houses

against the plunderings and forays to which they would be exposed, if

there were no armed force to protect them. With this object a

protecting force was despatched to the "boundary estates,"[2] about

two miles south of Phyle. This corps consisted of the Lacedaemonian

guards, or nearly all of them, and two divisions of horse.[3] They

encamped in a wild and broken district, and the round of their duties

commenced.



[1] "A strong fortress (the remains of which still exist) commanding

    the narrow pass across Mount Parnes, through which runs the direct

    road from Thebes to Athens, past Acharnae. The precipitous rock on

    which it stands can only be approached by a ridge on the eastern

    side. The height commands a magnificent view of the whole Athenian

    plain, of the city itself, of Mount Hymettus, and the Saronic

    Gulf,"--"Dict. of Geog., The demi of the Diacria and Mount

    Parnes."



[2] Cf. Boeckh, "P. E. A." p. 63, Eng. ed.



[3] Lit. tribes, each of the ten tribes furnishing about one hundred

    horse.



But by this time the small garrison above them had increased tenfold,

until there were now something like seven hundred men collected in

Phyle; and with these Thrasybulus one night descended. When he was not

quite half a mile from the enemy's encampment he grounded arms, and a

deep silence was maintained until it drew towards day. In a little

while the men opposite, one by one, were getting to their legs or

leaving the camp for necessary purposes, while a suppressed din and

murmur arose, caused by the grooms currying and combing their horses.

This was the moment for Thrasybulus and his men to snatch up their

arms and make a dash at the enemy's position. Some they felled on the

spot; and routing the whole body, pursued them six or seven furlongs,

killing one hundred and twenty hoplites and more. Of the cavalry,

Nicostratus, "the beautiful," as men called him, and two others

besides were slain; they were caught while still in their beds.

Returning from the pursuit, the victors set up a trophy, got together

all the arms they had taken, besides baggage, and retired again to

Phyle. A reinforcement of horse sent from the city could not discover

the vestige of a foe; but waited on the scene of battle until the

bodies of the slain had been picked up by their relatives, when they

withdrew again to the city.



After this the Thirty, who had begun to realise the insecurity of

their position, were anxious to appropriate Eleusis, so that an asylum

might be ready for them against the day of need. With this view an

order was issued to the Knights; and Critias, with the rest of the

Thirty, visited Eleusis. There they held a review of the Eleusians in

the presence of the Knights;[4] and, on the pretext of wishing to

discover how many they were, and how large a garrison they would

further require, they ordered the townsfolk to enter their names. As

each man did so he had to retire by a postern leading to the sea. But

on the sea-beach this side there were lines of cavalry drawn up in

waiting, and as each man appeared he was handcuffed by the satellites

of the Thirty. When all had so been seized and secured, they gave

orders to Lysimachus, the commander of the cavalry, to take them off

to the city and deliver them over to the Eleven. Next day they

summoned the heavy armed who were on the list, and the rest of the

Knights[5] to the Odeum, and Critias rose and addressed them. He said:

"Sirs, the constitution, the lines of which we are laying down, is a

work undertaken in your interests no less than ours; it is incumbent

on you therefore to participate in its dangers, even as you will

partake of its honours. We expect you therefore, in reference to these

Eleusians here, who have been seized and secured, to vote their

condemnation, so that our hopes and fears may be identical." Then,

pointing to a particular spot, he said peremptorily, "You will please

deposit your votes there within sight of all." It must be understood

that the Laconian guards were present at the time, and armed to the

teeth, and filling one-half of the Odeum. As to the proceedings

themselves, they found acceptance with those members of the State,

besides the Thirty, who could be satisfied with a simple policy of

self-aggrandisement.



[4] Or, "in the cavalry quarters," cf. {en tois ikhthusin} = in the

    fish market. Or, "at the review of the horse."



[5] For the various Odeums at Athens vide Prof. Jebb, "Theophr."

    xviii. 235, 236. The one here named was near the fountain

    Callirhoe by the Ilissus.



But now Thrasybulus at the head of his followers, by this time about

one thousand strong, descended from Phyle and reached Piraeus in the

night. The Thirty, on their side, informed of this new move, were not

slow to rally to the rescue, with the Laconian guards, supported by

their own cavalry and hoplites. And so they advanced, marching down

along the broad carriage road which leads into Piraeus. The men from

Phyle seemed at first inclined to dispute their passage, but as the

wide circuit of the walls needed a defence beyond the reach of their

still scanty numbers, they fell back in a compact body upon

Munychia.[6] Then the troops from the city poured into the Agora of

Hippodmus.[7] Here they formed in line, stretching along and filling

the street which leads to the temple of Artemis and the Bendideum.[8]

This line must have been at least fifty shields deep; and in this

formation they at once began to march up. As to the men of Phyle, they

too blocked the street at the opposite end, and facing the foe. They

presented only a thin line, not more than ten deep, though behind

these, certainly, were ranged a body of targeteers and light-armed

javelin men, who were again supported by an artillery of stone-

throwers--a tolerably numerous division drawn from the population of

the port and district itself. While his antagonists were still

advancing, Thrasybulus gave the order to ground their heavy shields,

and having done so himself, whilst retaining the rest of his arms, he

stood in the midst, and thus addressed them: "Men and fellow-citizens,

I wish to inform some, and to remind others of you, that of the men

you see advancing beneath us there, the right division are the very

men we routed and pursued only five days ago; while on the extreme

left there you see the Thirty. These are the men who have not spared

to rob us of our city, though we did no wrong; who have hounded us

from our homes; who have set the seal of proscription on our dearest

friends. But to-day the wheel of fortune has revolved; that has come

about which least of all they looked for, which most of all we prayed

for. Here we stand with our good swords in our hands, face to face

with our foes; and the gods themselves are with us, seeing that we

were arrested in the midst of our peaceful pursuits; at any moment,

whilst we supped, or slept, or marketed, sentence of banishment was

passed upon us: we had done no wrong--nay, many of us were not even

resident in the country. To-day, therefore, I repeat, the gods do

visibly fight upon our side; the great gods, who raise a tempest even

in the midst of calm for our benefit, and when we lay to our hand to

fight, enable our little company to set up the trophy of victory over

the multitude of our foes. On this day they have brought us hither to

a place where the steep ascent must needs hinder our foes from

reaching with lance or arrow further than our foremost ranks; but we

with our volley of spears and arrows and stones cannot fail to reach

them with terrible effect. Had we been forced to meet them vanguard to

vanguard, on an equal footing, who could have been surprised? But as

it is, all I say to you is, let fly your missiles with a will in right

brave style. No one can miss his mark when the road is full of them.

To avoid our darts they must be for ever ducking and skulking beneath

their shields; but we will rain blows upon them in their blindness; we

will leap upon them and lay them low. But, O sirs! let me call upon

you so to bear yourselves that each shall be conscious to himself that

victory was won by him and him alone. Victory--which, God willing,

shall this day restore to us the land of our fathers, our homes, our

freedom, and the rewards of civic life, our children, if children we

have, our darlings, and our wives! Thrice happy those among us who as

conquerors shall look upon this gladdest of all days. Nor less

fortunate the man who falls to-day. Not all the wealth in the world

shall purchase him a monument so glorious. At the right instant I will

strike the keynote of the paean; then, with an invocation to the God

of battle,[9] and in return for the wanton insults they put upon us,

let us with one accord wreak vengeance on yonder men."



[6] The citadel quarter of Piraeus.



[7] Named after the famous architect Hippodamus, who built the town.

    It was situated near where the two long walls joined the wall of

    Piraeus; a broad street led from it up to the citadel of Munychia.



[8] I.e. the temple of Bendis (the Thracian Artemis). Cf. Plat. "Rep."

    327, 354; and Prof. Jowett, "Plato," vol. iii. pp. 193, 226.



[9] Lit. "Enyalius," in Homer an epithet of Ares; at another date (cf.

    Aristoph. "Peace," 456) looked upon as a distinct divinity.



Having so spoken, he turned round, facing the foemen, and kept quiet,

for the order passed by the soothsayer enjoined on them, not to charge

before one of their side was slain or wounded. "As soon as that

happens," said the seer, "we will lead you onwards, and the victory

shall be yours; but for myself, if I err not, death is waiting." And

herein he spoke truly, for they had barely resumed their arms when he

himself as though he were driven by some fatal hand, leapt out in

front of the ranks, and so springing into the midst of the foe, was

slain, and lies now buried at the passage of the Cephisus. But the

rest were victorious, and pursued the routed enemy down to the level

ground. There fell in this engagement, out of the number of the

Thirty, Critias himself and Hippomachus, and with them Charmides,[10]

the son of Glaucon, one of the ten archons in Piraeus, and of the rest

about seventy men. The arms of the slain were taken; but, as fellow-

citizens, the conquerors forebore to despoil them of their coats. This

being done, they proceeded to give back the dead under cover of a

truce, when the men, on either side, in numbers stept forward and

conversed with one another. Then Cleocritus (he was the Herald of the

Initiated,[11] a truly "sweet-voiced herald," if ever there was),

caused a deep silence to reign, and addressed their late combatants as

follows: "Fellow-citizens--Why do you drive us forth? why would you

slay us? what evil have we wrought you at any time? or is it a crime

that we have shared with you in the most solemn rites and sacrifices,

and in festivals of the fairest: we have been companions in the

chorus, the school, the army. We have braved a thousand dangers with

you by land and sea in behalf of our common safety, our common

liberty. By the gods of our fathers, by the gods of our mothers, by

the hallowed names of kinship, intermarriage, comradeship, those three

bonds which knit the hearts of so many of us, bow in reverence before

God and man, and cease to sin against the land of our fathers: cease

to obey these most unhallowed Thirty, who for the sake of private gain

have in eight months slain almost more men than the Peloponnesians

together in ten years of warfare. See, we have it in our power to live

as citizens in peace; it is only these men, who lay upon us this most

foul burthen, this hideous horror of fratricidal war, loathed of God

and man. Ah! be well assured, for these men slain by our hands this

day, ye are not the sole mourners. There are among them some whose

deaths have wrung from us also many a bitter tear."



[10] He was cousin to Critias, and uncle by the mother's side to

    Plato, who introduces him in the dialogue, which bears his name

    (and treats of Temperance), as a very young man at the beginning

    of the Peloponnesian War. We hear more of him also from Xenophon

    himself in the "Memorabilia," iii. 6. 7; and as one of the

    interlocutors in the "Symposium."



[11] I.e. of the Eleusinian mysteries. He had not only a loud voice,

    but a big body. Cf. Aristoph. "Frogs," 1237.



So he spoke, but the officers and leaders of the defeated army who

were left, unwilling that their troops should listen to such topics at

that moment, led them back to the city. But the next day the Thirty,

in deep down-heartedness and desolation, sat in the council chamber.

The Three Thousand, wherever their several divisions were posted, were

everywhere a prey to discord. Those who were implicated in deeds of

violence, and whose fears could not sleep, protested hotly that to

yield to the party in Piraeus were preposterous. Those on the other

hand who had faith in their own innocence, argued in their own minds,

and tried to convince their neighbours that they could well dispense

with most of their present evils. "Why yield obedience to these

Thirty?" they asked, "Why assign to them the privilege of destroying

the State?" In the end they voted a resolution to depose the

government, and to elect another. This was a board of ten, elected one

from each tribe.



B.C. 403. As to the Thirty, they retired to Eleusis; but the Ten,

assisted by the cavalry officers, had enough to do to keep watch over

the men in the city, whose anarchy and mutual distrust were rampant.

The Knights did not return to quarters at night, but slept out in the

Odeum, keeping their horses and shields close beside them; indeed the

distrust was so great that from evening onwards they patrolled the

walls on foot with their shields, and at break of day mounted their

horses, at every moment fearing some sudden attack upon them by the

men in Piraeus. These latter were now so numerous, and of so mixed a

company, that it was difficult to find arms for all. Some had to be

content with shields of wood, others of wicker-work, which they spent

their time in coating with whitening. Before ten days had elapsed

guarantees were given, securing full citizenship, with equality of

taxation and tribute to all, even foreigners, who would take part in

the fighting. Thus they were presently able to take the field, with

large detachments both of heavy infantry and light-armed troops,

besides a division of cavalry, about seventy in number. Their system

was to push forward foraging parties in quest of wood and fruits,

returning at nightfall to Piraeus. Of the city party no one ventured

to take the field under arms; only, from time to time, the cavalry

would capture stray pillagers from Piraeus or inflict some damage on

the main body of their opponents. Once they fell in with a party

belonging to the deme Aexone,[12] marching to their own farms in

search of provisions. These, in spite of many prayers for mercy and

the strong disapprobation of many of the knights, were ruthlessly

slaughtered by Lysimachus, the general of cavalry. The men of Piraeus

retaliated by putting to death a horseman, named Callistratus, of the

tribe Leontis, whom they captured in the country. Indeed their courage

ran so high at present that they even meditated an assault upon the

city walls. And here perhaps the reader will pardon the record of a

somewhat ingenious device on the part of the city engineer, who, aware

of the enemy's intention to advance his batteries along the

racecourse, which slopes from the Lyceum, had all the carts and

waggons which were to be found laden with blocks of stone, each one a

cartload in itself, and so sent them to deposit their freights

"pele-mele" on the course in question. The annoyance created by these

separate blocks of stone was enormous, and quite out of proportion to

the simplicity of the contrivance.



[12] On the coast south of Phalerum, celebrated for its fisheries. Cf.

    "Athen." vii. 325.



But it was to Lacedaemon that men's eyes now turned. The Thirty

despatched one set of ambassadors from Eleusis, while another set

representing the government of the city, that is to say the men on the

list, was despatched to summon the Lacedaemonians to their aid, on the

plea that the people had revolted from Sparta. At Sparta, Lysander,

taking into account the possibility of speedily reducing the party in

Piraeus by blockading them by land and sea, and so cutting them off

from all supplies, supported the application, and negotiated the loan

of one hundred talents[13] to his clients, backed by the appointment

of himself as harmost on land, and of his brother, Libys, as admiral

of the fleet. And so proceeding to the scene of action at Eleusis, he

got together a large body of Peloponnesian hoplites, whilst his

brother, the admiral, kept watch and ward by sea to prevent the

importation of supplies into Piraeus by water. Thus the men in Piraeus

were soon again reduced to their former helplessness, while the ardour

of the city folk rose to a proportionally high pitch under the

auspices of Lysander.



[13] 24,375 pounds, reckoning one tal. = 243 pounds 15 shillings.



Things were progressing after this sort when King Pausanias

intervened. Touched by a certain envy of Lysander--(who seemed, by a

final stroke of achievement, about to reach the pinnacle of

popularity, with Athens laid like a pocket dependency at his feet)--

the king persuaded three of the ephors to support him, and forthwith

called out the ban. With him marched contingents of all the allied

States, except the Boeotians and Corinthians. These maintained, that

to undertake such an expedition against the Athenians, in whose

conduct they saw nothing contrary to the treaty, was inconsistent with

their oaths. But if that was the language held by them, the secret of

their behaviour lay deeper; they seemed to be aware of a desire on the

part of the Lacedaemonians to annex the soil of the Athenians and to

reduce the state to vassalage. Pausanias encamped on the

Halipedon,[14] as the sandy flat is called, with his right wing

resting on Piraeus, and Lysander and his mercenaries forming the left.

His first act was to send an embassage to the party in Piraeus,

calling upon them to retire peacably to their homes; when they refused

to obey, he made, as far as mere noise went, the semblance of an

attack, with sufficient show of fight to prevent his kindly

disposition being too apparent. But gaining nothing by the feint, he

was forced to retire. Next day he took two Laconian regiments, with

three tribes of Athenian horse, and crossed over to the Mute[15]

Harbour, examining the lie of the ground to discover how and where it

would be easiest to draw lines of circumvallation round Piraeus. As he

turned his back to retire, a party of the enemy sallied out and caused

him annoyance. Nettled at the liberty, he ordered the cavalry to

charge at the gallop, supported by the ten-year-service[16] infantry,

whilst he himself, with the rest of the troops, followed close,

holding quietly back in reserve. They cut down about thirty of the

enemy's light troops and pursued the rest hotly to the theatre in

Piraeus. Here, as chance would have it, the whole light and heavy

infantry of the Piraeus men were getting under arms; and in an instant

their light troops rushed out and dashed at the assailants; thick and

fast flew missiles of all sorts--javelins, arrows and sling stones.

The Lacedaemonians finding the number of their wounded increasing

every minute, and sorely called, slowly fell back step by step, eyeing

their opponents. These meanwhile resolutely pressed on. Here fell

Chaeron and Thibrachus, both polemarchs, here also Lacrates, an

Olympic victor, and other Lacedaemonians, all of whom now lie entombed

before the city gates in the Ceramicus.[17]



[14] The Halipedon is the long stretch of flat sandy land between

    Piraeus Phalerum and the city.



[15] Perhaps the landlocked creek just round the promontory of

    Eetioneia, as Leake conjectures, "Topog. of Athens," p. 389. See

    also Prof. Jowett's note, "Thuc." v. 2; vol. ii. p. 286.



[16] I.e. who had already seen ten years of service, i.e. over twenty-

    eight, as the Spartan was eligible to serve at eighteen. Cf. Xen.

    "Hell." III. iv. 23; VI. iv. 176.



[17] The outer Ceramicus, "the most beautiful spot outside the walls."

    Cf. Thuc. ii. 34; through it passes the street of the tombs on the

    sacred road; and here was the place of burial for all persons

    honoured with a public funeral. Cf. Arist. "Birds," 395.



Watching how matters went, Thrasybulus began his advance with the

whole of his heavy infantry to support his light troops and quickly

fell into line eight deep, acting as a screen to the rest of his

troops. Pausanias, on his side, had retired, sorely pressed, about

half a mile towards a bit of rising ground, where he sent orders to

the Lacedaemonians and the other allied troops to bring up

reinforcements. Here, on this slope, he reformed his troops, giving

his phalanx the full depth, and advanced against the Athenians, who

did not hesitate to receive him at close quarters, but presently had

to give way; one portion being forced into the mud and clay at

Halae,[18] while the others wavered and broke their line; one hundred

and fifty of them were left dead on the field, whereupon Pausanias set

up a trophy and retired. Not even so, were his feelings embittered

against his adversary. On the contrary he sent secretly and instructed

the men of Piraeus, what sort of terms they should propose to himself

and the ephors in attendance. To this advice they listened. He also

fostered a division in the party within the city. A deputation, acting

on his orders, sought an audience of him and the ephors. It had all

the appearance of a mass meeting. In approaching the Spartan

authorities, they had no desire or occasion, they stated, to look upon

the men of Piraeus as enemies, they would prefer a general

reconciliation and the friendship of both sides with Lacedaemon. The

propositions were favourably received, and by no less a person than

Nauclidas. He was present as ephor, in accordance with the custom

which obliges two members of that board to serve on all military

expeditions with the king, and with his colleague shared the political

views represented by Pausanias, rather than those of Lysander and his

party. Thus the authorities were quite ready to despatch to Lacedaemon

the representatives of Piraeus, carrying their terms of truce with the

Lacedaemonians, as also two private individuals belonging to the city

party, whose names were Cephisophon and Meletus. This double

deputation, however, had no sooner set out to Lacedaemon than the "de

facto" government of the city followed suit, by sending a third set of

representatives to state on their behalf: that they were prepared to

deliver up themselves and the fortifications in their possession to

the Lacedaemonians, to do with them what they liked. "Are the men of

Piraeus," they asked, "prepared to surrender Piraeus and Munychia in

the same way? If they are sincere in their profession of friendship to

Lacedaemon, they ought to do so." The ephors and the members of

assembly at Sparta[19] gave audience to these several parties, and

sent out fifteen commissioners to Athens empowered, in conjunction

with Pausanias, to discover the best settlement possible. The

terms[20] arrived at were that a general peace between the rival

parties should be established, liberty to return to their own homes

being granted to all, with the exception of the Thirty, the Eleven,

and the Ten who had been governors in Piraeus; but a proviso was

added, enabling any of the city party who feared to remain at Athens

to find a home in Eleusis.



[18] Halae, the salt marshy ground immediately behind the great

    harbour of Piraeus, but outside the fortification lines.



[19] Cf. "Hell." VI. iii. 3, {oi ekkletoi}.



[20] Cf. Prof. Jebb, "Orators," i. 262, note 2.



And now that everything was happily concluded, Pausanias disbanded his

army, and the men from Piraeus marched up under arms into the

acropolis and offered sacrifice to Athena. When they were come down,

the generals called a meeting of the Ecclesia,[21] and Thrasybulus

made a speech in which, addressing the city party, he said: "Men of

the city! I have one piece of advice I would tender to you; it is that

you should learn to know yourselves, and towards the attainment of

that self-knowledge I would have you make a careful computation of

your good qualities and satisfy yourselves on the strength of which of

these it is that you claim to rule over us. Is it that you are more

just than ourselves? Yet the people, who are poorer--have never

wronged you for the purposes of plunder; but you, whose wealth would

outweight the whole of ours, have wrought many a shameful deed for the

sake of gain. If, then, you have no monopoly of justice, can it be on

the score of courage that you are warranted to hold your heads so

high? If so, what fairer test of courage will you propose than the

arbitrament of war--the war just ended? Or do you claim superiority of

intelligence?--you, who with all your wealth of arms and walls, money

and Peloponnesian allies, have been paralysed by men who had none of

these things to aid them! Or is it on these Laconian friends of yours

that you pride yourselves? What! when these same friends have dealt by

you as men deal by vicious dogs. You know how that is. They put a

heavy collar round the neck of the brutes and hand them over muzzled

to their masters. So too have the Lacedaemonians handed you over to

the people, this very people whom you have injured; and now they have

turned their backs and are gone. But" (turning to the mass) "do not

misconceive me. It is not for me, sirs, coldly to beg of you, in no

respect to violate your solemn undertakings. I go further; I beg you,

to crown your list of exploits by one final display of virtue. Show

the world that you can be faithful to your oaths, and flawless in your

conduct." By these and other kindred arguments he impressed upon them

that there was no need for anarchy or disorder, seeing that there were

the ancient laws ready for use. And so he broke up[22] the assembly.



[21] I.e. the Public Assembly, see above; and reading with Sauppe

    after Cobet {ekklesian epoiesan}, which words are supposed to have

    dropt out of the MSS. Or, keeping to the MSS., translate "When the

    generals were come down, Thrasybulus," etc. See next note.



[22] The Greek words are {antestese ten ekklesian} (an odd phrase for

    the more technical {eluse} or {dieluse ten ekklesian}). Or,

    accepting the MSS. reading above (see last note), translate "he

    set up (i.e. restored) the Assembly." So Mr. J. G. Philpotts, Mr.

    Herbert Hailstone, and others.



At this auspicious moment, then, they reappointed the several

magistrates; the constitution began to work afresh, and civic life was

recommenced. At a subsequent period, on receiving information that the

party at Eleusis were collecting a body of mercenaries, they marched

out with their whole force against them, and put to death their

generals, who came out to parley. These removed, they introduced to

the others their friends and connections, and so persuaded them to

come to terms and be reconciled. The oath they bound themselves by

consisted of a simple asseveration: "We will remember past offences no

more;" and to this day[23] the two parties live amicably together as

good citizens, and the democracy is steadfast to its oaths.



[23] It would be interesting to know the date at which the author

    penned these words. Was this portion of the "Hellenica" written

    before the expedition of Cyrus? i.e. in the interval between the

    formal restoration of the Democracy, September B.C. 403, and March

    B.C. 401. The remaining books of the "Hellenica" were clearly

    written after that expedition, since reference is made to it quite

    early in Bk. III. i. 2. Practically, then, the first volume of

    Xenophon's "History of Hellenic Affairs" ends here. This history

    is resumed in Bk. III. i. 3. after the Cyreian expedition [of

    which episode we have a detailed account in the "Anabasis" from

    March B.C. 401 down to March B.C. 399, when the remnant of the Ten

    Thousand was handed over to the Spartan general Thibron in Asia].

    Some incidents belonging to B.C. 402 are referred to in the

    opening paragraphs of "Hellenica," III. i. 1, 2, but only as an

    introduction to the new matter; and with regard to the historian

    himself, it is clear that "a change has come o'er the spirit of

    his dream." This change of view is marked by a change of style in

    writing. I have thought it legitimate, under the circumstances, to

    follow the chronological order of events, and instead of

    continuing the "Hellenica," at this point to insert the

    "Anabasis." My next volume will contain the remaining books of the

    "Hellenica" and the rest of Xenophon's "historical" writings.



