






PART IV



AS UNIVERSITY PRESIDENT







CHAPTER XVII



EVOLUTION OF ``THE CORNELL IDEA''--1850-1865



To Trinity Hall at Hobart College may be assigned

whatever honor that shadowy personage, the future

historian, shall think due the place where was conceived

and quickened the germ idea of Cornell University.  In

that little stone barrack on the shore of Seneca Lake, rude

in its architecture but lovely in its surroundings, a room

was assigned me during my first year at college; and in

a neighboring apartment, with charming views over the

lake and distant hills, was the library of the Hermean

Society.  It was the largest collection of books I had ever

seen,--four thousand volumes,--embracing a mass of

literature from ``The Pirate's Own Book'' to the works of

Lord Bacon.  In this paradise I reveled, browsing through

it at my will.  This privilege was of questionable value,

since it drew me somewhat from closer study; but it was

not without its uses.  One day I discovered in it Huber and

Newman's book on the English universities.  What a new

world it opened!  My mind was sensitive to any impression

it might make, on two accounts: first, because, on the

intellectual side, I was woefully disappointed at the

inadequacy of the little college as regarded its teaching force

and equipment; and next, because, on the esthetic side, I

lamented the absence of everything like beauty or fitness in

its architecture.



As I read in this new-found book of the colleges at

Oxford and Cambridge, and pored over the engraved

views of quadrangles, halls, libraries, chapels,--of all the

noble and dignified belongings of a great seat of learning,

--my heart sank within me.  Every feature of the little

American college seemed all the more sordid.  But gradually

I began consoling myself by building air-castles. 

These took the form of structures suited to a great

university:--with distinguished professors in every field, with

libraries as rich as the Bodleian, halls as lordly as that of

Christ Church or of Trinity, chapels as inspiring as that

of King's, towers as dignified as those of Magdalen and

Merton, quadrangles as beautiful as those of Jesus and

St. John's.  In the midst of all other occupations I was

constantly rearing these structures on that queenly site

above the finest of the New York lakes, and dreaming of

a university worthy of the commonwealth and of the nation. 

This dream became a sort of obsession.  It came

upon me during my working hours, in the class-rooms, in

rambles along the lake shore, in the evenings, when I paced

up and down the walks in front of the college buildings,

and saw rising in their place and extending to the

pretty knoll behind them, the worthy home of a great

university.  But this university, though beautiful and

dignified, like those at Oxford and Cambridge, was in two

important respects very unlike them.  First, I made

provision for other studies beside classics and mathematics. 

There should be professors in the great modern

literatures--above all, in our own; there should also be a

professor of modern history and a lecturer on architecture. 

And next, my university should be under control of

no single religious organization; it should be free from all

sectarian or party trammels; in electing its trustees and

professors no questions should be asked as to their belief

or their attachment to this or that sect or party.  So far, at

least, I went in those days along the road toward the

founding of Cornell.



The academic year of 1849-1850 having been passed at

this little college in western New York, I entered Yale. 

This was nearer my ideal; for its professors were more

distinguished, its equipment more adequate, its students

more numerous, its general scope more extended.  But it

was still far below my dreams.  Its single course in classics

and mathematics, through which all students were

forced alike, regardless of their tastes, powers, or aims;

its substitution of gerund-grinding for ancient literature;

its want of all instruction in modern literature; its

substitution of recitals from text-books for instruction in

history--all this was far short of my ideal.  Moreover,

Yale was then far more under denominational control

than at present--its president, of necessity, as was then

supposed, a Congregational minister; its professors, as a

rule, members of the same sect; and its tutors, to whom

our instruction during the first two years was almost

entirely confined, students in the Congregational Divinity.



Then, too, its outward representation was sordid and

poor.  The long line of brick barracks, the cheapest which

could be built for money, repelled me.  What a contrast

to Oxford and Cambridge, and, above all, to my air-

castles!  There were, indeed, two architectural consolations:

one, the library building, which had been built just

before my arrival; and the other, the Alumni Hall, begun

shortly afterward.  These were of stone, and I snatched

an especial joy from the grotesque Gothic heads in the

cornices of the library towers and from the little latticed

windows at the rear of the Alumni Hall.  Both seemed to

me features worthy of ``colleges and halls of ancient

days.''



The redeeming feature of the whole was its setting,

the ``green,'' with superb avenues overarched by elms;

and a further charm was added by East and West Rock,

and by the views over New Haven Harbor into Long

Island Sound.  Among these scenes I erected new air-

castles.  First of all, a great quadrangle, not unlike that

which is now developing at Yale, and, as a leading

feature, a gate-tower like that since erected in memory

of William Walter Phelps, but, unlike that, adorned

with statues in niches and on corbels, like those on the

entrance tower of Trinity at Cambridge--statues of old

Yalensian worthies, such as Elihu Yale in his costume of

the Georgian period, Bishop Berkeley in his robes,

President Dwight in his Geneva gown, and Nathan Hale in

fetters.  There was also in my dream another special

feature, which no one has as yet attempted to realize--a lofty

campanile, which I placed sometimes at the intersection of

College and Church, and sometimes at the intersection of

College and Elm streets--a clock-tower looking proudly

down the slope, over the traffic of the town, and bearing a

deep-toned peal of bells.



My general ideas on the subject were further developed

by Charles Astor Bristed's book, ``Five Years in an

English University,'' and by sundry publications regarding

student life in Germany.  Still, my opinions regarding

education were wretchedly imperfect, as may be judged

from one circumstance.  The newly established Sheffield

Scientific School had just begun its career in the old

president's house in front of the former Divinity Hall on

the college green; and, one day in my senior year, looking

toward it from my window in North College, I saw a

student examining a colored liquid in a test-tube.  A feeling

of wonder came over me!  What could it all be about? 

Probably not a man of us in the whole senior class had

any idea of a chemical laboratory save as a sort of small

kitchen back of a lecture-desk, like that in which an assistant

and a colored servant prepared oxygen, hydrogen, and

carbonic acid for the lectures of Professor Silliman.  I

was told that this new laboratory was intended for experiment,

and my wonder was succeeded by disgust that any

human being should give his time to pursuits so futile.



The next period in the formation of my ideas regarding

a university began, after my graduation at Yale, during

my first visit to Oxford.  Then and at later visits, both to

Oxford and Cambridge, I not only reveled in the architectural

glories of those great seats of learning, but learned

the advantages of college life in common--of the ``halls,''

and the general social life which they promote; of 

the ``commons'' and ``combination rooms,'' which give a

still closer relation between those most directly concerned

in university work; of the quadrangles, which give a sense

of scholarly seclusion, even in the midst of crowded cities;

and of all the surroundings which give a dignity befitting

these vast establishments.  Still more marked progress in

my ideas was made during my attendance at the Sorbonne

and the Coll<e!>ge de France.  In those institutions, during

the years 1853-1854, I became acquainted with the French

university-lecture system, with its clearness, breadth,

wealth of illustration, and its hold upon large audiences

of students; and I was seized with the desire to transfer

something like it to our own country.  My castles in the

air were now reared more loftily and broadly; for they

began to include laboratories, museums, and even galleries

of art.



Even St. Petersburg, during my attach<e'>ship in 1854-

1855, contributed to these airy structures.  In my diary

for that period, I find it jotted down that I observed and

studied at various times the Michael Palace in that city as

a very suitable structure for a university.  Twenty years

afterward, when I visited, as minister of the United

States, the Grand Duchess Catherine, the aunt of the

Emperor Alexander III, in that same palace, and mentioned

to her my old admiration for it, she gave me a most

interesting account of the building of it, and of the laying

out of the beautiful park about it by her father, the old

Grand Duke Michael, and agreed with me that it would

be a noble home for an institution of learning.



My student life at Berlin, during the year following,

further intensified my desire to do something for university

education in the United States.  There I saw my ideal

of a university not only realized, but extended and glorified--

with renowned professors, with ample lecture-halls,

with everything possible in the way of illustrative

materials, with laboratories, museums, and a concourse of

youth from all parts of the world.



I have already spoken, in the chapter on my professorship 

at the University of Michigan, regarding the influence

on my ideas of its president, Henry Philip Tappan, and

of the whole work in that institution.  Though many good

things may be justly said for the University of Virginia,

the real beginning of a university in the United States, in

the modern sense, was made by Dr. Tappan and his

colleagues at Ann Arbor.  Its only defects seemed to me that

it included no technical side, and did not yet admit

women.  As to the first of these defects, the State had

separated the agricultural college from the university,

placing it in what, at that period, was a remote swamp

near the State Capitol, and had as yet done nothing toward

providing for other technical branches.  As to the second,

though a few of us favored the admission of women, President

Tappan opposed it; and, probably, in view of the

condition of the university and of public opinion at that

time, his opposition was wise.



Recalled to Syracuse after five years in Michigan, my

old desire to see a university rising in the State of New

York was stronger than ever.  Michigan had shown me

some of my ideals made real; why might not our own

much greater commonwealth be similarly blessed?



The first thing was to devise a plan for a suitable

faculty.  As I felt that this must not demand too large an

outlay, I drew up a scheme providing for a few resident

teachers supported by endowments, and for a body of nonresident

professors or lecturers supported by fees.  These

lecturers were to be chosen from the most eminent professors

in the existing colleges and from the best men then

in the public-lecture field; and my confidant in the matter

was George William Curtis, who entered into it heartily,

and who afterward, in his speech at my inauguration as

president of Cornell, referred to it in a way which touched

me deeply.[5]





[5] See Mr. Curtis's speech, September 8, 1868, published

by the university.





The next thing was to decide upon a site.  It must

naturally be in the central part of the State; and, rather

curiously, that which I then most coveted, frequently

visited, walked about, and inspected was the rising ground

southeast of Syracuse since selected by the Methodists

for their institution which takes its name from that city.



My next effort was to make a beginning of an endowment,

and for this purpose I sought to convert Gerrit Smith. 

He was, for those days, enormously wealthy.  His property,

which was estimated at from two to three millions

of dollars, he used munificently; and his dear friend and

mine, Samuel Joseph May, had told me that it was not too

much to hope that Mr. Smith might do something for the

improvement of higher instruction.  To him, therefore, I

wrote, proposing that if he would contribute an equal sum

to a university at Syracuse, I would give to it one half of

my own property.  In his answer he gave reasons why he

could not join in the plan, and my scheme seemed no

nearer reality than my former air-castles.  It seemed,

indeed, to have faded away like



     ``The baseless fabric of a vision''



and to have left



     ``Not a wrack behind''--



when all its main features were made real in a way and by

means utterly unexpected; for now began the train of

events which led to my acquaintance, friendship, and close

alliance with the man through whom my plans became a

reality, larger and better than any ever seen in my dreams

--Ezra Cornell.







CHAPTER XVIII



EZRA CORNELL--1864-1874





On the first day of the year 1864, taking my seat for

the first time in the State Senate at Albany, I found

among my associates a tall, spare man, apparently very

reserved and austere, and soon learned his name--Ezra

Cornell.



Though his chair was near mine, there was at first little

intercourse between us, and there seemed small chance of

more.  He was steadily occupied, and seemed to have no

desire for new acquaintances.  He was, perhaps, the oldest

man in the Senate; I, the youngest: he was a man of

business; I was fresh from a university professorship:

and, upon the announcement of committees, our paths

seemed separated entirely; for he was made chairman of

the committee on agriculture, while to me fell the

chairmanship of the committee on education.



Yet it was this last difference which drew us together;

for among the first things referred to my committee was a

bill to incorporate a public library which he proposed to

found in Ithaca.



On reading this bill I was struck, not merely by his

gift of one hundred thousand dollars to his townsmen,

but even more by a certain breadth and largeness in his

way of making it.  The most striking sign of this was his

mode of forming a board of trustees; for, instead of the

usual effort to tie up the organization forever in some sect,

party, or clique, he had named the best men of his town--

his political opponents as well as his friends; and had

added to them the pastors of all the principal churches,

Catholic and Protestant.  This breadth of mind, even

more than his munificence, drew me to him.  We met several

times, discussed his bill, and finally I reported it

substantially as introduced, and supported it until it

became a law.



Our next relations were not, at first, so pleasant.  The

great Land Grant of 1862, from the General Government

to the State, for industrial and technical education, had

been turned over, at a previous session of the legislature,

to an institution called the People's College, in

Schuyler County; but the Agricultural College, twenty

miles distant from it, was seeking to take away from it

a portion of this endowment; and among the trustees of

this Agricultural College was Mr. Cornell, who now

introduced a bill to divide the fund between the two

institutions.



On this I at once took ground against him, declaring

that the fund ought to be kept together at some one

institution; that on no account should it be divided; that the

policy for higher education in the State of New York

should be concentration; that we had already suffered

sufficiently from scattering our resources; that there were

already over twenty colleges in the State, and not one of

them doing anything which could justly be called university

work.



Mr. Cornell's first effort was to have his bill referred,

not to my committee, but to his; here I resisted him, and,

as a solution of the difficulty, it was finally referred to a

joint committee made up of both.  On this double-headed

committee I deliberately thwarted his purpose throughout

the entire session, delaying action and preventing any

report upon his bill.



Most men would have been vexed by this; but he took

my course calmly, and even kindly.  He never expostulated,

and always listened attentively to my arguments

against his view; meanwhile I omitted no opportunity to

make these arguments as strong as possible, and especially

to impress upon him the importance of keeping the fund

together.



After the close of the session, during the following

summer, as it had become evident that the trustees of the

People's College had no intention of raising the additional

endowment and providing the equipment required by the

act which gave them the land grant, there was great danger

that the whole fund might be lost to the State by the

lapsing of the time allowed in the congressional act for

its acceptance.  Just at this period Mr. Cornell invited me

to attend a meeting of the State Agricultural Society, of

which he was the president, at Rochester; and, when the

meeting had assembled, he quietly proposed to remove the

difficulty I had raised, by drawing a new bill giving the

State Agricultural College half of the fund, and by inserting

a clause requiring the college to provide an additional

sum of three hundred thousand dollars.  This sum he

pledged himself to give, and, as the comptroller of the

State had estimated the value of the land grant at six

hundred thousand dollars, Mr. Cornell supposed that this

would obviate my objection, since the fund of the Agricultural

College would thus be made equal to the whole original

land-grant fund as estimated, which would be equivalent

to keeping the whole fund together.



The entire audience applauded, as well they might: it

was a noble proposal.  But, much to the disgust of the

meeting, I persisted in my refusal to sanction any bill

dividing the fund, declared myself now more opposed to

such a division than ever; but promised that if Mr. Cornell

and his friends would ask for the WHOLE grant--keeping

it together, and adding his three hundred thousand dollars,

as proposed--I would support such a bill with all my

might.



I was led to make this proposal by a course of

circumstances which might, perhaps, be called ``providential.'' 

For some years I had been dreaming of a university; had

looked into the questions involved, at home and abroad;

had approached sundry wealthy and influential men on the

subject; but had obtained no encouragement, until this

strange and unexpected combination of circumstances--a

great land grant, the use of which was to be determined

largely by the committee of which I was chairman, and

this noble pledge by Mr. Cornell.



Yet for some months nothing seemed to come of our

conference.  At the assembling of the legislature in the

following year, it was more evident than ever that the

trustees of the People's College intended to do nothing. 

During the previous session they had promised through

their agents to supply the endowment required by their

charter; but, though this charter obliged them, as a condition

of taking the grant, to have an estate of two hundred

acres, buildings for the accommodation of two hundred

students, and a faculty of not less than six professors, with

a sufficient library and other apparatus, yet our committee,

on again taking up the subject, found hardly the faintest

pretense of complying with these conditions.  Moreover,

their charter required that their property should be

free from all encumbrance; and yet the so-called donor of

it, Mr. Charles Cook, could not be induced to cancel a

small mortgage which he held upon it.  Still worse, before

the legislature had been in session many days, it was found

that his agent had introduced a bill to relieve the People 's

College of all conditions, and to give it, without any pledge

whatever, the whole land grant, amounting to very nearly

a million of acres.



But even worse than this was another difficulty.  In

addition to the strong lobby sent by Mr. Cook to Albany in

behalf of the People's College, there came representatives

of nearly all the smaller denominational colleges in the

State, men eminent and influential, clamoring for a division

of the fund among their various institutions, though

the fragment which would have fallen to each would not

have sufficed to endow even a single professorship.



While all this was uncertain, and the fund seemed

likely to be utterly frittered away, I was one day going

down from the State Capitol, when Mr. Cornell joined me

and began conversation.  He was, as usual, austere and

reserved in appearance; but I had already found that

below this appearance there was a warm heart and noble

purpose.  No observant associate could fail to notice that

the only measures in the legislature which he cared for

were those proposing some substantial good to the State

or nation, and that he despised all political wrangling and

partizan jugglery.



On this occasion, after some little general talk, he quietly

said, ``I have about half a million dollars more than my

family will need: what is the best thing I can do with it

for the State?''  I answered:  `` Mr. Cornell, the two things

most worthy of aid in any country are charity and education;

but, in our country, the charities appeal to everybody. 

Any one can understand the importance of them,

and the worthy poor or unfortunate are sure to be taken

care of.  As to education, the lower grades will always be

cared for in the public schools by the State; but the

institutions of the highest grade, without which the lower can

never be thoroughly good, can be appreciated by only a

few.  The policy of our State is to leave this part of the

system to individuals; it seems to me, then, that if you

have half a million to give, the best thing you can do with

it is to establish or strengthen some institution for higher

instruction.''  I then went on to show him the need of a

larger institution for such instruction than the State then

had; that such a college or university worthy of the State

would require far more in the way of faculty and equipment

than most men supposed; that the time had come

when scientific and technical education must be provided

for in such an institution; and that education in history

and literature should be the bloom of the whole growth.



He listened attentively, but said little.  The matter

seemed to end there; but not long afterward he came to me

and said:  ``I agree with you that the land-grant fund

ought to be kept together, and that there should be a new

institution fitted to the present needs of the State and the

country.  I am ready to pledge to such an institution a site

and five hundred thousand dollars as an addition to the

land-grant endowment, instead of three hundred thousand,

as I proposed at Rochester.''



As may well be imagined, I hailed this proposal

joyfully, and soon sketched out a bill embodying his purpose

so far as education was concerned.  But here I wish to say

that, while Mr. Cornell urged Ithaca as the site of the

proposed institution, he never showed any wish to give his

own name to it.  The suggestion to that effect was mine. 

He at first doubted the policy of it; but, on my insisting

that it was in accordance with time-honored American

usage, as shown by the names of Harvard, Yale, Dartmouth,

Amherst, Bowdoin, Brown, Williams, and the like, he yielded.



We now held frequent conferences as to the leading

features of the institution to be created.  In these I was

more and more impressed by his sagacity and largeness

of view; and, when the sketch of the bill was fully

developed,--its financial features by him, and its educational

features by me,--it was put into shape by Charles J. Folger

of Geneva, then chairman of the judiciary committee of

the Senate, afterward chief judge of the Court of Appeals,

and finally Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. 

The provision forbidding any sectarian or partizan

predominance in the board of trustees or faculty was proposed

by me, heartily acquiesced in by Mr. Cornell, and put into

shape by Judge Folger.  The State-scholarship feature

and the system of alumni representation on the board of

trustees were also accepted by Mr. Cornell at my suggestion.



I refer to these things especially because they show one

striking characteristic of the man--namely, his readiness

to be advised largely by others in matters which he felt

to be outside his own province, and his willingness to give

the largest measure of confidence when he gave any

confidence at all.



On the other hand, the whole provision for the endowment,

the part relating to the land grant, and, above all,

the supplementary legislation allowing him to make a

contract with the State for ``locating'' the lands, were

thought out entirely by himself; and in all these matters he

showed, not only a public spirit far beyond that displayed

by any other benefactor of education in his time, but a

foresight which seemed to me then, and seems to me now,

almost miraculous.  He alone, of all men in the United

States, was able to foresee what might be done by an

individual to develop the land-grant fund, and he alone

was willing to make the great personal sacrifice thereby

required.



But, while he thus left the general educational features

to me, he uttered, during one of our conversations, words

which showed that he had arrived at the true conception

of a university.  He expressed the hope that in the proposed

institution every student might find instruction in

whatever study interested him.  Hence came the legend

now surrounding his medallion portrait upon the university

seal:  ``I would found an institution where any person

can find instruction in any study.''



The introduction of this new bill into the legislature

was a signal for war.  Nearly all the denominational

colleges girded themselves for the fray, and sent their agents

to fight us at Albany; they also stirred up the secular

press, without distinction of party, in the regions where

they were situated, and the religious organs of their various

sects in the great cities.



At the center of the movement against us was the

People's College; it had rallied in force and won over the

chairman of the educational committee in the Assembly,

so that under various pretexts he delayed considering the

bill.  Worst of all, there appeared against us, late in the

session, a professor from the Genesee College--a man of

high character and great ability; and he did his work most

vigorously.  He brought the whole force of his sect to

bear upon the legislature, and insisted that every other

college in the State had received something from the public

funds, while his had received none.



As a first result came a proposal from some of his

associates that twenty-five thousand dollars of the land-grant

fund be paid to Genesee College; but this the friends of

the Cornell bill resisted, on the ground that, if the fund

were broken into in one case, it would be in others.



It was next proposed that Mr. Cornell should agree to

give twenty-five thousand dollars to Genesee College on

the passage of the bill.  This Mr. Cornell utterly refused,

saying that not for the passage of any bill would he make

any private offer or have any private understanding; that

every condition must be put into the bill, where all men

could see it; and that he would then accept or reject it as

he might think best.  The result was that our opponents

forced into the bill a clause requiring him to give twenty-

five thousand dollars to Genesee College, before he could

be allowed to give five hundred thousand dollars to the

proposed university; and the friends of the bill, not feeling

strong enough to resist this clause, and not being

willing to see the enterprise wrecked for the want of it,

allowed it to go unopposed.  The whole matter was vexatious

to the last degree.  A man of less firmness and

earnestness, thus treated, would have thrown up his

munificent purpose in disgust; but Mr. Cornell quietly

persevered.



Yet the troubles of the proposed university had only

begun.  Mr. Charles Cook, who, during his senatorship,

had secured the United States land grant of 1862 for the

People's College, was a man of great force, a born leader

of men, anxious to build up his part of the State, and

especially the town from which he came, though he had no

special desire to put any considerable part of his own

wealth into a public institution.  He had seen the opportunities

afforded by the land grant, had captured it, and was

now determined to fight for it.  The struggle became

bitter.  His emissaries, including the members of the Senate

and Assembly from his part of the State, made common

cause with the sectarian colleges, and with various

corporations and persons who, having bills of their own

in the legislature, were ready to exchange services and

votes.



The coalition of all these forces against the Cornell

University bill soon became very formidable, and the

committee on education in the Assembly, to which the bill had

been referred, seemed more and more controlled by them. 

Our only hope now was to enlighten the great body of the

senators and assemblymen.  To this end Mr. Cornell invited

them by squads, sometimes to his rooms at Congress

Hall, sometimes to mine at the Delavan House.  There he

laid before them his general proposal and the financial

side of the plan, while I dwelt upon the need of a university

in the true sense of the word; upon the opportunity

now offered by this great fund; upon the necessity of

keeping it together; upon the need of large means to carry

out any scheme of technical and general education such

as was contemplated by the congressional act of 1862;

showed the proofs that the People's College would and

could do nothing to meet this want; that division of the

fund among the existing colleges was simply the annihilation

of it; and, in general, did my best to enlighten the

reason and arouse the patriotism of the members on the

subject of a worthy university in our State.  These points

and others were finally embodied in my speech before the

Senate, and this having been published in the ``Albany

Journal,'' Mr. Cornell provided for its circulation broadcast

over the State and thus aroused public opinion.



In this way we won to our support several strong

friends in both Houses, among them some men of great

natural force of character who had never enjoyed the

privilege of much early education, but who were none the

less anxious that those who came after them should have

the best opportunities.  Of these I may name especially

Senators Cook of Saratoga and Ames of Oswego.  Men

of high education and culture also aided us, especially

Mr. Andrews, Mr. Havens, and, finally, Judge Folger in

the Senate, with Mr. Lord and Mr. Weaver in the Assembly.



While we were thus laboring with the legislature as a

whole, serious work had to be done with the Assembly

committee; and Mr. Cornell employed a very eminent

lawyer to present his case, while Mr. Cook employed one

no less noted to take the opposite side.  The session of

the committee was held in the Assembly chamber, and there

was a large attendance of spectators; but, unfortunately,

the lawyer employed by Mr. Cornell having taken little

pains with the case, his speech was cold, labored, perfunctory,

and fell flat.  The speech on the other side was much

more effective; it was thin and demagogical, but the

speaker knew well the best tricks for catching the average

man.  He indulged in eloquent tirades against the Cornell

bill as a ``monopoly,'' a ``wild project,'' a ``selfish

scheme,'' a ``job,'' a ``grab,'' and the like; denounced Mr.

Cornell as ``seeking to erect a monument to himself'';

hinted that he was ``planning to rob the State''; and,

before he had finished, had pictured Mr. Cornell as a

swindler and the rest of us as dupes or knaves.



I can never forget the quiet dignity with which Mr.

Cornell took this abuse.  Mrs. Cornell sat at his right, I

at his left.  In one of the worst tirades against him, he

turned to me and said quietly, and without the slightest

anger or excitement:  ``If I could think of any other way

in which half a million of dollars would do as much good

to the State, I would give the legislature no more trouble.'' 

Shortly afterward, when the invective was again especially

bitter, he turned to me and said:  ``I am not sure

but that it would be a good thing for me to give the half

a million to old Harvard College in Massachusetts, to

educate the descendants of the men who hanged my forefathers.''



There was more than his usual quaint humor in this

--there was that deep reverence which he always bore

toward his Quaker ancestry, and which seemed to have

become part of him.  I admired Mr. Cornell on many

occasions, but never more than during that hour when he

sat, without the slightest anger, mildly taking the abuse of

that prostituted pettifogger, the indifference of the

committee, and the laughter of the audience.  It was a scene

for a painter, and I trust that some day it will be fitly

perpetuated for the university.



This struggle being ended, the Assembly committee

could not be induced to report the bill.  It was easy, after

such a speech, for its members to pose as protectors of

the State against a swindler and a monopoly; the chairman,

who, shortly after the close of the session, was

mysteriously given a position in the New York custom-house,

made pretext after pretext without reporting, until it became

evident that we must have a struggle in the Assembly

and drag the bill out of the committee in spite of him. 

To do this required a two-thirds vote.  All our friends

were set to work, and some pains taken to scare the

corporations which had allied themselves with the enemy, in

regard to the fate of their own bills, by making them

stand that, unless they stopped their interested

opposition to the university bill in the House, a feeling

would be created in the Senate very unfortunate for them. 

In this way their clutch upon sundry members of the

Assembly was somewhat relaxed, and these were allowed

to vote according to their consciences.



The Cornell bill was advocated most earnestly in the

House by Mr. Henry B. Lord: in his unpretentious way

he marshaled the university forces, and moved that the bill

be taken from the committee and referred to the Committee

of the Whole.  Now came a struggle.  Most of the

best men in the Assembly stood by us; but the waverers

--men who feared local pressure, sectarian hostility, or

the opposition of Mr. Cook to measures of their own--

attempted, if not to oppose the Cornell bill, at least to

evade a vote upon it.  In order to give them a little tone

and strength, Mr. Cornell went with me to various leading

editors in the city of New York, and we explained

the whole matter to them, securing editorial articles

favorable to the university, the most prominent among these

gentlemen being Horace Greeley of the ``Tribune,'' Eras-

tus Brooks of the ``Express,'' and Manton Marble of the

``World.''  This did much for us, yet when the vote was

taken the old cowardice was again shown; but several of

us stood in the cloak-room and fairly shamed the waverers

back into their places.  As a result, to the surprise and

disgust of the chairman of the Assembly committee, the

bill was taken out of his control, and referred to the

Committee of the Whole House.



Another long struggle now ensued, but the bill was

finally passed in the Assembly and came back to the

Senate.  There the struggle was renewed, all kinds of

delaying tactics were resorted to, but the bill was finally

carried, and received the signature of Governor Fenton.



Now came a new danger.  During their struggle against

the bill, our enemies had been strong enough to force into

it a clause enabling the People's College to retain the land

fund, provided that institution should be shown, within six

months of the passage of the bill, to be in possession of a

sum such as the Board of Regents should declare would

enable it to comply with the conditions on which it had

originally received the grant.  The Board of Regents

now reported that the possession of one hundred and

fifty thousand dollars would be sufficient for such a

compliance, and would insure the fund to the People's

College.  Naturally we watched, in much uneasy suspense,

during those six months, to see whether Mr. Cook and

the People's College authorities would raise this sum

of money, so small in comparison with that which Mr.

Cornell was willing to give, in order to secure the grant. 

But our fears were baseless; and on the fifth day of

September, 1865, the trustees of Cornell University were

assembled for the first time at Ithaca.



Then came to them a revelation of a quality in Mr. Cornell

unknown to most of them before.  In one of the petitions

forwarded from Ithaca to the legislature by his

fellow-citizens it had been stated that ``he never did less

than he promised, but generally more.''  So it was found

in this case.  He turned over to the trustees, not only the

securities for the five hundred thousand dollars required

by the charter, but also gave two hundred acres of land as

a site.  Thus came into being Cornell University.



Yet the services of Mr. Cornell had only begun: he at

once submitted to us a plan for doing what no other citizen

had done for any other State.  In the other commonwealths

which had received the land grant, the authorities

had taken the scrip representing the land, sold it at the

market price, and, as the market was thus glutted, had

realized but a small sum; but Mr. Cornell, with that

foresight which was his most striking characteristic, saw

clearly what could be done by using the scrip to take up

land for the institution.  To do this he sought aid in various

ways; but no one dared join him, and at last he determined

to bear the whole burden himself.  Scrip representing

over seven hundred thousand acres still remained

in the hands of the comptroller.  The trustees received Mr.

Cornell's plan for dealing with the scrip somewhat doubtfully,

but the enabling act was passed, by which he was

permitted to ``locate'' this land for the benefit of the

university.  So earnest was he in this matter that he was

anxious to take up the entire amount, but here his near

friends interposed: we saw too well what a crushing load

the taxes and other expenses on such a vast tract of land

would become before it could be sold to advantage.  Finally

he yielded somewhat: it was agreed that he should take up

five hundred thousand acres, and he now gave himself day

and night to this great part of the enterprise, which was

to provide a proper financial basis for a university such as

we hoped to found.



Meanwhile, at Mr. Cornell's suggestion, I devoted myself

to a more careful plan of the new institution; and, at

the next meeting of the board, presented a ``plan of

organization,'' which sketched out the purpose and

constitution of such a university as seemed needed in a great

commonwealth like ours.  Mr. Cornell studied it carefully,

gave it his approval, and a copy of it with marginal notes

in his own hand is still preserved.



I had supposed that this was to end my relations with

Mr. Cornell, so far as the university was concerned.  A

multitude of matters seemed to forbid my taking any further

care for it, and a call to another position very attractive

to me drew me away from all thought of connection

with it, save, perhaps, such as was involved in meeting the

trustees once or twice a year.



Mr. Cornell had asked me, from time to time, whether

I could suggest any person for the presidency of the

university.  I mentioned various persons, and presented the

arguments in their favor.  One day he said to me quietly

that he also had a candidate; I asked him who it was, and

he said that he preferred to keep the matter to himself

until the next meeting of the trustees.  Nothing more passed

between us on that subject.  I had no inkling of his

purpose, but thought it most likely that his candidate was

a Western gentleman whose claims had been strongly

pressed upon him.  When the trustees came together, and

the subject was brought up, I presented the merits of various

gentlemen, especially of one already at the head of an

important college in the State, who, I thought, would give

us success.  Upon this, Mr. Cornell rose, and, in a very

simple but earnest speech, presented my name.  It was entirely

unexpected by me, and I endeavored to show the trustees

that it was impossible for me to take the place in view of

other duties; that it needed a man of more robust health,

of greater age, and of wider reputation in the State.  But

Mr. Cornell quietly persisted, our colleagues declared

themselves unanimously of his opinion, and, with many

misgivings, I gave a provisional acceptance.



The relation thus begun ended only with Mr. Cornell's

life, and from first to last it grew more and more interesting

to me.  We were thrown much together at Albany, at

Ithaca, and on various journeys undertaken for the

university; and, the more I saw of him, the deeper became my

respect for him.  There were, indeed, toward the end of

his life, some things trying to one of my temperament,

and among these things I may mention his exceeding reticence, 

and his willingness not only to labor but to wait;

but these stood not at all in the way of my respect and

affection for him.



His liberality was unstinted.  While using his fortune

in taking up the lands, he was constantly doing generous

things for the university and those connected with it.  One

of the first of these was his gift of the library in classical

literature collected by Dr. Charles Anthon of Columbia

College.  Nothing could apparently be more outside his

sympathy than the department needing these seven thousand

volumes; but he recognized its importance in the general

plan of the new institution, bought the library for

over twelve thousand dollars, and gave it to the university.



Then came the Jewett collection in geology, which he

gave at a cost of ten thousand dollars; the Ward collection

of casts, at a cost of three thousand; the Newcomb collection

in conchology, at a cost of sixteen thousand; an addition

to the university grounds, valued at many thousands

more; and it was only the claims of a multitude of minor

university matters upon his purse which prevented his

carrying out a favorite plan of giving a great telescope, at

a cost of fifty thousand dollars.  At a later period, to

extinguish the university debt, to increase the equipment, and

eventually to provide free scholarships and fellowships,

he made an additional gift of about eighty thousand dollars.



While doing these things, he was constantly advancing

large sums in locating the university lands, and in paying

university salaries, for which our funds were not yet

available; while from time to time he made many gifts which,

though smaller, were no less striking evidences of the

largeness of his view.  I may mention a few among these

as typical.



Having found, in the catalogue of a London book-

seller, a set of Piranesi's great work on the ``Antiquities

of Rome,''--a superb copy, the gift of a pope to a royal

duke,--I showed it to him, when he at once ordered it for

our library at a cost of about a thousand dollars.  At

another time, seeing the need of some costly works to

illustrate agriculture, he gave them to us at a somewhat

greater cost; and, having heard Professor Tyndall's

lectures in New York, he bought additional physical apparatus

to enable our resident professor to repeat the lectures

at Ithaca, and this cost him fifteen hundred dollars.



Characteristic of him, too, was another piece of quiet

munificence.  When the clause forced into the university

charter, requiring him to give twenty-five thousand dollars

to another institution before he could be allowed to

give half a million to his own, was noised abroad through

the State, there was a general feeling of disgust; and at

the next session of the legislature a bill was brought in

to refund the twenty-five thousand dollars to him.  Upon

this, he remarked that what he once gave he never took

back, but that if the university trustees would accept it he

had no objection.  The bill was modified to this effect, and

thus the wrong was righted.



During my stay in Europe, through the summer of 1868,

under instructions to study various institutions for technical

education, to make large purchases of books, and to

secure one or two men greatly needed in special departments

not then much cultivated in this country, his generosity

was unfailing.  Large as were the purchases which

I was authorized to make, the number of desirable things

outside this limit steadily grew larger; but my letters to

him invariably brought back the commission to secure

this additional material.



During this occupation of mine in Europe, he was quite

as busy in the woods of the upper Mississippi and on the

plains of Kansas, selecting university lands.  No fatigue

or expenditure deterred him.



At various periods I passed much time with Mr. Cornell

on his home farm.  He lived generously, in a kind of

patriarchal simplicity, and many of his conversations interested

me intensely.  His reticence gradually yielded, and he gave

me much information regarding his earlier years: they had

been full of toil and struggle, but through the whole there

was clear evidence of a noble purpose.  Whatever worthy

work his hand had found to do, he had done it with his

might: the steamers of Cayuga Lake; the tunnel which

carries the waters of Fall Creek to the mills below; the

mills themselves; the dams against that turbulent stream,

which he built after others had failed, and which stand

firmly to this day; the calendar clocks for which Ithaca

has become famous, and of which he furnished the original

hint--all these he touched upon, though so modestly that

I never found out his full agency in them until a later

period, when I had made the acquaintance of many of his

townsmen.



Especially interesting were his references to the

beginnings of American telegraphic enterprise, with which he

had so much to do.



His connection with it began in a curious way.  Traveling

in northern New England to dispose of a plow which

he had invented, he entered the office of a gentleman who

had taken the contract for laying the first telegraphic wires

underground between Washington and Baltimore, and

found him in much doubt and trouble: the difficulty was to

lay the leaden pipe containing the two insulated wires at a

cost within the terms of the contract.  Hearing this, Mr.

Cornell said:  ``I will build you a machine which will dig

the trench, lay the pipe and wires, and cover them with

earth rapidly and cheaply.''



This proposal was at first derided; but, as Mr. Cornell

insisted upon it, he was at last allowed to show what he

could do.  The machine having been constructed, he

exhibited it to a committee; but when the long line of

horses attached to it were started, it was so thrown about

by the inequalities of the surface that the committee

declared it a failure.  Presently Mr. Cornell took them to

the ground over which the machine had just passed, and,

showing them a line of newly turned earth, asked them

to dig in it.  Having done this, they found the pipe incasing

the wires, acknowledged his triumph, and immediately

gave him and his machine permanent employment.



But before long he became convinced that this was not

the best way.  Having studied all the books on electricity

that he could find in the Congressional Library, he had

satisfied himself that it would be far better and cheaper

to string the wires through the open air between poles. 

This idea the men controlling the scheme for a time

resisted.  Some of them regarded such interference in a

scientific matter by one whom they considered a plain

working-man as altogether too presuming.  But one day

Professor Morse came out to decide the matter.  Finding

Mr. Cornell at his machine, the professor explained the

difficulties in the case, especially the danger of shaking the

confidence of Congress, and so losing the necessary

appropriation, should any change in plan be adopted, and

then asked him if he could see any way out of the difficulty. 

Mr. Cornell answered that he could, whereupon Professor

Morse expressed a wish that it might be taken.  At this

Mr. Cornell gave the word to his men, started up the

long line of horses dragging the ponderous machine,

guided it with his own hands into a boulder lying near,

and thus deranged the whole machinery.



As a natural result it was announced by various journals

at the national capital that the machinery for laying

the wires had been broken by the carelessness of an

employee, but that it would doubtless soon be repaired and

the work resumed.  Thanks to this stratagem, the necessary

time was gained without shaking the confidence of

Congress, and Mr. Cornell at once began stringing the

wires upon poles: the insulation was found far better

than in the underground system, and there was no more

trouble.



The confidence of the promoters of the enterprise being

thus gained, Mr. Cornell was employed to do their work

in all parts of the country; and his sturdy honesty, energy,

and persistence justified their confidence and laid the

foundations of his fortune.



Very striking were the accounts of his troubles and

trials during the prosecution of this telegraphic work--

troubles from men of pretended science, from selfish men,

from stupid men--all chronicled by him without the slightest

bitterness against any human being, yet with a quaint

humor which made the story very enjoyable.



Through his personal history, as I then began to learn

it, ran a thread, or rather a strong cord, of stoicism. 

He had clung with such desperate tenacity to his faith in

the future of the telegraphic system, that, sooner than part

with his interest in it, even when its stock was utterly

discredited, he suffered from poverty, and almost from want. 

While pressing on his telegraphic construction, he had been

terribly wounded in a Western railroad accident, but had

extricated himself from the dead and dying, and, as I

learned from others, had borne his sufferings without a

murmur.  At another time, overtaken by ship-fever at

Montreal, and thought to be beyond help, he had quietly

made up his mind that, if he could reach a certain hydropathic

establishment in New York, he would recover; and

had dragged himself through that long journey, desperately

ill as he was, in railway cars, steamers, and

stages, until he reached his desired haven; and there he

finally recovered, though nearly every other person

attacked by the disease at his Montreal hotel had died.



Pursuing his telegraphic enterprise, he had been obliged

at times to fight many strong men and great combinations

of capital; but this same stoicism carried him through:

he used to say laughingly that his way was to ``tire them

out.''



When, at last, fortune had begun to smile upon him, his

public spirit began to show itself in more striking forms,

though not in forms more real, than in his earlier days. 

Evidences of this met the eye of his visitors at once, and

among these were the fine cattle, sheep, fruit-trees, and

the like, which he had brought back from the London

Exposition of 1851.  His observations of the agricultural

experiments of Lawes and Gilbert at Rothamstead in

England, and his visits to various agricultural exhibitions,

led him to attempt similar work at home.  Everything

that could improve the community in which he lived

was matter of concern to him.  He took the lead in

establishing ``Cascadilla Place,'' in order to give a very

gifted woman an opportunity to show her abilities in

administering hydropathic treatment to disease; his

public library, when I first visited Ithaca, was just

completed.



He never showed the slightest approach to display or

vanity regarding any of these things, and most of them I

heard of first, at a later period, from others.



Although his religious ideas were very far from those

generally considered orthodox, he had a deep sympathy

with every good effort for religion and morality, no matter

by whom made; and he contributed freely to churches

of every name and to good purposes of every sort.  He

had quaint ways at times in making such gifts, and from

the many stories showing these I select one as characteristic. 

During the Civil War, the young women of the village

held large sewing-circles, doing work for the soldiers. 

When Mr. Cornell was asked to contribute to their funds,

he declined, to the great surprise of those who asked

him, and said dryly:  ``Of course these women don't really

come together to sew for the soldiers; they come together

to gossip.''  This was said, no doubt, with that peculiar

twinkle of the eye which his old friends can well remember;

but, on the young ladies protesting that he did them

injustice, he answered:  ``If you can prove that I am wrong,

I will gladly contribute; if you will only sew together all

one afternoon, and no one of you speak a word, I will give

you a hundred dollars.''  The society met, and complete

silence reigned.  The young men of the community, hearing

of this, and seeing an admirable chance to tease their

fair friends, came in large numbers to the sewing-circle,

and tried to engage them in conversation.  At first their

attempts were in vain; but, finally, to a question skilfully

put, one of the young ladies made a reply.  This broke

the spell.  Of course, the whole assembly were very unhappy;

but, when all was told to Mr. Cornell, he said: 

``They shall have their hundred dollars, for they have

done better than any other women ever did.''



But I ought to say here that this little episode would

be grossly misunderstood were it supposed to indicate any

tendency in his heart or mind toward a cynical view of

womankind.  Nothing could be more manly and noble

than his reference to her who had stood at his side

courageously, hopefully, and cheerily during his years

of struggle and want of appreciation.  Well might he

speak of her, as he did once in my hearing, as ``the best

woman that ever lived.''  And his gentle courtliness and

thoughtful kindness were also deeply appreciated in other

households.  His earnestness, too, in behalf of the higher

education of women, and of their fair treatment in various

professions and occupations, showed something far deeper

than conventional politeness.



From the time when I began to know him best, his main

thought was concentrated upon the university.  His own

business interests were freely sacrificed; his time, wealth,

and effort were all yielded to his work in taking up its

lands, to say nothing of supplementary work which became

in many ways a heavy burden to him.



During the summer preceding the opening of the university,

this labor and care began to wear upon him, and

he was attacked by an old malady which gave him great

pain; yet his stoicism asserted itself.  Through night after

night, as I lay in the room next his at his farm-house, I

could hear him groan, and to my natural sympathy was

added a fear lest he might not live through this most critical

period in the history of the new institution; but,

invariably, when I met him next morning and asked how he

felt, his answer was, ``All right,'' or ``Very well.''  I

cannot remember ever hearing him make any complaint

of his sufferings or even any reference to them.



Nor did pain diminish his steady serenity or generosity. 

I remember that on one hot afternoon of that summer,

when he had come into the house thoroughly weary, a

young man called upon him to ask for aid in securing

school-books.  Mr. Cornell questioned him closely, and

then rose, walked with him down the hill into the town,

and bought the books which were needed.



As the day approached for the formal opening of the

university, he was obliged to remain in bed.  Care and

toil had prostrated me also; and both of us, a sorry couple

indeed, had to be taken from our beds to be carried to the

opening exercises.



A great crowd had assembled from all parts of the

State:--many enthusiastic, more doubtful, and some

decidedly inclined to scoff.



Some who were expected were not present.  The Governor

of the State, though he had been in Ithaca the day

before, quietly left town on the eve of the opening

exercises.  His Excellency was a very wise man in his

generation, and evidently felt that it was not best for him to

have too much to do with an institution which the sectarian

press had so generally condemned.  I shall not soon forget

the way in which Mr. Cornell broke the news to me, and

the accent of calm contempt in his voice.  Fortunately

there remained with us the lieutenant-governor, General

Stewart Lyndon Woodford.  He came to the front nobly,

and stood by us firmly and munificently ever afterward.



Mr. Cornell's speech on that occasion was very simple

and noble; his whole position, to one who knew what he

had gone through in the way of obloquy, hard work, and

self-sacrifice, was touching.  Worn down by illness, he

was unable to stand, and he therefore read his address in

a low tone from his chair.  It was very impressive, almost

incapacitating me from speaking after him, and I saw

tears in the eyes of many in the audience.  Nothing could

be more simple than this speech of his; it was mainly

devoted to a plain assertion of the true university theory in

its most elementary form, and to a plea that women should

have equal privileges with men in advanced education.  In

the midst of it came a touch of his quaint shrewdness; for,

in replying to a recent charge that everything at the

university was unfinished, he remarked in substance, ``We

have not invited you to see a university finished, but to see

one begun.''



The opening day seemed a success, but this very success

stirred up the enemy.  A bitter letter from Ithaca

to a leading denominational organ in New York gave the

signal, and soon the whole sectarian press was in full cry,

steadily pressing upon Mr. Cornell and those who stood

near him.  Very many of the secular presses also thought

it wise to join in the attack, and it was quickly extended

from his ideas to his honor, and even to his honesty.  It

seemed beyond the conception of many of these gentlemen

that a Hicksite Quaker, who, if he gave any thought at

all to this or that creed, or this or that ``plan of salvation,''

passed it all by as utterly irrelevant and inadequate,

could be a religious man; and a far greater number seemed

to find it just as difficult to believe that a man could

sacrifice his comfort and risk his fortune in managing so great

a landed property for the public interest without any

concealed scheme of plunder.



But he bore all this with his usual stoicism.  It seemed

to increase his devotion to the institution, rather than to

diminish it.  When the receipts from the endowment fell

short or were delayed, he continued to advance money

freely to meet the salaries of the professors; and for

apparatus, books, and equipment of every sort his purse

was constantly opened.



Yet, in those days of toil and care and obloquy, there

were some things which encouraged him much.  At that

period all patriotic Americans felt deep gratitude to Goldwin

Smith for his courage and eloquence in standing by

our country during the Civil War, and great admiration for

his profound and brilliant historical lectures at Oxford. 

Naturally, on arriving in London, I sought to engage him

for the new university, and was authorized by Mr. Cornell

to make him large pecuniary offers.  Professor Smith entered

at once into our plans heartily; wrote to encourage

us; came to us; lived with us amid what, to him, must have

been great privations; lectured for us year after year as

brilliantly as he had ever lectured at Oxford; gave his

library to the university, with a large sum for its increase;

lent his aid very quietly, but none the less effectually, to

needy and meritorious students; and steadily refused

then, as he has ever since done, and now does, to accept

a dollar of compensation.  Nothing ever gave Mr. Cornell

more encouragement than this.  For ``Goldwin,'' as he

called him in his Quaker way, there was always a very

warm corner in his heart.



He also found especial pleasure in many of the lecture-

courses established at the opening of the university.  For

Professor Agassiz he formed a warm friendship; and

their discussions regarding geological questions were very

interesting, eliciting from Agassiz a striking tribute to

Mr. Cornell's closeness of observation and sagacity in

reasoning.  The lectures on history by Goldwin Smith,

and on literature by James Russell Lowell, George William

Curtis, and Bayard Taylor, he also enjoyed greatly.



The scientific collections and apparatus of various sorts

gave him constant pleasure.  I had sent from England,

France, and Germany a large number of charts, models,

and pieces of philosophical apparatus, and regarding

some of them had thought it best to make careful explanations

to him, in order to justify so large an expenditure;

but I soon found this unnecessary.  His shrewd mind

enabled him to understand any piece of apparatus quickly,

and to appreciate it fully.  I have never had to deal with

any man whose instinct in such matters was more true.  If

a book or scientific specimen or piece of apparatus was

necessary to the proper work of a department, he could

easily be made to see it; and then it MUST come to us, no

matter at what cost.  Like the great prince of navigators

in the fifteenth century, he was a man ``who had the

taste for great things''--``qui tenia gusto en cosas

grandes.''  He felt that the university was to be great,

and he took his measures accordingly.  His colleagues

generally thought him over-sanguine; and when he declared

that the university should yet have an endow-

ment of three millions, most of them regarded him as a

dreamer.



I have never known a man more entirely unselfish.  I

have seen him, when his wealth was counted in millions,

devote it so generously to university objects that he felt

it necessary to stint himself in some matters of personal

comfort.  When urged to sell a portion of the university

land at a sacrifice, in order to better our foundations, he

answered in substance, ``Don't let us do that yet; I will

wear my old hat and coat a little longer, and let you have

a little more money from my own pocket.''



This feeling seemed never diminished, even under the

worst opposition.  He ``kept the faith,'' no matter who

opposed him.



An eminent and justly respected president of one of the

oldest Eastern universities published a treatise, which was

widely circulated, to prove that the main ideas on which

the new university was based were utterly impracticable;

and especially that the presentation of various courses of

instruction suited to young men of various aims and

tastes, with liberty of choice between them, was preposterous. 

It is interesting to note that this same eminent gentleman

was afterward led to adopt this same ``impracticable''

policy at his own university.  Others of almost equal

eminence insisted that to give advanced scientific and

technical instruction in the same institution with classical

instruction was folly; and these gentlemen were probably

not converted until the plan was adopted at English Cambridge. 

Others still insisted that an institution not belonging

to any one religious sect must be ``godless,'' would

not be patronized, and could not succeed.  Their eyes were

opened later by the sight of men and women of different

Christian denominations pressing forward at Cornell

University to contribute sums which, in the aggregate,

amounted to much more than the original endowment.



He earned the blessing of those who, not having seen,

have yet believed.  Though he did not live long enough

to see the fundamental principles of the university thus

force their way to recognition and adoption by those who

had most strongly opposed them, his faith remained

undiminished to the end of his life.



But the opposition to his work developed into worse

shapes; many leading journals in the State, when not

openly hostile to him, were cold and indifferent, and some

of them were steadily abusive.  This led to a rather wide-

spread feeling that ``where there is smoke, there must be

fire''; and we who knew the purity of his purpose, his

unselfishness, his sturdy honesty, labored long against this

feeling.



I regret to say that some eminent men connected with

important universities in the country showed far too much

readiness to acquiesce in this unfavorable view of our

founder.  From very few of our sister institutions came

any word of cheer; and from some of them came most

bitter attacks, not only upon the system adopted in the

new university, but upon Mr. Cornell himself.  But his

friends were more afflicted, by far, than he; all this opposition

only served to strengthen his faith.  As to this effect

upon him, I recall one or two quaint examples.  At the

darkest period in the history of the university, I

mentioned to him that a fine collection of mathematical

books was offered us for five thousand dollars.  Under

ordinary circumstances he would have bought it for

us at once; but at that moment, when any addition

to his burdens would not have been advised by any of

his friends, he quietly said, ``Somewhere there is a man

walking about who wants to give us that five thousand

dollars.''  I am glad to say that his faith was soon

justified; such a man appeared,--a man who was glad to give

the required sum as a testimony to his belief in Mr.

Cornell's integrity:  William Kelly of Rhinebeck.



Another example may be given as typical.  Near the

close of the first celebration of Founder's Day at one of

the college buildings, a pleasant social dance sprang up

among the younger people--students from the university

and young ladies from the village.  This brought a very

severe protest from sundry clergymen of the place,

declaring dancing to be ``destructive of vital godliness.'' 

Though this was solemnly laid before the faculty, no

answer was ever made to it; but we noticed that, at every

social gathering on Founder's Day afterward, as long as

Mr. Cornell lived, he had arrangements made for dancing. 

I never knew a man more open to right reason, and never

one less influenced by cant or dogmatism.



To most attacks upon him in the newspapers he neither

made nor suggested any reply; but one or two which were

especially misleading he answered simply and conclusively. 

This had no effect, of course, in stopping the attacks;

but it had one effect, at which the friends of the

university rejoiced: it bound his old associates to him all the

more closely, and led them to support him all the more

vigorously.  When a paper in one of the largest cities in

western New York had been especially abusive, one of Mr.

Cornell's old friends living in that city wrote:  ``I know

that the charges recently published are utterly untrue; but

I am not skilled in newspaper controversy, so I will simply

add to what I have already given to the university a special

gift of thirty thousand dollars, which will testify to

my townsmen here, and perhaps to the public at large, my

confidence in Mr. Cornell.''



Such was the way of Hiram Sibley.  Upon another attack,

especially violent, from the organ of one of the

denominational colleges, another old friend of Mr. Cornell

in the eastern part of the State, a prominent member of

the religious body which this paper represented, sent his

check for several thousand dollars, to be used for the

purchase of books for the library, and to show confidence

in Mr. Cornell by deeds as well as words.



Vile as these attacks were, worse remained behind.  A

local politician, who had been sent to the legislature from

the district where the ``People's College'' had lived its

short life, prepared, with pettifogging ability, a long speech

to show that the foundation of Cornell University, Mr.

Cornell's endowment of it, and his contract to locate the

lands for it were parts of a great cheat and swindle.  This

thesis, developed in all the moods and tenses of abuse

before the legislature, was next day published at length in the

leading journals of the metropolis, and echoed throughout

the Union.  The time for these attacks was skilfully

chosen; the Cr<e'>dit Mobilier and other schemes had been

revealed at Washington, and everybody was only too ready

to believe any charge against anybody.  That Mr. Cornell

had been known for forty years as an honest man seemed

to go for nothing.



The enemies of the university were prompt to support

the charges, and they found some echoes even among those

who were benefited by his generosity--even among the

students themselves.  At this I felt it my duty to call the

whole student body together, and, in a careful speech,

to explain Mr. Cornell's transactions, answering the

charges fully.  This speech, though spread through the

State, could evidently do but little toward righting the

wrong; but it brought to me what I shall always feel a

great honor--a share in the abuse showered mainly on him.



Very characteristic was Mr. Cornell's conduct under

this outrage.  That same faith in justice, that same

patience under wrong, which he always showed, was more

evident than ever.



On the morning after the attack in the legislature had

been blazoned in all the leading newspapers--in the early

hours, and after a sleepless night--I heard the rattle of

gravel against my window-panes.  On rising, I found Mr.

Cornell standing below.  He was serene and cheerful, and

had evidently taken the long walk up the hill to quiet my

irritation.  His first words were a jocose prelude.  The

bells of the university, which were then chimed at six

o'clock, were ringing merrily, and he called out, ``Come

down here and listen to the chimes; I have found a spot

where you can hear them directly with one ear, and their

echo with the other.''



When I had come down, we first investigated the echo

of the chime, which had really aroused his interest; then

he said seriously:  ``Don't make yourself unhappy over

this matter; it will turn out to be a good thing for the

university.  I have long foreseen that this attack must

come, but have feared that it would come after my death,

when the facts would be forgotten, and the transactions

little understood.  I am glad that the charges are made

now, while I am here to answer them.''  We then discussed

the matter, and it was agreed that he should telegraph and

write Governor Dix, asking him to appoint an investigating

committee, of which the majority should be from

the political party opposed to his own.  This was done. 

The committee was composed of Horatio Seymour,

formerly governor of the State and Democratic candidate

for the Presidency of the United States; William A.

Wheeler, Vice-President of the United States; and John

D. Van Buren, all three men of the highest standing, and

two of them politically opposed to Mr. Cornell.



During the long investigation which ensued in New

York and at Ithaca, he never lost his patience, though at

times sorely tried.  Various disappointed schemers, among

these one person who had not been allowed to make an

undue profit out of the university lands, and another who

had been allowed to depart from a professorship on

account of hopeless incompetency, were the main witnesses. 

The onslaught was led by the person who made the attack

in the legislature, and he had raked together a mass of

half-truths and surmises; but the evidence on Mr. Cornell's

side consisted of a complete exhibition of all the

facts and documents.  The unanimous report of the

committee was all that his warmest friends could desire; and

its recommendations regarding the management of the

fund were such as Mr. Cornell had long wished, but which

he had hardly dared ask.  The result was a complete triumph

for him.



Yet the attacks continued.  The same paper which had

been so prominent in sounding them through the western

part of the State continued them as before, and, almost

to the very day of his death, assailed him periodically as

a ``land jobber,'' ``land grabber,'' and ``land thief.''  But

he took these foul attacks by tricky declaimers and his

vindication by three of his most eminent fellow-citizens

with the same serenity.  That there was in him a profound

contempt for the wretched creatures who assailed him

and imputed to him motives as vile as their own can

hardly be doubted; yet, though I was with him constantly

during this period, I never heard him speak harshly of

them; nor could I ever see that this injustice diminished

his good will toward his fellow-men and his desire to

benefit them.



At the very time when these attacks were at their worst,

he was giving especial thought to the problem of bringing

education at the university within reach of young men of

good ability and small means.  I am quite within bounds in

saying that he gave an hour to thought upon this for

every minute he gave to thought upon the attacks of his

enemies.



It was during this period that he began building his

beautiful house near the university, and in this he showed

some of his peculiarities.  He took much pains to secure a

tasteful plan, and some of the ideas embodied in it

evidently resulted from his study of beautiful country-houses

in England.  Characteristic of him also was his way of

carrying on the work.  Having visited several quarries in

various parts of the State, in order to choose the best

possible building-stone, he employed some German stone-

carvers who had recently left work upon the Cathedral of

Cologne, brought them to Ithaca, and allowed them to work

on with no interference save from the architect.  If they

gave a month or more to the carving of a single capital

or corbel, he made no remonstrance.  When he had thus

secured the best stone-work, he selected the best seasoned

oak and walnut and called skilful carpenters from England.



In thus going abroad for artisans there was no want

of loyalty to his countrymen, nor was there any alloy

of vanity in his motives.  His purpose evidently was

to erect a house which should be as perfect a specimen

of the builder's art as he could make it, and therefore

useful, as an example of thoroughly good work, to the local

workmen.



In connection with this, another incident throws light

upon his characteristics.  Above the front entrance of the

house was a scroll, or ribbon, in stone, evidently intended

for a name or motto.  The words carved there were, ``True

and Firm.''  It is a curious evidence of the petty criticism

which beset him in those days, that this motto was at times

cited as a proof of his vainglory.  It gives me pleasure

to relieve any mind sensitive on this point, and to vindicate

the truth of history, by saying that it was I who

placed the motto there.  Calling his attention one day to

the scroll and to the need of an inscription, I suggested

a translation of the old German motto, ``Treu und Fest'';

and, as he made no objection, I wrote it out for the stone-

cutters, but told Mr. Cornell that there were people,

perhaps, who might translate the last word ``obstinate.''



The point of this lay in the fact, which Mr. Cornell knew

very well, that he was frequently charged with obstinacy. 

Yet an obstinate man, in the evil sense of that word, he

was not.  For several years it fell to my lot to discuss a

multitude of questions with him, and reasonableness was

one of his most striking characteristics.  He was one of

those very rare strong men who recognize adequately their

own limitations.  True, when he had finally made up his

mind in a matter fully within his own province, he

remained firm; but I have known very few men, wealthy,

strong, successful, as he was, so free from the fault of

thinking that, because they are good judges of one class of

questions, they are equally good in all others.  One mark of

an obstinate man is the announcement of opinions upon

subjects regarding which his experience and previous

training give him little or no means of judging.  This was

not at all the case with Mr. Cornell.  When questions arose

regarding internal university management, or courses of

study, or the choice of professors, or plans for their

accommodation, he was never quick in announcing or

tenacious in holding an opinion.  There was no purse pride

about him.  He evidently did not believe that his success

in building up a fortune had made him an expert or judge

in questions to which he had never paid special attention.



During the last year or two of his life, I saw not so

much of him as during several previous years.  He had

become greatly interested in various railway projects

having as their purpose the connection of Ithaca, as a

university town, with the State at large; and he threw

himself into these plans with great energy.  His course in

this was prompted by a public spirit as large and pure as

that which had led him to found the university.  When, at

the suggestion of sundry friends, I ventured to remonstrate

with him against going so largely into these railway

enterprises at his time of life, he said:  ``I shall live twenty

years longer, and make a million of dollars more for the

university endowment.''  Alas! within six months from

that day he lay dead in the midst of many broken hopes. 

His plans, which, under other circumstances, would have

been judged wise, seemed for a time wrecked by the financial

crisis which had just come upon the country.



In his last hours I visited him frequently.  His mind

remained clear, and he showed his old freedom from any

fault-finding spirit, though evidently oppressed by business

cares and bodily suffering.  His serenity was especially

evident as I sat with him the night before his

death, and I can never forget the placidity of his

countenance, both then and on the next morning, when all was

ended.



Something should be said regarding Mr. Cornell's

political ideas.  In the legislature he was a firm Republican,

but as free as possible from anything like partizan

bigotry.  Party ties in local matters sat lightly upon him. 

He spoke in public very little, and took far greater

interest in public improvement than in party advantage. 

With many of his political opponents his relations were

most friendly.  For such Democrats as Hiram Sibley,

Erastus Brooks, and William Kelly he had the deepest

respect and admiration.  He cared little for popular

clamor on any subject, braving it more than once by

his votes in the legislature.  He was evidently willing to

take any risk involved in waiting for the sober second

thought of the people.  He was as free from ordinary

ambition as from selfishness: when there was a call from

several parts of the State for his nomination as governor,

he said quietly, ``I prefer work for which I am better

fitted.''



There was in his ordinary bearing a certain austerity

and in his conversation an abruptness which interfered

somewhat with his popularity.  A student once said to

me, ``If Mr. Cornell would simply stand upon his pedestal

as our `Honored Founder,' and let us hurrah for him,

that would please us mightily; but when he comes into the

laboratory and asks us gruffly, `What are you wasting

your time at now?' we don't like him so well.''  The fact

on which this remark was based was that Mr. Cornell

liked greatly to walk quietly through the laboratories and

drafting-rooms, to note the work.  Now and then, when

he saw a student doing something which especially

interested him, he was evidently anxious, as he was wont

to say, ``to see what the fellow is made of,'' and he would

frequently put some provoking question, liking nothing

better than to receive a pithy answer.  Of his kind feelings

toward students I could say much.  He was not inclined

to coddle them, but was ever ready to help any who

were deserving.



Despite his apparent austerity, he was singularly free

from harshness in his judgments.  There were times when

he would have been justified in outbursts of bitterness

against those who attacked him in ways so foul and

maligned him in ways so vile; but I never heard any

bitter reply from him.  In his politics there was never

a drop of bitterness.  Only once or twice did I hear

him allude to any conduct which displeased him, and then

his comments were rather playful than otherwise.  On one

occasion, when he had written to a gentleman of great

wealth and deserved repute as a philanthropist, asking

him to join in carrying the burden of the land locations,

and had received an unfavorable answer, he made a remark

which seemed to me rather harsh.  To this I replied: 

``Mr. Cornell, Mr. ---- is not at all in fault; he does not

understand the question as you do; everybody knows that

he is a very liberal man.''  ``Oh,'' said Mr. Cornell, ``it's

easy enough to be liberal; the only hard part is drawing

the check.''



Of his intellectual characteristics, foresight was the most

remarkable.  Of all men in the country who had to do

with the college land grant of 1862, he alone discerned the

possibilities involved and had courage to make them actual.



Clearness of thought on all matters to which he gave his

attention was another striking characteristic; hence, whenever

he put anything on paper, it was lucid and cogent. 

There seems at times in his writings some of the

clear, quaint shrewdness so well known in Abraham Lincoln. 

Very striking examples of this are to be found in

his legislative speeches, in his address at the opening of

the university, and in his letters.



Among his moral characteristics, his truthfulness,

persistence, courage, and fortitude were most strongly

marked.  These qualities made him a man of peace.  He

regarded life as too short to be wasted in quarrels; his

steady rule was never to begin a lawsuit or have anything

to do with one, if it could be avoided.  The joy in

litigation and squabble, which has been the weakness of

so many men claiming to be strong, and the especial

curse of so many American churches, colleges, universities,

and other public organizations, had no place in his

strong, tolerant nature.  He never sought to publish the

sins of any one in the courts or to win the repute of an

uncompromising fighter.  In this peaceable disposition he

was prompted not only by his greatest moral quality:--

his charity toward his fellow-men, but by his greatest intel-

lectual quality:--his foresight; for he knew well ``the

glorious uncertainty of the law.''  He was a builder, not a

gladiator.



There resulted from these qualities an equanimity which

I have never seen equaled.  When his eldest son had been

elected to the highest office in the gift of the State

Assembly, and had been placed, evidently, on the way to the

governor 's chair,--afterward attained,--though it must

have gratified such a father, he never made any reference

to it in my hearing; and when the body of his favorite

grandson, a most winning and promising boy, killed

instantly by a terrible accident, was brought into his

presence, though his heart must have bled, his calmness seemed

almost superhuman.



His religious ideas were such as many excellent people

would hardly approve.  He had been born into the Society

of Friends; and their quietness, simplicity, freedom from

noisy activity, and devotion to the public good attached

him to them.  But his was not a bigoted attachment; he

went freely to various churches, aiding them without

distinction of sect, though finally he settled into a steady

attendance at the Unitarian Church in Ithaca, for the pastor

of which he conceived a great respect and liking.  He was

never inclined to say much about religion; but, in our

talks, he was wont to quote with approval from Pope's

``Universal Prayer''--and especially the lines:



   ``Teach me to feel another's woe,

        To hide the fault I see;

     The mercy I to others show,

        That mercy show to me.''





On the mere letter of Scripture he dwelt little; and,

while he never obtruded opinions that might shock any

person, and was far removed from scoffing or irreverence,

he did not hesitate to discriminate between parts of our

Sacred Books which he considered as simply legendary

and parts which were to him pregnant with eternal truth.



His religion seemed to take shape in a deeply reverent

feeling toward his Creator, and in a constant desire to

improve the condition of his fellow-creatures.  He was

never surprised or troubled by anything which any other

human being believed or did not believe; of intolerance

he was utterly incapable.  He sought no reputation as a

philanthropist, cared little for approval, and nothing for

applause; but I can say of him, without reserve, that,

during all the years I knew him, ``he went about doing

good.''







CHAPTER XIX



ORGANIZATION OF CORNELL UNIVERSITY--1865-1868



Although my formal election to the university presidency

did not take place until 1867, the duties implied

by that office had already been discharged by me

during two years.



While Mr. Cornell devoted himself to the financial

questions arising from the new foundation, he intrusted all

other questions to me.  Indeed, my duties may be said to

have begun when, as chairman of the Committee on Education

in the State Senate, I resisted all efforts to divide

the land-grant fund between the People's College and

the State Agricultural College; to have been continued

when I opposed the frittering away of the entire grant

among more than twenty small sectarian colleges; and

to have taken a more direct form when I drafted the

educational clauses of the university charter and advocated

it before the legislature and in the press.  This

advocacy was by no means a light task.  The influential

men who flocked to Albany, seeking to divide the fund

among various sects and localities, used arguments often

plausible and sometimes forcible.  These I dealt with

on various occasions, but especially in a speech before the

State Senate in 1865, in which was shown the character

of the interested opposition, the farcical equipment of

the People's College, the failure of the State Agricultural

College, the inadequacy of the sectarian colleges,

even though they called themselves universities; and I

did all in my power to communicate to my colleagues

something of my own enthusiasm for a university suitably

endowed, free from sectarian trammels, centrally

situated, and organized to meet fully the wants of the

State as regarded advanced education, general and

technical.



Three points I endeavored especially to impress upon

them in this speech.  First, that while, as regards primary

education, the policy of the State should be diffusion of

resources, it should be, as regards university education,

concentration of resources.  Secondly, that sectarian

colleges could not do the work required.  Thirdly, that any

institution for higher education in the State must form an

integral part of the whole system of public instruction;

that the university should not be isolated from the school

system, as were the existing colleges, but that it should

have a living connection with the system, should push its

roots down into it and through it, drawing life from it

and sending life back into it.  Mr. Cornell accepted this

view at once.  Mr. Horace Greeley, who, up to that time,

had supported the People's College, was favorably impressed

by it, and, more than anything else, it won for us

his support.  To insure this vital connection of the

proposed university with the school system, I provided in

the charter for four ``State scholarships'' in each of the

one hundred and twenty-eight Assembly districts.  These

scholarships were to be awarded to the best scholars in the

public schools of each district, after due examination, one

each year; each scholarship entitling the holder to free

instruction in the university for four years.  Thus the

university and the schools were bound closely together by

the constant and living tie of five hundred and twelve

students.  As the number of Assembly districts under the

new constitution was made, some years later, one hundred

and fifty, the number of these competitive free scholarships

is now six hundred.  They have served their purpose

well.  Thirty years of this connection have greatly

uplifted the whole school system of the State, and

made the university a life-giving power in it; while this

uplifting of the school system has enabled the university

steadily to raise and improve its own standard of instruction.



But during the earlier period of our plans there was

one serious obstacle--Charles James Folger.  He was the

most powerful member of the Senate, its president, and

chairman of the Judiciary Committee.  He had already won

wide respect as a county judge, had been longer in the

Senate than any other member, and had already given ample

evidence of the qualities which later in life raised him to

some of the highest positions, State and National.  His

instincts would have brought him to our side; for he was

broad-minded, enlightened, and earnestly in favor of all

good legislation.  He was also my personal friend, and

when I privately presented my views to him he acquiesced

in them.  But there were two difficulties.  First, he had in

his own city a denominational college, his own alma

mater, which, though small, was influential.  Still worse

for us, he had in his district the State Agricultural College,

which the founding of Cornell University must necessarily

wipe out of existence.  He might rise above the first

of these difficulties, but the second seemed insurmountable. 

No matter how much in sympathy with our main aim, he

could not sacrifice a possession so dear to his constituency

as the State College of Agriculture.  He felt that he had

no right to do so; he knew also that to do so would be to

sacrifice his political future, and we felt, as he did, that he

had no right to do this.



But here came in to help us the culmination of a series

of events as unexpected as that which had placed the land-

grant fund at our disposal just at the time when Mr. Cornell

and myself met in the State Senate.  For years a

considerable body of thoughtful men throughout the State,

more especially of the medical profession, had sought to

remedy a great evil in the treatment of the insane.  As far

back as the middle of the century, Senator Bradford of

Cortland had taken the lead in an investigation of the

system then existing, and his report was a frightful ex-

posure.  Throughout the State, lunatics whose families

were unable to support them at the State or private asylums

were huddled together in the poorhouses of the various

counties.  Their condition was heartrending.  They

were constantly exposed to neglect, frequently to extremes

of cold and hunger, and sometimes to brutality: thus mild

lunacy often became raving madness.  For some years before

my election to the Senate the need of a reform had

been urged upon the legislative committees by a physician

--Dr. Willard of Albany.  He had taken this evil condition

of things much to heart, and year after year had come

before the legislature urging the creation of a new

institution, which he wished named after an eminent physician

of Albany who had in his day done what was possible to

remedy the evil--Dr. Beck.  But year after year Dr.

Willard's efforts, like those of Dr. Beck before him, had

been in vain.  Session after session the ``Bill to establish

the Beck Asylum for the Chronic Insane'' was rejected,--

the legislature shrinking from the cost of it.  But one day,

as we were sitting in the Senate, appalling news came from

the Assembly:  Dr. Willard, while making one more passionate

appeal for the asylum, had fallen dead in the presence

of the committee.  The result was a deep and wide-

spread feeling of compunction, and while we were under

the influence of this I sought Judge Folger and showed him

his opportunity to do two great things.  I said:  ``It rests

with you to remedy this cruel evil which has now cost

Dr. Willard his life, and at the same time to join us in

carrying the Cornell University Bill.  Let the legislature

create a new asylum for the chronic insane of the State. 

Now is the time of all times.  Instead of calling it the

Beck Asylum, give it the name of Willard--the man who

died in advocating it.  Place it upon the Agricultural

College property on the shores of Seneca Lake in your

district.  Your constituents are sure to prefer a living

State asylum to a dying Agricultural College, and will

thoroughly support you in both the proposed measures.'' 

This suggestion Judge Folger received with favor.  The

Willard Asylum was created, and he became one of our

strongest supporters.



Both Mr. Cornell's financial plans and my educational

plans in the new university charter were wrought into

final shape by him.  As chairman of the Judiciary Committee

he reported our bill to the Senate, and at various

critical periods gave us his earnest support.  Quite likely

doctrinaires will stigmatize our conduct in this matter as

``log-rolling''; the men who always criticize but never

construct may even call it a ``bargain.''  There was

no ``bargain'' and no ``log-rolling,'' but they may call

it what they like; I believe that we were both of us

thoroughly in the right.  For our coming together in this way

gave to the State the Willard Asylum and the Cornell

University, and without our thus coming together neither

of these would have been created.



But in spite of this happy compromise, the struggle for

our university charter, as has already been seen, was long

and severe.  The opposition of over twenty sectarian colleges,

and of active politicians from every quarter of the

State where these colleges had been established, made our

work difficult; but at last it was accomplished.  Preparations

for the new institution were now earnestly pressed

on, and for a year I gave up very much of my time to them,

keeping in constant communication with Mr. Cornell,

frequently visiting Ithaca, and corresponding with trustees

in various parts of the State and with all others at home

or abroad who seemed able to throw light on any of the

problems we had to solve.



The question now arose as to the presidency of the

institution; and, as time passed on and duties increased, this

became more and more pressing.  In the previous chapter

I have given some account of the circumstances attending

my election and of Mr. Cornell's relation to it; but this is

perhaps the place for stating one of the difficulties which

stood in the way of my acceptance, and which, indeed,

greatly increased my cares during all the first years of my

presidency.  The death of my father and uncle, who had

for many years carried on a large and wide-spread business,

threw upon me new responsibilities.  It was during the

Civil War, when panic after panic ran through the American

business world, making the interests now devolving

upon me all the more burdensome.  I had no education

for business and no liking for it, but, under the pressure

of necessity, decided to do the best I could, yet determining

that just as soon as these business affairs could be turned

over to others it should be done.  Several years elapsed,

and those the busiest so far as the university was concerned,

before such a release became possible.  So it happened

that during the first and most trying years of the

new institution of Ithaca, I was obliged to do duty as

senator of the State of New York, president of Cornell

University, lecturer at the University of Michigan,

president of the National Bank of Syracuse and director in

two other banks,--one being at Oswego,--director in the

New York Central and Lake Shore railways, director in

the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal,--to say nothing

of positions on boards of various similar corporations

and the executorship of two widely extended estates. 

It was a trying time for me.  There was, however, some

advantage; for this epoch in my life put me in relations

with some of the foremost business men in the United

States, among them Cornelius Vanderbilt, William H.

Vanderbilt, Dean Richmond, Daniel Drew, and various

other men accustomed to prompt and decisive dealing with

large business affairs.  I recognized the value of such

associations and endeavored to learn something from them,

but was determined, none the less, to end this sort of

general activity as early as it could be done consistently

with justice to my family.  Several years were required,

and those the very years in which university cares were

most pressing.  But finally my intention was fully carried

out.  The bank over which my father had presided so

many years I was able to wind up in a way satisfactory

to all concerned, not only repaying the shareholders,

but giving them a large surplus.  From the other cor-

porations also I gradually escaped, turning my duties

over to those better fitted for them.  Still many outside

cares remained, and in one way or another I was obliged

to take part in affairs which I would have gladly shunned. 

Yet there was consolation in the idea that, as my main

danger was that of drifting into a hermit life among

professors and books, anything that took me out of this for a

limited length of time was not without compensating advantages.



Just previously to my election to the university presidency

I had presented a ``plan of organization,'' which,

having been accepted and printed by the trustees, formed

the mold for the main features of the new institution; and

early among my duties came the selection and nomination

of professors.  In these days one is able to choose from a

large body of young men holding fellowships in the various

larger universities of the United States; but then, with

the possible exception of two or three at Harvard, there

was not a fellowship, so far as I can remember, in the whole

country.  The choosing of professors was immeasurably

more difficult than at present.  With reference to this point,

a very eminent graduate of Harvard then volunteered to

me some advice, which at first sight looked sound, but which

I soon found to be inapplicable.  He said:  ``You must secure

at any cost the foremost men in the United States in

every department.  In this way alone can a real university

be created.''  Trying the Socratic method upon him, I

asked, in reply, ``How are we to get such men?  The foremost

man in American science is undoubtedly Agassiz, but

he has refused all offers of high position at Paris made him

by the French Emperor.  The main objects of his life are

the creation of his great museum at Harvard and his

investigations and instruction in connection with it; he has

declared that he has `no time to waste in making money!' 

What sum or what inducement of any sort can transfer

him from Harvard to a new institution on the distant hills

of central New York?  So, too, with the most eminent

men at the other universities.  What sum will draw them

to us from Harvard, Yale, Columbia, the University of

Virginia, and the University of Michigan?  An endowment

twice as large as ours would be unavailing.''  Therefore

it was that I broached, as a practical measure, in my

``plan of organization,'' the system which I had discussed

tentatively with George William Curtis several years before,

and to which he referred afterward in his speech at

the opening of the university at Ithaca.  This was to take

into our confidence the leading professors in the more

important institutions of learning, and to secure from

them, not the ordinary, conventional paper testimonials,

but confidential information as to their young men likely

to do the best work in various fields, to call these young

men to our resident professorships, and then to call the

most eminent men we could obtain for non-resident

professorships or lectureships.  This idea was carried out to

the letter.  The most eminent men in various universities

gave us confidential advice; and thus it was that I was

enabled to secure a number of bright, active, energetic

young men as our resident professors, mingling with them

two or three older men, whose experience and developed

judgment seemed necessary in the ordinary conduct of our

affairs.



As to the other part of the plan, I secured Agassiz,

Lowell, Curtis, Bayard Taylor, Goldwin Smith, Theodore

Dwight, George W. Greene, John Stanton Gould, and at a

later period Froude, Freeman, and others, as non-resident

professors and lecturers.  Of the final working of this

system I shall speak later.



The question of buildings also arose; but, alas!  I could

not reproduce my air-castles.  For our charter required

us to have the university in operation in October, 1868,

and there was no time for careful architectural preparation. 

Moreover, the means failed us.  All that we could

then do was to accept a fairly good plan for our main

structures; to make them simple, substantial, and dignified;

to build them of stone from our own quarries; and

so to dispose them that future architects might so combine

other buildings with them as to form an impressive quadrangle

on the upper part of the university property.  To

this plan Mr. Cornell gave his hearty assent.  It was then

arranged, with his full sanction, that the university

buildings should ultimately consist of two great groups: the

first or upper group to be a quadrangle of stone, and the

second or lower group to be made up of buildings of

brick more freely disposed, according to our future needs

and means.  Although this plan has unfortunately been

departed from in some minor respects, it has in general

turned out well.



Having called a number of professors and seen foundations

laid for ``Morrill Hall,'' I sailed in April of 1868

for Europe, in order to study technical institutions, to

purchase needed equipment, and to secure certain professors

such as could not then be found in our own country. 

Thus far my knowledge of higher education in Europe

had been confined almost entirely to the universities;

but now I went carefully through various technical

institutions, among them the English Agricultural College

at Cirencester, the Agricultural Experiment Station

at Rothamstead, the French Agricultural College at

Grignon, the Conservatoire des Arts et M<e'>tiers at Paris,

the Veterinary School at Alfort, the German Agricultural

College at Hohenheim, the Technical School and

Veterinary College at Berlin, and others.  As to equipment,

wherever I found valuable material I bought it. 

Thus were brought together for our library a very large

collection of books in all the principal departments; physical

and chemical apparatus from London, Paris, Heidelberg,

and Berlin; chemicals from Berlin and Erfurt; the

only duplicate of the royal collection of cereals and grasses

and the great collection of British patent-office publications

from the British imperial authorities; the Rau models

of plows from Hohenheim; the Brendel plant models

from Breslau; the models of machine movements from

London, Darmstadt, and Berlin; the plastic models of

Auzoux from Paris; and other apparatus and instruments

from all parts of Europe, with diagrams and drawings

from every institution where I could find them.  During

three months, from funds furnished by the university, by

Mr. Cornell personally, and, I may be allowed to add, from

my own personal resources, I expended for these purposes

over sixty thousand dollars, a sum which in those days

represented much more than in these.



As to non-resident professors, I secured in London

Goldwin Smith, who had recently distinguished himself

by his works as a historian and as regius professor of

history at Oxford; and I was successful in calling Dr.

James Law, who, though a young man, had already made

himself a name in veterinary science.  It seemed to many

a comical juxtaposition, and various witticisms were made

at my expense over the statement that I had ``brought

back an Oxford professor and a Scotch horse-doctor.'' 

But never were selections more fortunate.  Goldwin Smith,

by his high character, his broad and deep scholarship, his

devotion not only to his professorship but to the general

university work, his self-denial in behalf of the university

and its students, rendered priceless services.  He bore all

privations cheerfully and braved all discouragements

manfully.  Never were there better historical lectures than his. 

They inspired us all, and the impulse then given is still

felt.  So, too, Dr. Law, in his field, was invaluable, and this

was soon felt throughout the State.  Of him I shall speak

later.







CHAPTER XX



THE FIRST YEARS OF CORNELL UNIVERSITY--1868-1870



On the 7th of October, 1868, came the formal opening

of the university.  The struggle for its charter

had attracted much attention in all parts of the State, and

a large body of spectators, with about four hundred

students, assembled at the Cornell Library Hall in Ithaca. 

Though the charter had required us to begin in October,

there had seemed for some time very little chance of

it.  Mr. Cornell had been absent in the woods of the upper

Mississippi and on the plains of Kansas, selecting university

lands; I had been absent for some months in Europe,

securing plans and equipment; and as, during our absence,

the contractor for the first main building, Morrill Hall, had

failed, the work was wretchedly behindhand.  The direct

roads to the university site were as yet impracticable, for

the Cascadilla ravine and the smaller one north of it were

still unbridged.  The grounds were unkempt, with heaps

of earth and piles of material in all directions.  The great

quantities of furniture, apparatus, and books which I had

sent from Europe had been deposited wherever storage

could be found.  Typical was the case of the large Holtz

electrical machine from Germany.  It was in those days a

novelty, and many were anxious to see it; but it could not

be found, and it was only discovered several weeks later,

when the last pots and pans were pulled out of the kitchen

store-room in the cellar of the great stone barrack known

as Cascadilla House.  All sorts of greatly needed material

had been delayed in steamships and on railways, or was

stuck fast in custom-houses and warehouses from Berlin

and Paris to Ithaca.  Our friends had toiled heroically

during our absence, but the little town--then much

less energetic than now--had been unable to furnish

the work required in so short a time.  The heating

apparatus and even the doors for the students' rooms were

not in place until weeks after winter weather had set in.  To

complicate matters still more, students began to come at

a period much earlier and in numbers far greater than we

had expected; and the first result of this was that, in

getting ready for the opening, Mr. Cornell and myself were

worn out.  For two or three days before my inauguration

both of us were in the hands of physicians and in bed, and

on the morning of the day appointed we were taken in

carriages to the hall where the ceremony was to take place. 

To Mr. Cornell's brief speech I have alluded elsewhere;

my own presented my ideas more at length.  They were

grouped in four divisions.  The first of these related to

``Foundation Ideas,'' which were announced as follows: 

First, the close union of liberal and practical instruction;

second, unsectarian control; third, a living union between

the university and the whole school system of the State;

fourth, concentration of revenues for advanced education. 

The second division was that of ``Formative Ideas''; and

under these--First, equality between different courses of

study.  In this I especially developed ideas which had

occurred to me as far back as my observations after

graduation at Yale, where the classical students belonging

to the ``college proper'' were given a sort of supremacy,

and scientific students relegated to a separate institution

at considerable distance, and therefore deprived of much

general, and even special, culture which would have

greatly benefited them.  Indeed, they seemed not considered

as having any souls to be saved, since no provision

was made for them at the college chapel.  Second, increased

development of scientific studies.  The third main division

was that of ``Governmental Ideas''; and under these--

First, ``the regular and frequent infusion of new life into

the governing board.''  Here a system at that time entirely

new in the United States was proposed.  Instead of the

usual life tenure of trustees, their term was made five years

and they were to be chosen by ballot.  Secondly, it was

required that as soon as the graduates of the university

numbered fifty they should select one trustee each year,

thus giving the alumni one third of the whole number

elected.  Third, there was to be a system of self-government

administered by the students themselves.  As to this

third point, I must frankly confess that my ideas were

vague, unformed, and finally changed by the logic of

events.  As the fourth and final main division, I presented

``Permeating Ideas''; and of these--First, the development

of the individual man in all his nature, in all his

powers, as a being intellectual, moral, and religious. 

Secondly, bringing the powers of the man thus developed

to bear usefully upon society.



In conclusion, I alluded to two groups of ``Eliminated

Ideas,'' the first of these being the ``Ideas of the Pedants,''

and the second the ``Ideas of the Philistines.''  As to the

former, I took pains to guard the institution from those

who, in the higher education, substitute dates for history,

gerund-grinding for literature, and formulas for science;

as to the latter, I sought to guard it from the men to whom

``Gain is God, and Gunnybags his Prophet.''



At the close, referring to Mr. Cornell, who had been too

weak to stand while delivering his speech, and who was at

that moment sitting near me, I alluded to his noble plans

and to the opposition, misrepresentation, and obloquy he

had met thus far, and in doing so turned toward him.  The

sight of him, as he thus sat, looking so weak, so weary, so

broken, for a few moments utterly incapacitated me.  I

was myself, at the time, in but little better condition than

he; and as there rushed into my mind memories of the previous

ten days at his house, when I had heard him groaning

in pain through almost every night, it flashed upon me

how utterly hopeless was the university without his

support.  My voice faltered; I could for a moment say no-

thing; then came a revulsion.  I asked myself, ``What will

this great audience think of us?''  How will our enemies,

some of whom I see scattered about the audience, exult

over this faltering at the outset!  A feeling of shame came

over me; but just at that moment I saw two or three strong

men from different parts of the State, among them my old

friend Mr. Sedgwick of Syracuse, in the audience, and Mr.

Sage and Mr. McGraw among the trustees, evidently

affected by my allusion to the obloquy and injustice which

Mr. Cornell had met thus far.  This roused me.  But

I could no longer read; I laid my manuscript aside and

gave the ending in words which occurred to me as I

stood then and there.  They were faltering and inadequate;

but I felt that the vast majority in that audience,

representing all parts of our commonwealth, were with

us, and I asked nothing more.



In the afternoon came exercises at the university

grounds.  The chime of nine bells which Miss Jenny

McGraw had presented to us had been temporarily hung

in a wooden tower placed very near the spot where now

stands the porch of the library; and, before the bells were

rung for the first time, a presentation address was delivered

by Mr. Francis Miles Finch, since justice of the Court

of Appeals of the State and dean of the University Law

School; and this was followed by addresses from the

superintendent of public instruction, and from our non-

resident professors Agassiz and George William Curtis.



Having again been taken out of bed and wrapped up

carefully, I was carried up the hill to hear them.  All the

speeches were fine; but, just at the close, Curtis burst into

a peroration which, in my weak physical condition, utterly

unmanned me.  He compared the new university to a

newly launched ship--``all its sails set, its rigging full and

complete from stem to stern, its crew embarked, its

passengers on board; and,'' he added, ``even while I speak

to you, even while this autumn sun sets in the west, the

ship begins to glide over the waves, it goes forth rejoicing,

every stitch of canvas spread, all its colors flying, its

bells ringing, its heart-strings beating with hope and

joy; and I say, God bless the ship, God bless the builder,

God bless the chosen captain, God bless the crew, and,

gentlemen undergraduates, may God bless all the passengers!''



The audience applauded; the chimes burst merrily

forth; but my heart sank within me.  A feeling of ``goneness''

came over me.  Curtis's simile was so perfect that

I felt myself indeed on the deck of the ship, but not so much

in the character of its ``chosen captain'' as of a seasick

passenger.  There was indeed reason for qualmish feelings. 

Had I drawn a picture of the ship at that moment,

it would have been very different from that presented by

Curtis.  My mind was pervaded by our discouragements--

by a realization of Mr. Cornell's condition and my own,

the demands of our thoughtless friends, the attacks of our

fanatical enemies, the inadequacy of our resources.  The

sense of all these things burst upon me, and the view about

us was not reassuring.  Not only were the university buildings

unready and the grounds unkempt, but all that part

of our domain which is now devoted to the beautiful lawns

about the university chapel, Barnes Hall, Sage College,

and other stately edifices, was then a ragged corn-field

surrounded by rail fences.  No one knew better than I

the great difficulties which were sure to beset us. 

Probably no ship was ever launched in a condition so unfit to

brave the storms.  Even our lesser difficulties, though they

may appear comical now, were by no means comical then. 

As a rule, Mr. Cornell had consulted me before making

communications to the public; but during my absence in

Europe he had written a letter to the ``New York Tribune,''

announcing that students could support themselves,

while pursuing their studies one half of each day in the

university, by laboring the other half.  In this he showed

that sympathy with needy and meritorious young men

which was one of his marked qualities, but his proclamation

cost us dear.  He measured the earnestness and endurance

and self-sacrifice of others by his own; he did not

realize that not one man in a thousand was, in these

respects, his equal.  As a result of this ``Tribune'' letter, a

multitude of eager young men pressed forward at the

opening of the university and insisted on receiving self-

supporting work.  Nearly all of those who could offer

skilled labor of any sort we were able to employ; and

many graduates of whom Cornell University is now proud

supported themselves then by working as carpenters, masons,

printers, accountants, and shorthand-writers.  But

besides these were many who had never done any manual

labor, and still more who had never done any labor

requiring skill.  An attempt was made to employ these in

grading roads, laying out paths, helping on the farm,

doing janitors' work, and the like.  Some of them were

successful; most were not.  It was found that it would be

cheaper to support many of the applicants at a hotel and to

employ day-laborers in their places.  Much of their work

had to be done over again at a cost greater than the original

outlay should have been.  Typical was the husking of

Indian corn upon the university farm by student labor: it

was found to cost more than the resultant corn could be

sold for in the market.  The expectations of these youth

were none the less exuberant.  One of them, who had never

done any sort of manual labor, asked whether, while learning

to build machinery and supporting himself and his

family, he could not lay up something against contingencies. 

Another, a teamster from a Western State, came to

offer his services, and, on being asked what he wished to

study, said that he wished to learn to read; on being told

that the public school in his own district was the place for

that, he was very indignant, and quoted Mr. Cornell's

words, ``I would found an institution where any person can

find instruction in any study.''  Others, fairly good scholars,

but of delicate build, having applied for self-supporting

employment, were assigned the lightest possible tasks

upon the university grounds; but, finding even this work

too severe, wrote bitterly to leading metropolitan journals

denouncing Mr. Cornell's bad faith.  One came all the way

from Russia, being able to make the last stages of his

journey only by charity, and on arriving was found to be

utterly incapable of sustained effort, physical or mental. 

The most definite part of his aims, as he announced them,

was to convert the United States to the Russo-Greek

Church.



Added to these were dreamers and schemers of more

mature age.  The mails were burdened with their letters

and our offices with their presence.  Some had plans for

the regeneration of humanity by inventing machines which

they wished us to build, some by devising philosophies

which they wished us to teach, some by writing books

which they wished us to print; most by taking professorships

which they wished us to endow.  The inevitable politician

also appeared; and at the first meeting of the trustees

two notorious party hacks came all the way from New

York to tell us ``what the people expected,''--which was

the nomination of sundry friends of theirs to positions in

the new institution.  A severe strain was brought upon

Mr. Cornell and myself in showing civility to these gentlemen;

yet, as we were obliged to deny them, no suavity

on our part could stay the inevitable result--their

hostility.  The attacks of the denominational and local presses

in the interests of institutions which had failed to tear the

fund in pieces and to secure scraps of it were thus largely

reinforced.  Ever and anon came onslaughts upon us

personally and upon every feature of the institution, whether

actual, probable, possible, or conceivable.  One eminent

editorial personage, having vainly sought to ``unload'' a

member of his staff into one of our professorships, howled

in a long article at the turpitude of Mr. Cornell in land

matters, screamed for legislative investigation, and for

years afterward never neglected an opportunity to strike

a blow at the new institution.



Some difficulties also showed themselves in the first

working of our university machinery.  In my ``plan of

organization,'' as well as in various addresses and reports,

I had insisted that the university should present various

courses of instruction, general and special, and that

students should be allowed much liberty of choice between

these.  This at first caused serious friction.  It has

disappeared, now that the public schools of the State have

adjusted themselves to the proper preparation of students

for the various courses; but at that time these

difficulties were in full force and vigor.  One of the most

troublesome signs of this was the changing and shifting

by students from course to course, which both injured

them and embarrassed their instructors.  To meet this

tendency I not only addressed the students to show

that good, substantial, continuous work on any one course

which any one of them was likely to choose was far

better than indecision and shifting about between various

courses, but also reprinted for their use John Foster's

famous ``Essay on Decision of Character.''  This tractate

had done me much good in my student days and at various

times since, when I had allowed myself to linger too long

between different courses of action; and I now distributed

it freely, the result being that students generally made

their election between courses with increased care, and

when they had made it stood by it.



Yet for these difficulties in getting the student body

under way there were compensations, and best of these

was the character and bearing of the students.  There

were, of course, sundry exhibitions of boyishness, but the

spirit of the whole body was better than that of any

similar collection of young men I had ever seen.  One reason

was that we were happily spared any large proportion of

rich men's sons, but the main reason was clearly the

permission of choice between various courses of study in

accordance with individual aims and tastes.  In this way

a far larger number were interested than had ever been

under the old system of forcing all alike through one

simple, single course, regardless of aims and tastes; and

thus it came that, even from the first, the tone at Cornell

was given, not by men who affected to despise study, but

by men who devoted themselves to study.  It evidently

became disreputable for any student not to be really at

work in some one of the many courses presented.  There

were few cases really calling for discipline.  I prized this

fact all the more because it justified a theory of mine.  I

had long felt that the greatest cause of student turbulence

and dissipation was the absence of interest in study

consequent upon the fact that only one course was provided,

and I had arrived at the conclusion that providing various

courses, suited to various aims and tastes, would diminish

this evil.



As regards student discipline in the university, I had

dwelt in my ``plan of organization'' upon the advisability

of a departure from the system inherited from the English

colleges, which was still widely prevailing.  It had been

developed in America probably beyond anything known

in Great Britain and Germany, and was far less satisfactory

than in these latter countries, for the simple reason

that in them the university authorities have some legal

power to secure testimony and administer punishment,

while in America they have virtually none.  The result had

been most unfortunate, as I have shown in other parts of

these chapters referring to various student escapades in the

older American universities, some of them having cost human

life.  I had therefore taken the ground that, so far as

possible, students should be treated as responsible citizens;

that, as citizens, they should be left to be dealt with by the

constituted authorities; and that members of the faculty

should no longer be considered as policemen.  I had, during

my college life, known sundry college tutors seriously

injured while thus doing police duty; I have seen a

professor driven out of a room, through the panel of a door,

with books, boots, and bootjacks hurled at his head; and

even the respected president of a college, a doctor of

divinity, while patrolling buildings with the janitors,

subjected to outrageous indignity.



Fortunately the causes already named, to which may be

added athletic sports, especially boating, so greatly

diminished student mischief at Cornell, that cases of discipline

were reduced to a minimum--so much so, in fact, that there

were hardly ever any of a serious character.  I felt that

then and there was the time to reiterate the doctrine laid

down in my ``plan of organization,'' that a professor

should not be called upon to be a policeman, and that if the

grounds were to be policed, proper men should be employed

for that purpose.  This doctrine was reasonable

and it prevailed.  The Cornell grounds and buildings,

under the care of a patrol appointed for that purpose,

have been carefully guarded, and never has a member of

the faculty been called upon to perform police duty.



There were indeed some cases requiring discipline by

the faculty, and one of these will provoke a smile on the

part of all who took part in it as long as they shall live. 

There had come to us a stalwart, sturdy New Englander,

somewhat above the usual student age, and showing

considerable aptitude for studies in engineering.  Various

complaints were made against him; but finally he was

summoned before the faculty for a very singular breach

of good taste, if not of honesty.  The entire instructing

body of that day being gathered about the long table in

the faculty room, and I being at the head of the table, the

culprit was summoned, entered, and stood solemnly before

us.  Various questions were asked him, which he

parried with great ingenuity.  At last one was asked

of a very peculiar sort, as follows:  ``Mr. ----, did you,

last month, in the village of Dundee, Yates County, pass

yourself off as Professor ---- of this university,

announcing a lecture and delivering it in his name?''  He

answered blandly, ``Sir, I did go to Dundee in Yates County;

I did deliver a lecture there; I did NOT announce myself as

Professor ---- of Cornell University; what others may

have done I do not know; all I know is that at the close

of my lecture several leading men of the town came

forward and said that they had heard a good many lectures

given by college professors from all parts of the State,

and that they had never had one as good as mine.''  I

think, of all the strains upon my risible faculties during

my life, this answer provoked the greatest, and the

remainder of the faculty were clearly in the same condition. 

I dismissed the youth at once, and hardly was he outside

the door when a burst of titanic laughter shook the court

and the youth was troubled no more.



Far more serious was another case.  The usual good-

natured bickering between classes had gone on, and as a

consequence certain sophomores determined to pay off

some old scores against members of the junior class, at a

junior exhibition.  To do this they prepared a ``mock

programme,'' which, had it been merely comic, as some

others had been, would have provoked no ill feeling. 

Unfortunately, some miscreant succeeded in introducing into

it allusions of a decidedly Rabelaisian character.  The

evening arrived, a large audience of ladies and gentlemen

were assembled, and this programme was freely distributed. 

The proceeding was felt to be an outrage; and I

served notice on the class that the real of offender or

offenders, if they wished to prevent serious consequences to all

concerned, must submit themselves to the faculty and take

due punishment.  Unfortunately, they were not manly

enough to do this.  Thereupon, to my own deep regret and

in obedience to my sense of justice, I suspended indefinitely

from the university the four officers of the class,

its president, vice-president, secretary, and treasurer. 

They were among the very best men in the class, all

of them friends of my own; and I knew to a certainty

that they had had nothing directly to do with the articles

concerned, that the utmost which could be said against

them was that they had been careless as to what appeared

in the programme, for which they were responsible.  Most

bitter feeling arose, and I summoned a meeting of the

entire student body.  As I entered the room hisses were

heard; the time had evidently come for a grapple with

the whole body.  I stated the case as it was: that the four

officers would be suspended and must leave the university

town until their return was allowed by the faculty; that

such an offense against decency could not be condoned;

that I had understood that the entire class proposed to

make common cause with their officers and leave the

university with them; that to this we interposed no objection;

that it simply meant less work for the faculty during the

remainder of the year; that it was far more important

for the university to maintain a character for decency and

good discipline than to have a large body of students; and

that, if necessary to maintain such a character, we would

certainly allow the whole student body in all the classes to

go home and would begin anew.  I then drew a picture. 

I sketched a member of the class who had left the university

on account of this discipline entering the paternal

door, encountering a question as to the cause of his

unexpected home-coming, and replying that the cause was the

outrageous tyranny of the president and faculty.  I

pictured, then, the father and mother of the home-coming

student asking what the cause or pretext of this ``tyranny''

was, and I then said:  ``I defy any one of you to show your

father and mother the `mock programme' which has

caused the trouble.  There is not one of you here who dares

do it; there is not one of you who would not be turned out

of his father's door if he were thus to insult his mother.'' 

At this there came a round of applause.  I then expressed

my personal regret that the penalty must fall upon four

men whom I greatly respected; but fall it must unless

the offenders were manly enough to give themselves

up.  The result was that at the close I was greeted with a

round of applause; and immediately afterward the four

officers came to me, acknowledged the justice of the

discipline, and expressed the hope that their suspension might

not go beyond that term.  It did not: at the close of the

term they were allowed to return; and from that day

``mock programmes'' of the sort concerned, which in many

American colleges had been a chronic evil, never

reappeared at Cornell.  The result of this action encouraged

me greatly as to the reliance to be placed on the sense of

justice in the great body of our students when directly

and properly appealed to.



Still another thing which I sought to promote was a

reasonable devotion to athletics.  My own experience as

a member of a boating-club at Yale had shown me what

could be done, and I think one of the best investments I

ever made was in giving a racing-boat to the Cornell crew

on Cayuga Lake.  The fact that there were so many

students trained sturdily in rural homes in the bracing

air of western New York, who on every working-day of

college life tramped up the University Hill, and on other

days explored the neighboring hills and vales, gave us a

body of men sure to do well as athletes.  At their first

contest with the other universities on the Connecticut

River at Springfield they were beaten, but they took their

defeat manfully.  Some time after this, General Grant,

then President of the United States, on his visit to the

university, remarked to me that he saw the race at Springfield;

that our young men ought to have won it; and that,

in his opinion, they would have won it if they had not

been unfortunately placed in shallow water, where there

were eddies making against them.  This remark struck

me forcibly, coming as it did from one who had so keen a

judgment in every sort of contest.  I bore it in mind, and

was not surprised when, a year or two later (1875), the

Cornell crews, having met at Saratoga Lake the crews

from Harvard, Yale, and other leading universities, won

both the freshman and university races.  It was humorously

charged against me that when the news of this

reached Ithaca I rang the university bells.  This was not

the fact.  The simple truth was that, being in the midst

of a body of students when the news came, and seeing them

rush toward the bell-tower, I went with them to prevent

injury to the bells by careless ringing; the ringing was

done by them.  I will not deny that the victory pleased me,

as many others since gained by the Cornell crews have

done; but far more to me than the victory itself was a

letter written me by a prominent graduate of Princeton

who was at Saratoga during the contest.  He wrote me, as

he said, not merely to congratulate me on the victory, but

on the fine way in which our students took it, and the manly

qualities which they showed in the hour of triumph and

during their whole stay at Saratoga.  This gave me courage. 

From that day I have never felt any fears as to the

character of the student body.  One leading cause of the

success of Cornell University, in the midst of all its trials

and struggles, has been the character of its students:

working as they do under a system which gives them an

interest in the studies they are pursuing, they have used

the large liberty granted them in a way worthy of all praise.



Nor is this happy change seen at Cornell alone.  The

same causes,--mainly the increase in the range of studies

and freedom of choice between them, have produced similar

results in all the leading institutions.  Recalling the

student brawl at the Harvard commons which cost the

historian Prescott his sight, and the riot at the Harvard

commencement which blocked the way of President Everett

and the British minister; recalling the fatal wounding

of Tutor Dwight, the maiming of Tutor Goodrich, and

the killing of two town rioters by students at Yale; and

recalling the monstrous indignities to the president and

faculty at Hobart of which I was myself witness, as well

as the state of things at various other colleges in my own

college days, I can testify, as can so many others, to the vast

improvement in the conduct and aims of American students

during the latter half of the nineteenth century.







CHAPTER XXI



DIFFICULTIES AND DANGERS AT CORNELL--1868-1872



The first business after formally opening the university

was to put in operation the various courses of

instruction, and vitally connected with these were the

lectures of our non-resident professors.  From these I had

hoped much and was not disappointed.  It had long seemed

to me that a great lack in our American universities was

just that sort of impulse which non-resident professors

or lecturers of a high order could give.  At Yale there had

been, in my time, very few lectures of any sort to

undergraduates; the work in the various classes was carried on,

as a rule, without the slightest enthusiasm, and was

considered by the great body of students a bore to be abridged

or avoided as far as possible.  Hence such pranks as

cutting out the tongue of the college bell, of which two or

three tongues still preserved in university club-rooms are

reminders; hence, also, the effort made by members of my

own class to fill the college bell with cement, which would

set in a short time, and make any call to morning prayers

and recitations for a day or two impossible--a performance

which caused a long suspension of several of the best

young fellows that ever lived, some of them good scholars,

and all of them men who would have walked miles to attend

a really inspiring lecture.



And yet, one or two experiences showed me what might

be done by arousing an interest in regular class work. 

Professor Thacher, the head of the department of Latin,

who conducted my class through the ``Germania'' and

``Agricola'' of Tacitus, was an excellent professor; but

he yielded to the system then dominant at Yale, and the

whole thing was but weary plodding.  Hardly ever was

there anything in the shape of explanation or comment;

but at the end of his work with us he laid down the book,

and gave us admirably the reasons why the study of

Tacitus was of value, and why we might well recur to it

in after years.  Then came painfully into my mind the

thought, ``What a pity that he had not said this at the

beginning of his instruction rather than at the end!''



Still worse was it with some of the tutors, who took us

through various classical works, but never with a particle

of appreciation for them as literature or philosophy.  I

have told elsewhere how my classmate Smalley fought it

out with one of these.  No instruction from outside

lectures was provided; but in my senior year there came to

New Haven John Lord and George William Curtis, the

former giving a course on modern history, the latter

one upon recent literature, and both arousing my earnest

interest in their subjects.  It was in view of these

experiences that in my ``plan of organization'' I dwelt

especially upon the value of non-resident professors in

bringing to us fresh life from the outside, and in thus

preventing a certain provincialism and woodenness which

come when there are only resident professors, and these

selected mainly from graduates of the institution itself.



The result of the work done by our non-resident

professors more than answered my expectations.  The twenty

lectures of Agassiz drew large numbers of our brightest

young men, gave them higher insight into various problems

of natural science, and stimulated among many

a zeal for special investigation.  Thus resulted an

enthusiasm which developed out of our student body several

scholars in natural science who have since taken rank

among the foremost teachers and investigators in the

United States.  So, too, the lectures of Lowell on early

literature and of Curtis on later literature aroused great

interest among students of a more literary turn; while

those of Theodore Dwight on the Constitution of the

United States and of Bayard Taylor upon German literature

awakened a large number of active minds to the

beauties of these fields.  The coming of Goldwin Smith

was an especial help to us.  He remained longer than the

others; in fact, he became for two or three years a resident

professor, exercising, both in his lecture-room and out of

it, a great influence upon the whole life of the university. 

At a later period, the coming of George W. Greene as

lecturer on American history, of Edward A. Freeman,

regius professor at Oxford, as a lecturer on European

history, and of James Anthony Froude in the same field,

aroused new interest.  Some of our experiences with the

two gentlemen last named were curious.  Freeman was a

rough diamond--in his fits of gout very rough indeed.  At

some of his lectures he appeared clad in a shooting-jacket

and spoke sitting, his foot swathed to mitigate his

sufferings.  From New Haven came a characteristic story of

him.  He had been invited to attend an evening gathering,

after one of his lectures, at the house of one of the

professors, perhaps the finest residence in the town.  With

the exception of himself, the gentlemen all arrived in

evening dress; he appeared in a shooting-jacket.  Presently

two professors arrived; and one of them, glancing

through the rooms, and seeing Freeman thus attired, asked

the other, ``What sort of a costume do you call that?''  The

answer came instantly, ``I don't know, unless it is the

costume of a Saxon swineherd before the Conquest.''  In

view of Freeman's studies on the Saxon and Norman

periods and the famous toast of the dean of Wells, ``In

honor of Professor Freeman, who has done so much to

reveal to us the rude manners of our ancestors,'' the Yale

professor's answer seemed much to the point.



The lectures of Froude were exceedingly interesting;

but every day he began them with the words ``Ladies and

gentlemen,'' in the most comical falsetto imaginable,--

a sort of Lord Dundreary manner,--so that, sitting

beside him, I always noticed a ripple of laughter run-

ning over the whole audience, which instantly disappeared

as he settled into his work.  He had a way of

giving color to his lectures by citing bits of humorous

history.  Thus it was that he threw a vivid light on the

horrors of civil war in Ireland during the sixteenth and

seventeenth centuries, when he gave the plea of an Irish

chieftain on trial for high treason, one of the charges

against him being that he had burned the Cathedral of

Cashel.  His plea was:  ``Me lords, I niver would have

burned the cathaydral but that I supposed that his grace

the lord archbishop was inside.''



Speaking of the strength of the clan spirit, he told me a

story of the late Duke of Argyll, as follows:  At a banquet

of the great clan of which the duke was chief, a splendid

snuff-box belonging to one of the clansmen, having

attracted attention, was passed round the long table for

inspection.  By and by it was missing.  All attempts to trace it

were in vain, and the party broke up in disgust and distress

at the thought that one of their number must be a thief. 

Some days afterward, the duke, putting on his dress-coat,

found the box in his pocket, and immediately sent for the

owner and explained the matter.  ``I knew ye had it,'' said

the owner.  ``How did ye know it?'' said the duke.  ``Saw

ye tak' it.''  ``Then why did n't ye tell me?'' asked the

duke.  ``I thocht ye wanted it,'' was the answer.



Speaking of university life, Froude told the story of an

Oxford undergraduate who, on being examined in Paley,

was asked to name any instance which he had himself

noticed of the goodness and forethought of the Almighty as

evidenced in his works: to which the young man answered,

``The formation of the head of a bulldog.  Its nose is so

drawn back that it can hang on the bull and yet breathe

freely; but for this, the bulldog would soon have to let

go for want of breath.''



Walking one day with Froude, I spoke to him regarding

his ``Nemesis of Faith,'' which I had read during my

attach<e'>ship at St. Petersburg, and which had been greatly

objected to by various Oxford dons, one of whom is said to

have burned a copy of it publicly in one of the college

quadrangles.  He seemed somewhat dismayed at my question,

and said, in a nervous sort of way, ``That was a

young man's book--a young man's folly,'' and passed

rapidly to other subjects.



From the stimulus given by the non-resident professors

the resident faculty reaped much advantage.  It might

well be said that the former shook the bush and the latter

caught the birds.  What is most truthfully stated on the

tablet to Professor Agassiz in the Cornell Memorial Chapel

of the university might, in great part, be said of all the

others.  It runs as follows:



``To the memory of Louis Agassiz, LL.D.  In the midst

of great labors for science, throughout the world, he

aided in laying the foundations of instruction at Cornell

University, and, by his teachings here, gave an impulse to

scientific studies, which remains a precious heritage.  The

trustees, in gratitude for his counsels and teachings, erect

this memorial.  1884.''



An incidental benefit of the system was its happy

influence upon the resident professors.  Coming from

abroad, and of recognized high position, the non-residents

brought a very happy element to our social life.  No

veteran of our faculty is likely to forget the charm they

diffused among us.  To meet Agassiz socially was a delight;

nor was it less a pleasure to sit at table with Lowell

or Curtis.  Of the many good stories told us by Lowell, I

remember one especially.  During a stay in Paris he dined

with Sainte-Beuve, and took occasion to ask that most

eminent of French critics which he thought the greater

poet, Lamartine or Victor Hugo.  Sainte-Beuve, shrugging

his shoulders, replied:  ``Eh bien, charlatan pour

charlatan, je pref<e!>re Lamartine.''  This provoked another

story, which was that, being asked by an American

professor whether in his opinion the Empire of Napoleon

III was likely to endure, Sainte-Beuve, who was a

salaried senator of the Empire, answered with a shrug,

``Monsieur, je suis pay<e'> pour le croire.''  Agassiz also

interested me by showing me the friendly, confidential, and

familiar letters which he was then constantly receiving

from the Emperor of Brazil, Dom Pedro--letters in which

not only matters of science but of contemporary history

were discussed.  Bayard Taylor also delighted us all. 

Nothing could exceed, as a provocative to mirth, his

recitations of sundry poems whose inspiration was inferior to

their ambition.  One especially brought down the house--

``The Eonx of Ruby,'' by a poet who had read Poe and

Browning until he never hesitated to coin any word, no

matter how nonsensical, which seemed likely to help his

jingle.  In many respects the most charming of all the

newcomers was Goldwin Smith, whose stories, observations,

reflections, deeply suggestive, humorous, and witty, were

especially grateful at the close of days full of work and

care.  His fund of anecdotes was large.  One of them

illustrated the fact that even those who are best acquainted

with a language not their own are in constant danger of

making themselves ridiculous in using it.  The Duc

d'Aumale, who had lived long in England, and was supposed

to speak English like an Englishman, presiding at a dinner

of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,

gave a toast as follows:  ``De tree of science, may it

shed down pease upon de nations.''



Another story related to Sir Allan MacNab, who, while

commander of the forces in Canada, having received a

card inscribed, ``The MacNab,'' immediately returned the

call, and left a card on which was inscribed, ``The other

MacNab.''



As I revise these lines, thirty-six years after his first

coming, he is visiting me again to lay the corner-stone of

the noble building which is to commemorate his services

to Cornell.  Though past his eightieth year, his memory

constantly brings up new reminiscences.  One of these I

cannot forbear giving.  He was at a party given by Lady

Ashburton when Thomas Carlyle was present.  During

the evening, which was beautiful, the guests went out upon

the lawn, and gazed at the starry heavens.  All seemed

especially impressed by the beauty of the moon, which

was at the full, when Carlyle, fastening his eyes upon it,

was heard to croak out, solemnly and bitterly, ``Puir auld

creetur!''



The instruction of the university was at that time divided

between sundry general courses and various technical

departments, the whole being somewhat tentative.  These

general courses were mainly three: the arts course,

which embraced both Latin and Greek; the course in

literature, which embraced Latin and modern languages;

and the course in science, which embraced more especially

modern languages in connection with a somewhat extended

range of scientific studies.  Of these general divisions the

one most in danger of shipwreck seemed to be the first. 

It had been provided for in the congressional act of

1862, evidently by an afterthought, and it was generally

felt that if, in the storms besetting us, anything must be

thrown overboard, it would be this; but an opportunity

now arose for clenching it into our system.  There was

offered for sale the library of Professor Charles Anthon

of Columbia, probably the largest and best collection

in classical philology which had then been brought

together in the United States.  Discussing the situation

with Mr. Cornell, I showed him the danger of restricting

the institution to purely scientific and technical

studies, and of thus departing from the university ideal. 

He saw the point, and purchased the Anthon library for

us.  Thenceforth it was felt that, with such a means of

instruction, from such a source, the classical department

must stand firm; that it must on no account be sacrificed;

that, by accepting this gift, we had pledged ourselves to

maintain it.



Yet, curiously, one of the most bitter charges constantly

reiterated against us was that we were depreciating

the study of ancient classical literature.  Again and

again it was repeated, especially in a leading daily journal

of the metropolis under the influence of a sectarian

college, that I was ``degrading classical studies.''  No-

thing could be more unjust; I had greatly enjoyed such

studies myself, had found pleasure in them since my

graduation, and had steadily urged them upon those who

had taste or capacity for them.  But, as a student and as a

university instructor, I had noticed two things in point,

as many other observers had done: the first of these was

that very many youths who go through their Latin and

Greek Readers, and possibly one or two minor authors

besides, exhaust the disciplinary value of such studies, and

thenceforward pursue them listlessly and perfunctorily,

merely droning over them.  On their account it seemed

certainly far better to present some other courses of study in

which they could take an interest.  As a matter of fact, I

constantly found that many young men who had been doing

half-way mental labor, which is perhaps worse than

none, were at once brightened and strengthened by devoting

themselves to other studies more in accordance with

their tastes and aims.



But a second and very important point was that, in

the two colleges of which I had been an undergraduate,

classical studies were really hampered and discredited

by the fact that the minority of students who loved

them were constantly held back by a majority who disliked

them; and I came to the conclusion that the true

way to promote such studies in the United States was

to take off this drag as much as possible, by presenting

other courses of studies which would attract those who

had no taste for Latin and Greek, thus leaving those who

had a taste for them free to carry them much farther than

had been customary in American universities up to that

time.  My expectations in this respect were fully met.  A

few years after the opening of the university, contests

were arranged between several of the leading colleges and

universities, the main subjects in the competition being

Latin, Greek, and mathematics; and to the confusion of

the gainsayers, Cornell took more first prizes in these

subjects than did all the older competing institutions

together.  Thenceforward the talk of our ``degrading clas-

sical studies'' was less serious.  The history of such studies

at Cornell since that time has fully justified the policy

then pursued.  Every competent observer will, I feel sure,

say that at no other American institution have these

studies been pursued with more earnestness or with better

results.  The Museum of Classical Archaeology, which has

since been founded by the generous gift of Mr. Sage, has

stimulated an increased interest in them; and graduates

of Cornell are now exercising a wide influence in classical

teaching: any one adequately acquainted with the history

of American education knows what the influence of Cornell

has been in bettering classical instruction throughout

the State of New York.  There has been another incidental

gain.  Among the melancholy things of college life in the

old days was the relation of students to classical

professors.  The majority of the average class looked on such

a professor as generally a bore and, as examinations

approached, an enemy; they usually sneered at him as a

pedant, and frequently made his peculiarities a subject for

derision.  Since that day far better relations have grown up

between teachers and taught, especially in those institutions

where much is left to the option of the students.  The students

in each subject, being those who are really interested

in it, as a rule admire and love their professor, and whatever

little peculiarities he may have are to them but pleasing

accompaniments of his deeper qualities.  This is a perfectly

simple and natural result, which will be understood

fully by any one who has observed human nature to much

purpose.



Besides this course in arts, in which classical studies

were especially prominent, there were established courses

in science, in literature, and in philosophy, differing from

each other mainly in the proportion observed between

ancient languages, modern languages, and studies in various

sciences and other departments of thought.  Each of

these courses was laid down with much exactness for the

first two years, with large opportunity for choice between

subjects in the last two years.  The system worked well,

and has, from time to time, been modified, as the improvement

in the schools of the State, and other circumstances

have required.



In proposing these courses I was much influenced by

an idea broached in Herbert Spencer's ``Treatise on

Education.''  This idea was given in his discussion of the

comparative values of different studies, when he arrived

at the conclusion that a subject which ought to be among

those taught at the beginning of every course is human

physiology,--that is to say, an account of the structure,

functions, and proper management of the human body, on

which so much depends for every human being.  It seemed

to me that not only was there great force in Spencer's

argument, but that there was an additional reason for

placing physiology among the early studies of most of

the courses; and this was that it formed a very good

beginning for scientific study in general.  An observation

of my own strengthened me in this view.  I remembered

that, during my school life, while my tastes were in the

direction of classical and historical studies, the weekly

visits to the school by the surgeon who lectured upon the

human eye, ear, and sundry other organs, using models

and preparations, interested me intensely, and were a real

relief from other studies.  There was still another reason. 

For the professorship in this department Professor Agassiz

had recommended to me Dr. Burt Wilder; and I soon

found him, as Agassiz had foretold, not only a thorough

investigator, but an admirable teacher.  His lectures were

not read, but were, as regards phrasing, extemporaneous;

and it seemed to me that, mingled with other studies, a

course of lectures given in so good a style, by so gifted a

man, could not fail to be of great use in teaching our

students, incidentally, the best way of using the English

language in communicating their ideas to their fellowmen. 

I had long deplored the rhetorical fustian and oratorical

tall-talk which so greatly afflict our country, and

which had been, to a considerable extent, cultivated in our

colleges and universities; I determined to try, at least,

to substitute for it clean, clear, straightforward statement

and illustration; and it seemed to me that a course of

lectures on a subject which admitted neither fustian nor

tall-talk, by a clear-headed, clear-voiced, earnest, and

honest man, was the best thing in the world for this purpose. 

So was adopted the plan of beginning most courses with

an extended course of lectures upon human physiology, in

which to real practice in investigation by the class is added

the hearing of a first-rate lecturer.



As regards the course in literature, I determined that

use should be made of this to promote the general culture

of students, as had been done up to that time by very

few of our American universities.  At Yale in my day,

there was never even a single lecture on any subject

in literature, either ancient or modern: everything was

done by means of ``recitations'' from text-books; and

while young men read portions of masterpieces in Greek

and Latin, their attention was hardly ever directed to

these as literature.  As regards the great fields of modern

literature, nothing whatever was done.  In the English

literature and language, every man was left entirely to his

own devices.  One of the first professors I called to Cornell

was Hiram Corson, who took charge of the department

of English literature; and from that day to this he has

been a center from which good culture has radiated among

our students.  Professor H. B. Sprague was also called;

and he also did excellent work, though in a different way. 

I also added non-resident professors.  My original scheme

I still think a good one.  It was to call James Russell Lowell

for early English literature, Bishop Arthur Cleveland

Coxe for the literature of the Elizabethan and Jacobean

periods, Edwin Whipple for the literature of Queen

Anne's time, and George William Curtis for recent and

contemporary literature.  Each of these men was admirable

as a scholar and lecturer in the particular field named;

but the restricted means of the university obliged me to

cut the scheme down, so that it included simply Lowell

for early and Curtis for recent literature.  Other lectures

in connection with the instruction of the resident professors

marked an epoch, and did much to remove anything

like Philistinism from the student body.  Bayard Taylor's

lectures in German literature thus supplemented admirably

the excellent work of the resident professors Hewett

and Horatio White.  To remove still further any danger of

Philistinism, I called an eminent graduate of Harvard,--

Charles Chauncey Shackford,--whose general lectures in

various fields of literature were attractive and useful.  In

all this I was mainly influenced by the desire to prevent

the atmosphere of the university becoming simply and

purely that of a scientific and technical school.  Highly as

I prized the scientific spirit and technical training, I

felt that the frame of mind engendered by them should be

modified by an acquaintance with the best literature as

literature.  There were many evidences that my theory

was correct.  Some of our best students in the technical

departments developed great love for literary studies. 

One of them attracted much attention by the literary

excellence of his writings; and on my speaking to him about

it, and saying that it seemed strange to me that a man

devoted to engineering should show such a taste for

literature, he said that there was no greater delight to him

than passing from one of the studies to the other--that

each was a recreation after the other.



The effort to promote that element in the general culture

of the student body which comes from literature, ancient

and modern, gained especial strength from a source

usually unpromising--the mathematical department. 

Two professors highly gifted in this field exercised a wide

and ennobling influence outside it.  First of these was

Evan William Evans, who had been known to me at Yale

as not only one of the best scholars in the class of 1851,

but also one of its two foremost writers.  Later, he

developed a passion for modern literature, and his influence

was strongly felt in behalf of the humanities.  His

successor was James Edward Oliver, a graduate of Harvard,

a genius in his chosen field, but always exercising a large

influence by virtue of his broad, liberal, tolerant views of

life which were promoted by study of the best thoughts of

the best thinkers of all times.



The work of organizing and developing the general

courses was comparatively easy, and the stimulus given at

the outset by the non-resident professors rendered it

all the more so.  But with the technical departments and

special courses there were grave difficulties.  The department

of civil engineering, of course, went easily enough;

there were plenty of precedents for it, and the admirable

professor first elected was, at his death, succeeded by

another who most vigorously and wisely developed it: Estevan

Fuertes, drawn from the most attractive surroundings

in the island of Porto Rico to the United States by a deep

love of science, and retained here during the rest of his

life by a love, no less sincere, for American liberty--a rare

combination of the virtues and capabilities of the Latin

races with the best results of an American environment.  I

may mention, in passing, that this combination came out

curiously in his views of American citizenship.  He was

wont to marvel at the indifference of the average American

to his privileges and duties, and especially at the lack

of a proper estimate of his function at elections.  I have

heard him say:  ``When I vote, I put on my best clothes

and my top hat, go to the polls, salute the officers, take off

my hat, and cast my ballot.''



It may be worth mentioning here that, at the election of

the first professor in this department, a curious question

arose.  Among the candidates was one from Harvard,

whose testimonials showed him to be an admirable

acquisition; and among these testimonials was one from an

eminent bishop, who spoke in high terms of the scientific

qualifications of the candidate, but added that he felt it

his duty to warn me that the young man was a Unitarian. 

At this I wrote the bishop, thanking him, and saying that

the only question with me was as to the moral and intellectual

qualifications of the candidate; and that if these

were superior to those of other candidates, I would nominate 

him to the trustees even if he were a Buddhist.  The

good bishop at first took some offense at this; and, in one

of the communications which ensued, expressed doubts

whether laymen had any right to teach at all, since the

command to teach was given to the apostles and their

successors, and seemed therefore confined to those who had

received holy orders; but he became most friendly later,

and I look back to my meetings with him afterward as

among the delightful episodes of my life.



The technical department which caused me the most

anxiety was that of agriculture.  It had been given the

most prominent place in the Congressional act of 1862,

and in our charter from the State in 1865.  But how

should agriculture be taught; what proportion should we

observe between theory and practice; and what should the

practice be?  These questions elicited all sorts of answers. 

Some eminent agriculturists insisted that the farm should

be conducted purely as a business operation; others that

it should be a ``model farm''--regardless of balance

sheets; others still that it should be wholly experimental. 

Our decision was to combine what was best in all these

views; and several men attempted this as resident professors,

but with small success.  One day, after a series of

such failures, when we were almost desperate, there

appeared a candidate from an agricultural college in Ireland. 

He bore a letter from an eminent clergyman in New York,

was of pleasing appearance and manners, gave glowing

accounts of the courses he had followed, expatiated on the

means by which farming had been carried to a high point

in Scotland, and ventured suggestions as to what might

be done in America.  I had many misgivings.  His

experience was very remote from ours, and he seemed to

me altogether too elegant for the work in hand; but Mr.

Cornell had visited English farms, was greatly impressed

by their excellence, and urged a trial of the new-comer. 

He was duly called; and, that he might begin his courses

of instruction, an order was given for a considerable

collection of English agricultural implements and for the

erection of new farm-buildings after English patterns,

Mr. Cornell generously advancing the required money.



All this took time--much time.  At first great things

were expected by the farmers of the State, but gradually

their confidence waned.  As they saw the new professor

walking over the farm in a dilettantish way, superintending

operations with gloved hands, and never touching

any implement, doubts arose which soon ripened into

skepticism.  Typical were the utterances of our farm

manager.  He was a plain, practical farmer, who had taken the

first prize of the State Agricultural Society for the

excellence of his own farm; and, though he at first indulged

in high hopes regarding the new professor, he soon had

misgivings, and felt it his duty to warn me.  He said: 

``Yew kin depend on 't, he ain't a-goin' to do nothin'; he

don't know nothin' about corn, and he don't want to

know nothin' about corn; AND HE DON'T BELIEVE IN PUNKINS! 

Depend on 't, as soon as his new barn is finished

and all his new British tackle is brought together, he'll

quit the job.''  I reasoned that, to a farmer brought up

among the glorious fields of Indian corn in western New

York, and accustomed to rejoice in the sight of golden

pumpkins, diffusion of other cultures must seem like treason;

but, alas! he was right.  As soon as the new buildings

and arrangements were ready for our trial of British

scientific agriculture, the young foreign professor notified

me that he had accepted the headship of an agricultural

college in Canada.  Still, he met with no greater success

there than with us; nor was his reputation increased when,

after the foul attacks made upon Mr. Cornell in the

legislature, he volunteered to come to the investigation and

testify that Mr. Cornell was ``not a practical man.''  In

this the career of the young agriculturist culminated. 

Having lost his professorship in Canada, he undertook

the management of a grocery in the oil-regions of western

Pennsylvania; and scientific British agriculture still

awaits among us a special representative.  Happily, since

that day, men trained practically in the agriculture of the

United States have studied the best British methods, and

brought us much that has been of real use.



Fortunately I had found three men who enabled us to

tide our agricultural department over those dark days, in

which we seemed to be playing ``Hamlet'' with Hamlet

left out.  The first of these was the Hon. John Stanton

Gould, whom I called as a lecturer upon agriculture.  He

had been president of the State Agricultural Society, and

was eminent, not only for his knowledge of his subject,

but for his power of making it interesting.  Men came

away from Mr. Gould's lectures filled with intense desire

to get hold of a spade or hoe and to begin turning the soil.



So, also, the steady work of Professor George C. Caldwell,

whom I had called from the State College of Pennsylvania

to take charge of the department of agricultural

chemistry, won the respect of all leaders in agriculture

throughout the State, and, indeed, throughout the country. 

And with especial gratitude should be named Dr.

James Law of the British Royal Veterinary College, whom

I had found in London, and called to our veterinary

professorship.  Never was there a more happy selection. 

From that day to this, thirty-six years, he has been a

tower of strength to the university, and has rendered

incalculable services to the State and Nation.  His quiet,

thorough work impressed every one most favorably.  The

rudest of the surrounding farmers learned more and more

to regard him with respect and admiration, and the State

has recently recognized his services by establishing in

connection with the university a State veterinary college

under his control.



The work of these three men saved us.  Apart from it,

the agricultural department long remained a sort of slough

of despond; but at last a brighter day dawned.  From the

far-off State Agricultural College of Iowa came tidings

of a professor--Mr. J. I. P. Roberts--who united the practical

and theoretical qualities desired.  I secured him, and

thenceforward there was no more difficulty.  For more

than twenty years, as professor and lecturer, he has

largely aided in developing agriculture throughout the

State and country; and when others were added to

him, like Comstock and Bailey, the success of the

department became even more brilliant.  Still, its old

reputation lasted for a time, even after a better era had

been fully ushered in.  About a year after the tide had

thus turned a meeting of the State ``Grange'' was held

at the neighboring city of Elmira; and the leading speakers

made the university and its agricultural college an

object of scoffing which culminated in a resolution

denouncing both, and urging the legislature to revoke our

charter.  At this a bright young graduate of Cornell, an

instructor in the agricultural department, who happened

to be present, stood up manfully, put a few pertinent

questions, found that none of the declaimers had visited the

university, declared that they were false to their duty in

not doing so, protested against their condemning the

institution unheard and unseen, and then and there invited

them all to visit the institution and its agricultural

department without delay.  Next day this whole body of farmers,

with their wives, sons, and daughters, were upon us. 

Everything was shown them.  Knowing next to nothing

about modern appliances for instruction in science and

they were amazed at all they saw; the libraries,

the laboratories, and, above all, the natural-science

collections and models greatly impressed them.  They were taken

everywhere, and shown not only our successes but our

failures; nothing was concealed from them, and, as a result,

though they ``came to scoff,'' they ``remained to

pray.''  They called a new session of their body, pledged

to us their support, and passed resolutions commending

our work and condemning the State legislature for not

doing more in our behalf.  That was the turning-point for

the agricultural department; and from that day to this

the legislature has dealt generously with us, and the

influence of the department for good throughout the State

has been more and more widely acknowledged.



Of the two technical departments referred to in the origi-

nal act of Congress, the second--specified under the vague

name of ``Mechanic Arts''--went better, though there was

at first much groping to find just what ought to be done. 

First of all, there was a danger which demanded delicate

handling.  This danger lay in Mr. Cornell's wish to establish,

in vital connection with the university, great factories

for the production of articles for sale, especially chairs

and shoes, thus giving large bodies of students opportunities

for self-support.  In discussing this matter with him,

I pointed to the fact that, in becoming a manufacturing

corporation we were making a business venture never

contemplated by our charter; that it was exceedingly doubtful

whether such a corporation could be combined with an

educational institution without ruining both; that the men

best fitted to manage a great factory were hardly likely

to be the best managers of a great institution of learning;

that under our charter we had duties, not merely to those

who wished to support themselves by labor, but to others;

and I finally pointed out to him many reasons for holding

that such a scheme contravened the act of Congress and

the legislation of the State.  I insisted that the object of

our charters from the State and Nation was not to enable

a great number of young men to secure an elementary

education while making shoes and chairs; that for these

the public schools were provided; that our main purpose

must be to send out into all parts of the State and Nation

thoroughly trained graduates, who should develop and

improve the main industries of the country, and, by their

knowledge and example, train up skilful artisans of

various sorts and in every locality.  Mr. Cornell's conduct

in this matter was admirable.  Tenacious as he

usually was when his opinion was formed, and much as it

must have cost him to give up what had become a darling

project, he yielded to this view.



New questions now opened as to this ``Department of

Mechanic Arts.''  It was clear to me, from what I had

seen abroad, that not all the models I had sent from

Europe would be sufficient to give the practical character

which such a department needed; that its graduates must

have a direct, practical acquaintance with the construction

and use of machinery before they could become leaders in

great mechanical enterprises; that they must be made, not

only mathematicians and draftsmen, but skilled workmen,

practically trained in the best methods and processes. 

A very shrewd artisan said to me:  ``When a young

mechanical engineer comes among us fresh from college, only

able to make figures and pictures, we rarely have much

respect for him: the trouble with the great majority

of those who come from technical institutions is that

they don't know as much about practical methods and

processes as we know.''



I felt that there was truth in this, but, as things were,

hardly dared tell this to the trustees.  It would have scared

them, for it seemed to open the door to great expenditures

demanded by a mere theory; but I laid my views before

Mr. Cornell, and he agreed with me so far as to send to

us from his agricultural works at Albany sundry large

pieces of old machinery, which he thought might be

rebuilt for our purposes.  But this turned out to be hardly

practicable.  I dared not, at that stage of the proceedings,

bring into the board of trustees a proposal to buy machinery

and establish a machine-shop; the whole would have a

chimerical look, and was sure to repel them.  Therefore it

was that, at my own expense, I bought a power-lathe and

other pieces of machinery; and, through the active efforts

of Professor John L. Morris, my steadfast supporter in

the whole matter, these were set up in our temporary

wooden laboratory.  A few students began using them, and

to good purpose.  Mr. Cornell was greatly pleased.  Other

trustees of a practical turn visited the place, and the result

was that opinion in the governing board soon favored a

large practical equipment for the department.



On this I prepared a report, taking up the whole subject

with great care, and brought it before them, my main

suggestion being that a practical beginning of the department

should be made by the erection and equipment of a

small building on the north side of the university grounds,

near our main water-power.  Then came a piece of great

good fortune.  Among the charter trustees of the university

was Mr. Cornell's old friend and associate in telegraphic

enterprise, Hiram Sibley of Rochester; and at the

close of the meeting Mr. Sibley asked me if I could give

him a little time on the university grounds after the

adjournment of the meeting.  I, of course, assented; and

next morning, on our visiting the grounds together, he

asked me to point out the spot where the proposed college

of mechanic arts might best be placed.  On my doing so, he

looked over the ground carefully, and then said that he

would himself erect and equip the building.  So began

Sibley College, which is to-day, probably, all things

considered, the most successful department of this kind in

our own country, and perhaps in any country.  In the

hands, first of Professors Morris and Sweet, and later

under the direction of Dr. Thurston, it has become of

the greatest value to every part of the United States, and

indeed to other parts of the American continent.



At the outset a question arose, seemingly trivial, but

really serious.  Mr. Sibley had gone far beyond his original

proposals; and when the lecture-rooms, drafting-

rooms, modeling-rooms, foundries, shops for ironwork,

woodwork, and the like, had been finished, the question

came up:  Shall our aim be to produce things having a

pecuniary value, or shall we produce simply samples of

the most highly finished workmanship, having, generally,

no value?  Fortunately, Professors Morris and Sweet were

able to combine both these purposes, and to employ a

considerable number of students in the very best of work

which had a market value.  The whole thing was thereby

made a success, but it waited long for recognition.  A

result followed not unlike some which have occurred in

other fields in our country.  At the Centennial Exhibition

of 1876, an exhibit was made of the work done by students

in Sibley College, including a steam-engine, power-lathes,

face-plates, and various tools of precision, admirably fin-

ished, each a model in its kind.  But while many mechanics

praised them, they attracted no special attention from

New England authorities.  On the other hand, an exhibit

of samples of work from the School of Technology of

Moscow, which had no merchantable value,--many of the

pieces being of antiquated pattern, but of exquisite finish

and showily arranged,--aroused great admiration among

sundry New England theorists; even the head of the

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in enthusiastic

magazine articles, called the attention of the whole country to

them, and urged the necessity of establishing machine-

shops in connection with schools of science.  The fact that

this had already been done, and better done, at Cornell,

was loftily ignored.  Western New York seemed a Nazareth

out of which no good could come.  That same straining

of the mind's eye toward the East, that same tendency

to provincialism which had so often afflicted Massachusetts,

evidently prevented her wise men in technology

from recognizing any new departure west of them.



At a later period I had occasion to make a final

comment on all this.  Both as commissioner at the Paris

Exhibition and as minister to Russia, I came to know

intimately Wischniegradsky, who had been the head of the

Moscow School of Technology and afterward Russian

minister of finance.  He spoke to me in the highest terms

of what original American methods had done for railways;

and the climax was reached when the Moscow

methods, so highly praised by Boston critics, proved to be

utterly inadequate in training mechanical engineers to

furnish the machinery needed in Russia, and men from

the American schools, trained in the methods of Cornell,

sent over locomotives and machinery of all sorts for the

new Trans-Siberian Railway, of which the eastern terminus

was that very city of Moscow which enjoyed the

privileges so lauded and magnified by the Boston critics! 

Time has reversed their judgment: the combination of the

two systems, so ably and patiently developed by Director

Thurston, is the one which has happily prevailed.



Few days in the history of Cornell University have

been so fraught with good as that on which Thurston

accepted my call to the headship of Sibley College.  At the

very outset he gained the confidence and gratitude of trustees,

professors, students, and, indeed, of his profession

throughout the country, by his amazing success as

professor, as author, and as organizer and administrator

of that department, which he made not only one of the

largest, but one of the best of its kind in the world.  The

rapidity and wisdom of his decisions, the extent and excellence

of his work, his skill in attracting the best men, his

ability in quieting rivalries and--animosities, and the kindly

firmness of his whole policy were a source of wonder to all

who knew him.  And, at his lamented death in 1903, it was

found that he had rendered another service of a sort which

such strong men as he are often incapable of rendering--

he had trained a body of assistants and students worthy

to take up his work.



Another department which I had long wished to see

established in our country now began to take shape. 

From my boyhood I had a love for architecture.  In my

young manhood this had been developed by readings in

Ruskin, and later by architectural excursions in Europe;

and the time had now arrived when it seemed possible

to do something for it.  I had collected what, at that

period, was certainly one of the largest, if not the largest,

of the architectural libraries in the United States, besides

several thousand large architectural photographs, drawings,

casts, models, and other material from every country

in Europe.  This had been, in fact, my pet extravagance;

and a propitious time seeming now to arrive, I proposed

to the trustees that if they would establish a department

of architecture and call a professor to it, I would transfer

to it my special library and collections.  This offer was

accepted; and thus was founded this additional department,

which began its good career under Professor Charles

Babcock, who, at this present writing, is enjoying, as

professor emeritus, the respect and gratitude of a long

series of classes which have profited by his teachings, and

the cordial companionship of his colleagues, who rejoice

to profit by his humorous, but none the less profound,

observations upon problems arising in the university and in

the world in general.



As regards this illustrative material, I recall one

curious experience.  While on one of my architectural

excursions through the great towns of eastern France, I

arrived at Troyes.  On visiting the government agent for

photographing public monuments, I noticed in his rooms

some admirably executed pieces of stone carving,--capitals,

corbels, and the like,--and on my asking him whence

these came, he told me that they had been recently taken

out of the cathedral by the architect who was ``restoring''

it.  After my purchases were made, he went with me to

this great edifice, one of the finest in Europe; and there

I found that, on each side of the high altar, the architect

had taken out several brackets, or corbels, of the best

mediaeval work, and substituted new ones designed by

himself.  One of these corbels thus taken out the government

photographer had in his possession.  It was very striking,

representing the grotesque face of a monk in the midst of

a mass of foliage supporting the base of a statue, all being

carved with great spirit.  Apart from its architectural

value, it had a historical interest, since it must have

witnessed the famous betrothal of the son and daughter of

the English and French kings mentioned in Shakspere,

to say nothing of many other mediaeval pageants.



On my making known to the photographer the fact that

I was engaged in founding a school of architecture in the

United States, and was especially anxious to secure a good

specimen of French work, he sold me this example, which

is now in the museum of the Architectural Department at

Cornell.  I allude to this, in passing, as showing what

monstrous iniquities (and I could name many others) are

committed in the great mediaeval buildings of Europe

under pretense of ``restoration.''







CHAPTER XXII



FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF UNIVERSITY COURSES--1870-1872



In close connection with the technical departments were

various laboratories.  For these, place was at first

made here and there in cellars and sheds; but at last we

were able to erect for them buildings large and complete,

and to the opening of the first of these came Mr. Cleveland,

then Governor of New York, and later President of

the United States.  Having laid the corner-stone of the

Memorial Chapel and made an excellent speech, which

encouraged us all, he accompanied me to the new building

devoted to chemistry and physics, which was then opened

for the first time.  On entering it, he expressed his surprise

at its equipment, and showed that he had seen nothing

of the kind before.  I learned afterward that he had

received a thorough preparation in classics and mathematics

for college, but that, on account of the insufficient means

of his father, he was obliged to give up his university

course; and it was evident, from his utterances at this

time, as well as when visiting other colleges and universities,

that he lamented this.



Out of this laboratory thus opened was developed,

later, a new technical department.  Among my happiest

hours were those spent in visiting the various buildings,

collections, and lecture-rooms, after my morning's work,

to see how all were going on; and, during various visits

to the new laboratory I noticed that the majority of the

students were, in one way or another, giving attention to

matters connected with electricity.  There had already

been built in the machine-shops, under the direction of

Professor Anthony, a dynamo which was used in lighting

our grounds, this being one of the first examples

of electric lighting in the United States; and on one

of my visits I said to him, ``It looks much as if, with

the rapid extension throughout the country of the telegraph,

telephone, electric lighting, and electric railways,

we shall be called on, before long, to train men for

a new profession in connection with them.''  As he

assented to this, I asked him to sketch out a plan for

a ``Department of Electrical Engineering,'' and in due

time he appeared with it before the executive committee

of the trustees.  But it met much opposition from one of

our oldest members, who was constitutionally averse to

what he thought new-fangled education, partly from

conservatism, partly from considerations of expense; and this

opposition was so threatening that, in order to save the

proposed department, I was obliged to pledge myself to

become responsible for any extra expense caused by it

during the first year.  Upon this pledge it was established. 

Thus was created, as I believe, the first department of

electrical engineering ever known in the United States,

and, so far as I can learn, the first ever known in any

country.



But while we thus strove to be loyal to those parts of

our charter which established technical instruction, there

were other parts in which I personally felt even a deeper

interest.  In my political reminiscences I have acknowledged

the want of preparation in regard to practical

matters of public concern which had hampered me as a

member of the State Senate.  Having revolved this subject

in my mind for a considerable time, I made, while

commissioner to the Paris Exposition of 1878, a careful

examination of the courses of study in political and

economic science established in European universities, and

on my return devoted to this subject my official report. 

Like such reports generally, it was delayed a long time

in the Government Printing-office, was then damned with

faint praise, and nothing more came of it until the following

year, when, being called to deliver the annual address

at the Johns Hopkins University, I wrought its main

points into a plea for education in relation to politics. 

This was widely circulated with some effect, and I now

brought a modest proposal in the premises before our

trustees.  Its main feature was that Mr. Frank B. Sanborn,

a graduate of Harvard, Secretary of the Board of

Charities of the State of Massachusetts and of the Social

Science Association of the United States, should be called

to give a course of practical lectures before the senior

class during at least one term,--his subjects to be such as

pauperism, crime (incipient and chronic), inebriety, lunacy,

and the best dealing of modern states with these;

also that his instructions should be given, not only by

lectures, but by actual visits with his classes to the great

charitable and penal institutions of the State, of which

there were many within easy distance of the university. 

For several years, and until the department took a different

form, this plan was carried out with excellent results. 

Professor Sanborn and his students, beginning with the

county almshouse and jail, visited the reformatories, the

prisons, the penitentiaries, and the asylums of various sorts

in the State; made careful examinations of them; drew up

reports upon them, these reports forming the subject of

discussions in which professor and students took earnest

part; and a number of young men who have since taken

influential places in the State legislature were thus

instructed as to the best actual and possible dealings with all

these subjects.  I still think that more should be done in

all our universities to train men by this method for the

public service in this most important and interesting field,

and also in matters pertaining generally to State, county,

and city administration.



Closely connected with this instruction was that in

political economy and history.  As to the first of these, I

had, some years before, seen reason to believe that my

strong, and perhaps bigoted free-trade ideas were at least

not so universal in their application as I had supposed. 

Down to the time of our Civil War I had been very intolerant

on this subject, practically holding a protectionist

to be either a Pharisee or an idiot.  I had convinced

myself not only that the principles of free trade are

axiomatic, but that they afford the only means of binding

nations together in permanent peace; that Great Britain

was our best friend; that, in desiring us to adopt her own

system, she was moved by broad, philosophic, and

philanthropic considerations.  But as the war drew on and I

saw the haughtiness and selfishness toward us shown by

her ruling classes, there came in my mind a revulsion

which led me to examine more closely the foundations

of my economical belief.  I began to attribute more

importance to John Stuart Mill's famous ``exception,''

to the effect that the building up of certain industries

may be necessary to the very existence of a nation, and

that perhaps the best way of building them up is to

adopt an adequate system of protective duties.  Down

to this time I had been a disciple of Adam Smith and

Bastiat; but now appeared the published lectures of

Roscher of Leipsic, upon what he called ``The Historical

System'' of political economy.  Its fundamental idea was

that political economy is indeed a science, to be wrought

out by scientific methods; but that the question how far

its conclusions are adapted to the circumstances of any

nation at any time is for statesmen to determine.  This

impressed me much.  Moreover, I was forced to acknowledge

that the Morrill protective tariff, adopted at the

Civil War period, was a necessity for revenue; so that

my old theory of a tariff for revenue easily developed

into a belief in a tariff for revenue with incidental

protection.  This idea has been developed in my mind as time

has gone on, until at present I am a believer in protection

as the only road to ultimate free trade.  My process of

reasoning on the subject I have given in another chapter.



At the opening of the university there was but little

instruction in political economy, that little being mainly

given by our professor of moral philosophy, Dr. Wilson,

a man broad in his views and strong in reasoning power,

who had been greatly impressed by the ideas of Friedrich

List, the German protectionist.  But lectures were also

given by free-traders, and I adopted the plan of having

both sides as well represented as possible.  This was, at

first, complained of; sundry good people said it was like

calling a professor of atheism into a theological seminary;

but my answer was that our university was not, like a

theological seminary, established to arrive at certain

conclusions fixed beforehand, or to propagate an established

creed; that, political economy not being an exact science,

our best course was to call eminent lecturers to present

both sides of the main questions in dispute.  The result was

good.  It stimulated much thought, and doubtless did

something to promote that charity to opposing economical

opinions which in my own case had been, through my

early manhood, so conspicuously lacking.



The second of these departments--history--was the

one for which I cared most.  I believed then, and later

experience has strengthened my conviction, that the best

of all methods in presenting every subject bearing on

political and social life is the historical.  My own studies

had been mainly in this field, and I did what I could

to establish historical courses in the university.  The

lectures which I had given at the University of Michigan

were now developed more fully and again presented; but

to these I constantly added new lectures and, indeed, new

courses, though at a great disadvantage, since my administrative

duties stood constantly in the way of my professorial

work.  At the same time I went on collecting my

historical library until it became, in its way, probably the

largest and most complete of its kind in the possession of

any individual in the United States.  Gradually strong

men were drawn into the department, and finally there

came one on whom I could lay a large portion of the work.



The story is somewhat curious.  During the year 1877-

1878, in Germany and France, I had prepared a short

course of lectures upon the historical development of criminal

law; and while giving it to my senior class after my

return, I noticed a student, two or three years below the

average age of the class, carefully taking notes and

apparently much interested.  One day, going toward my

house after the lecture, I found him going in the same

direction, and, beginning conversation with him, learned

that he was a member of the sophomore class; that he had

corresponded with me, two or three years before, as to the

best means of working his way through the university;

had followed out a suggestion of mine, then made, in that

he had learned the printer's trade; had supported himself

through the preparatory school by means of it, and was

then carrying himself through college by setting type for

the university press.  Making inquiries of professors and

students, I found that the young man, both at school and

at the university, was, as a rule, at the head of every class

he had entered; and therefore it was that, when the

examination papers came in at the close of the term, I

first took up his papers to see how he had stood the test. 

They proved to be masterly.  There were excellent scholars

in the senior class, but not one had done so well as this

young sophomore; in fact, I doubt whether I could have

passed a better examination on my own lectures.  There

was in his answers a combination of accuracy with breadth

which surprised me.  Up to that time, passing judgment

on the examination papers had been one of the most

tedious of my burdens; for it involved wading through

several hundred pages of crabbed manuscript, every term,

and weighing carefully the statements therein embodied. 

A sudden light now flashed upon me.  I sent for the young

sophomore, cautioned him to secrecy, and then and there

made him my examiner in history.  He, a member of the

sophomore class, took the papers of the seniors and resident

graduates, and passed upon them carefully and admirably--

better than I should have ever had the time and

patience to do.  Of course this was kept entirely secret;

for had the seniors known that I had intrusted their papers

to the tender mercies of a sophomore, they would probably

have mobbed me.  This mode of examination continued

until the young man's graduation, when he was

openly appointed examiner in history, afterward

becoming instructor in history, then assistant professor;

and, finally, another university having called him to a

full professorship, he was appointed full professor of

history at Cornell, and has greatly distinguished himself

both by his ability in research and his power in teaching. 

To him have been added others as professors, assistant

professors, and instructors, so that the department is now

on an excellent footing.  In one respect its development has

been unexpectedly satisfactory.  At the opening of the

university one of my strongest hopes had been to establish a

professorship of American history.  It seemed to me monstrous

that there was not, in any American university, a

course of lectures on the history of the United States; and

that an American student, in order to secure such

instruction in the history of his own country, must go to

the lectures of Laboulaye at the Coll<e!>ge de France.  Thither

I had gone some years before, and had been greatly

impressed by Laboulaye's admirable presentation of his

subject, and awakened to the fact that American history

is not only more instructive, but more interesting, than

I had ever supposed it.  My first venture was to call

Professor George W. Greene of Brown University for a

course of lectures on the history of our Revolutionary

period, and Professor Dwight of Columbia College for

a course upon the constitutional history of the United

States.  But finally my hope was more fully realized:  I

was enabled to call as resident professor my old friend

Moses Coit Tyler, whose book on the ``History of American

Literature'' is a classic, and who, in his new field,

exerted a powerful influence for good upon several

generations of students.  More than once since, as I have

heard him, it has been borne in upon me that I was born

too soon.  Remembering the utter want of any such

instruction in my own college days, I have especially envied

those who have had the good fortune to be conducted by

him, and men like him, through the history of our own

country.[6]





[6] To my great sorrow, he died in 1900.--A. D. W.





In some of these departments to which I have referred

there were occasionally difficulties requiring much tact

in handling.  During my professorial days at the University

of Michigan I once heard an eminent divine deliver

an admirable address on what he called ``The Oscillatory

Law of Human Progress''--that is, upon the tendency

of human society, when reacting from one evil, to swing

to another almost as serious in the opposite direction.  In

swinging away from the old cast-iron course of instruction,

and from the text-book recitation of the mere dry

bones of literature, there may be seen at this hour some

tendency to excessive reaction.  When I note in sundry

university registers courses of instruction offered in some

of the most evanescent and worthless developments of

contemporary literature,--some of them, indeed, worse

than worthless,--I think of a remark made to me by a

college friend of mine who will be remembered by the

Yale men of the fifties for his keen and pithy judgments

of men and things.  Being one day in New Haven looking

for assistant professors and instructors, I met him; and,

on my answering his question as to what had brought me,

he said, ``If at any time you want a professor of HORSE

SENSE, call ME.''  I have often thought of this proposal

since, and have at times regretted that some of our institutions

of learning had not availed themselves of his services. 

The fact is that, under the new system, ``horse sense'' is

especially called for to prevent a too extreme reaction from

the evils which afflicted university instruction during my

student days.



While it rejoices my heart to see the splendid courses

in modern literature now offered at our larger universities,

some of them arouse misgivings.  Reflecting upon

the shortness of human life and the vast mass of really

GREAT literature, I see with regret courses offered dealing

with the bubbles floating on the surface of sundry literatures--

bubbles soon to break, some of them with ill odor.



I would as soon think of endowing restaurants to enable

young men to appreciate caviar, or old Gorgonzola, or

game of a peculiarly ``high'' character, as of establishing

courses dealing with Villon, Baudelaire, Swinburne, and

the like; and when I hear of second-rate critics summoned

across the ocean to present to universities which

have heard Emerson, Longfellow, Henry Reed, Lowell,

Whipple, and Curtis the coagulated nastiness of Verlaine,

Mallarm<e'>, and their compeers, I expect next to

hear of courses introducing young men to the beauties of

absinthe, Turkish cigarettes, and stimulants unspeakable. 

Doubtless these things are all due to the ``oscillatory

law of human progress,'' which professors of ``horse

sense'' like my friend Joe Sheldon will gradually do

away with.



As time went on, buildings of various sorts rose around

the university grounds, and, almost without exception, as

gifts from men attracted by the plan of the institution.  At

the annual commencement in 1869 was laid the cornerstone

of an edifice devoted especially to lecture-rooms and

museums of natural science.  It was a noble gift by Mr.

John McGraw; and amid the cares and discouragements

of that period it gave us new heart, and strengthened

the institution especially on the scientific side.  In order

to do honor to this occasion, it was decided to invite leading

men from all parts of the State, and, above all, to

request the governor, Mr. Fenton, to lay the corner-stone. 

But it was soon evident that his excellency's old fear of

offending the sectarian schools still controlled him.  He

made excuse, and we then called on the Freemasons to

take charge of the ceremony.  They came in full

regalia, bringing their own orators; and, on the appointed

day, a great body of spectators was grouped about

the foundations of the new building on the beautiful

knoll in front of the upper quadrangle.  It was an ideal

afternoon in June, and the panorama before and around

us was superb.  Immediately below us, in front, lay the

beautiful valley in which nestles the little city of Ithaca;

beyond, on the left, was the vast amphitheater, nearly

surrounded by hills and distant mountains; and on the

right, Cayuga Lake, stretching northward for forty miles. 

Few points in our country afford a nobler view of lake,

mountain, hill, and valley.  The speakers naturally

expatiated in all the moods and tenses on the munificence

of Mr. Cornell and Mr. McGraw; and when all was ended

the great new bell, which had just been added to the

university chime in the name of one most dear to me,--the

largest bell then swinging in western New York, inscribed

with the verse written for it by Lowell,--boomed grandly

forth.  As we came away I walked with Goldwin Smith,

and noticed that he was convulsed with suppressed laughter. 

On my asking him the cause, he answered:  ``There

is nothing more to be said; no one need ever praise the

work of Mr. Cornell again.''  On my asking the professor

what he meant, he asked me if I had not heard the last

speech.  I answered in the negative--that my mind was

occupied with other things.  He then quoted it substantially

as follows:  ``Fellow-citizens, when Mr. Cornell

found himself rich beyond the dreams of avarice, did he

give himself up to a life of inglorious ease?  No, fellow-

citizens; he founded the beautiful public library in

yonder valley.  But did he then retire to a life of luxury? 

No, fellow-citizens; he came up to this height (and

here came a great wave of the hand over the vast

amphitheater below and around us) and he established this

UNIVERSE!''



In reference to this occasion I may put on record

Lowell's quatrain above referred to, which is cast upon the

great clock-bell of the university.  It runs as follows:



   I call as fly the irrevocable hours

   Futile as air, or strong as fate to make

   Your lives of sand or granite.  Awful powers,

   Even as men choose, they either give or take.





There was also cast upon it the following, from the

Psalter version of Psalm xcii:





To tell of thy loving-kindness early in the morning: and of thy

truth in the night season.





While various departments were thus developed, there

was going on a steady evolution in the general conception

of the university.  In the Congressional act of 1862 was a

vague provision for military instruction in the institutions

which might be created under it.  The cause of this was

evident.  The bill was passed during one of the most critical

periods in the history of the Civil War, and in my

inaugural address I had alluded to this as most honorable

to Senator Morrill and to the Congress which had adopted

his proposals.  It was at perhaps the darkest moment in

the history of the United States that this provision was

made, in this Morrill Act, for a great system of classical,

scientific, and technical instruction in every State and

Territory of the Union; and I compared this enactment, at

so trying a period, to the conduct of the Romans in buying

and selling the lands on which the Carthaginians were

encamped after their victory at Cannae.  The provision

for military instruction had been inserted in this act of

1862 because Senator Morrill and others saw clearly the

advantage which had accrued to the States then in rebellion

from their military schools; but the act had left

military instruction optional with the institutions securing

the national endowment, and, so far as I could learn, none

of those already created had taken the clause very

seriously.  I proposed that we should accept it fully and

fairly, not according to the letter of the act, but to the

spirit of those who had passed it; indeed, that we should

go further than any other institution had dreamed of

going, so that every undergraduate not excused on the

ground of conscientious scruples, or for some other

adequate cause, should be required to take a thorough

course of military drill; and to this end I supported a plan,

which was afterward carried out by law, that officers from

the United States army should be detailed by the Secretary

of War to each of the principal institutions as military

professors.  My reasons for this were based on my

recollections of what took place at the University of Michigan

during the Civil War.  I had then seen large numbers of

my best students go forth insufficiently trained, and in

some cases led to destruction by incompetent officers.  At

a later period, I had heard the West Point officer whom I

had secured from Detroit to train those Michigan students

express his wonder at the rapidity with which they learned

what was necessary to make them soldiers and even officers. 

Being young men of disciplined minds, they learned

the drill far more quickly and intelligently than the

average recruits could do.  There was still another reason for

taking the military clause in the Morrill Act seriously. 

I felt then, and feel now, that our Republic is not to

escape serious internal troubles; that in these her reliance

must be largely upon her citizen soldiery; that it will be a

source of calamity, possibly of catastrophe, if the power

of the sword in civil commotions shall fall into the hands

of ignorant and brutal leaders, while the educated men of

the country, not being versed in military matters, shall

slink away from the scene of duty, cower in corners, and

leave the conduct of military affairs to men intellectually

and morally their inferiors.  These views I embodied in

a report to the trustees; and the result was the formation

of a university battalion, which has been one of the best

things at Cornell.  A series of well-qualified officers, sent

by the War Department, have developed the system admirably. 

Its good results to the university have been acknowledged

by all who have watched its progress.  Farmers'

boys,--slouchy, careless, not accustomed to obey any word

of command; city boys, sometimes pampered, often wayward,

have thus been in a short time transformed: they

stand erect; they look the world squarely in the face; the

intensity of their American individualism is happily

modified; they can take the word of command and they can

give it.  I doubt whether any feature of instruction at

Cornell University has produced more excellent results

upon CHARACTER than the training thus given.  And this is

not all.  The effect on the State has been valuable.  It has

already been felt in the organization and maintenance of

the State militia; and during the war with Spain,

Cornellians, trained in the university battalion, rendered

noble service.



Among the matters which our board of trustees and

faculty had to decide upon at an early day was the

conferring of degrees.  It had become, and indeed has

remained in many of our colleges down to the present

day, an abuse, and a comical abuse.  Almost more than

any other thing, it tends to lower respect for many American

colleges and universities among thinking men.  The

older and stronger universities are free from it; but many

of the newer ones, especially various little sectarian

colleges, some of them calling themselves ``universities,''

have abused and are abusing beyond measure their privilege

of conferring degrees.  Every one knows individuals

in the community whose degrees, so far from adorning

them, really render them ridiculous; and every one knows

colleges and ``universities'' made ridiculous by the

conferring of such pretended honors.



At the outset I proposed to our trustees that Cornell

University should confer no honorary degrees of any

sort, and a law was passed to that effect.  This was

observed faithfully during my entire presidency; then the

policy was temporarily changed, and two honorary doctorates

were conferred; but this was immediately followed

by a renewal of the old law, and Cornell has conferred no

honorary degrees since.



But it is a question whether the time has not arrived

for some relaxation of this policy.  The argument I used

in proposing the law that no honorary degree should be

conferred was that we had not yet built up an institution

whose degrees could be justly considered as of any value. 

That argument is no longer valid, and possibly some departure

from it would now be wise.  Still, the policy of

conferring no honorary degrees is infinitely better than

the policy of lavishing them.



As to regular and ordinary degrees, I had, in my plan

of organization, recommended that there should be but one

degree for all courses, whether in arts, science, or

literature.  I argued that, as all our courses required an equal

amount of intellectual exertion, one simple degree should

be granted alike to all who had passed the required

examination at the close of their chosen course.  This view

the faculty did not accept.  They adopted the policy

of establishing several degrees: as, for example, for the

course in arts, the degree of A.B.; for the course in science,

the degree of B.S.; for the course in literature, the degree

of B.L.; and so on.  The reason given for this was that

it was important in each case to know what the training

of the individual graduate had been; and that the

true way to obviate invidious distinctions is so to perfect

the newer courses that all the degrees shall finally be

considered as of equal value and honor.  This argument

converted me: it seemed to me just, and my experience

in calling men to professorships led me more and more

to see that I had been wrong and that the faculty was

right; for it was a matter of the greatest importance to

me, in deciding on the qualifications of candidates for

professorships, to know, not only their special fitness, but

what their general education had been.



But, curiously enough, within the last few years the

Cornell faculty, under the lead of its present admirable

president, has reverted to my old argument, accepted it,

and established a single degree for all courses.  I bow

respectfully to their judgment, but my conversion by the

same faculty from my own original ideas was so complete

that I cannot now agree to the wisdom of the change.  It

is a curious case of cross-conversion, I having been and

remaining converted to the ideas of the faculty, and they

having been converted to my original idea.  As to the

whole matter, I have the faith of an optimist that eventu-

ally, with the experience derived from both systems, a

good result will be reached.



Another question which at that time occupied me much

was that of scholarships and fellowships awarded by

competitive examinations versus general gratuitous instruction. 

During the formation of my plans for the university,

a number of excellent men urged upon me that all

our instruction should be thrown open to all mankind free

of charge; that there should be no payment of instruction

fees of any kind; that the policy which prevails in the

public schools of the State should be carried out in the

new institution at the summit of the system.  This demand

was plausible, but the more I thought upon it the more

illogical, fallacious, and injurious it seemed; and, in spite

of some hard knocks in consequence, I have continued to

dissent from it, and feel that events have justified me.



Since this view of mine largely influenced the plan of

the university, this is perhaps as good a place as any to

sketch its development.  In the first place, I soon saw that

the analogy between free education in the public schools

and in the university is delusive, the conditions of the two

being entirely dissimilar.  In a republic like ours primary

education of the voters is a practical necessity.  No republic

of real weight in the world, except Switzerland and

the United States, has proved permanent; and the only

difference between the many republics which have failed

and these two, which, we hope, have succeeded, is that in

the former the great body of the citizens were illiterate,

while in the latter the great body of voters have had some

general education.  Without this education, sufficient for

an understanding of the main questions involved, no real

republic or democracy can endure.  With general primary

education up to a point necessary for the intelligent

exercise of the suffrage, one may have hopes for the continuance

and development of a democratic republic.  On this

account primary education should be made free: it is

part of our political system; it is the essential condition

of its existence.



The purpose of university education is totally different. 

The interest of the Republic is, indeed, that it should

maintain the very highest and best provision for advanced

instruction, general, scientific, and technical; and it is also

in the highest interest of the Republic that its fittest young

men and women should secure such instruction.  No republic,

no nation in fact, possesses any other treasure

comparable to its young citizens of active mind and earnest

purpose.  This is felt at the present time by all the

great nations of the world, and consequently provision

is made in almost all of them for the highest education of

such men and women.  Next to the general primary education

of all voters, the most important duty of our Republic

is to develop the best minds it possesses for the best

service in all its fields of high intellectual activity.  To do

this it must supply the best university education, and

must smooth the way for those to acquire it who are best

fitted for it, no matter how oppressive their poverty.



Now, my first objection to gratuitous university instruction

to all students alike is that it stands in the way of

this most important consummation; that it not only does

not accomplish the end which is desirable, but that it does

accomplish another which is exceedingly undesirable. 

For the real problem to be solved is this:  How shall the

higher education in different fields be brought within

reach of the young men and women best fitted to acquire

it, to profit by it, and to use it to best advantage?  Any

one acquainted with American schools and universities

knows that the vast majority of these young people

best fitted to profit by higher education come from the

families of small means.  What does gratuitous instruction

in the university offer them?  Merely a remission of

instruction fees, which, after all, are but a small part of

the necessary expenses of a university course.  With many

of these young persons--probably with most--a mere

remission of instruction fees is utterly insufficient to enable

them to secure advanced education.  I have alluded to the

case of President Cleveland, who, having been well fitted

for the university, could not enter.  His father being a

country clergyman with a large family and small means,

the future Chief Executive of the United States was obliged

to turn aside to a teacher's place and a clerkship which

afforded him a bare support.  At the Hamilton College

commencement a few years since, Mr. Cleveland, pointing

to one of the professors, was reported as saying in

substance:  ``My old school friend by my side is, of all men,

the one I have most envied: he was able to buy a good

edition of Vergil; I was not.''



It would not have been at all difficult for him to secure

a remission of instruction fees at various American colleges

and universities; but the great difficulty was that he

could not secure the means necessary for his board, for

his clothing, for his traveling expenses, for his books, for

all the other things that go to make up the real cost of life

at a university.  I can think of but one way, and that is,

as a rule, to charge instruction fees upon the great body

of the students, but both to remit instruction fees and to

give scholarships and fellowships to those who, in

competitive examinations and otherwise, show themselves

especially worthy of such privileges.  This is in conformity

to the system of nature; it is the survival of the

fittest.  This was the main reason which led me to insert

in the charter of Cornell University the provision by

which at present six hundred students from the State of

New York are selected by competitive examinations out of

the mass of scholars in the public schools, and to provide

that each of these best scholars shall have free instruction

for four years.



But this was only a part of the system.  From the first

I have urged the fact above mentioned, namely, that while

remission of instruction fees is a step in the right direction,

it is not sufficient; and I have always desired to see

some university recognize the true and sound principle

of free instruction in universities by CONSECRATING ALL

MONEYS RECEIVED FROM INSTRUCTION FEES TO THE CREATION

OF COMPETITIVE SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS, EACH OF WHICH

SHALL AMOUNT TO A SUM SUFFICIENT TO MEET, WITH ECONOMY, THE

LIVING EXPENSES OF A STUDENT.  This plan I was enabled, in

considerable measure, to carry out by establishing the

competitive scholarships in each Assembly district; and

later, as will be seen in another chapter, I was enabled, by

a curious transformation of a calamity into a blessing, to

carry it still further by establishing endowed scholarships

and fellowships.  These latter scholarships, each, as a

general rule, of two hundred and fifty dollars a year, were

awarded to those who passed the best examinations and

maintained the best standing in their classes; while the

fellowships, each of the value of from four to five hundred

dollars a year, were awarded to the seniors of our own or

other universities who had been found most worthy of

them.  In the face of considerable opposition I set this

system in motion at Cornell; and its success leads me to

hope that it will be further developed, not only there, but

elsewhere.  Besides this, I favored arrangements for

remitting instruction fees and giving aid to such students as

really showed promising talent, and who were at the time

needy.  To this end a loan fund was created which has

been carefully managed and has aided many excellent

men through the university courses.[7]  Free instruction,

carried out in accordance with the principle and plan

above sketched, will, I feel sure, prove of great value to

our country.  Its effect is to give to the best and brightest

young men, no matter how poor, just the chance they

need; and not as a matter of charity, but as a matter of

wise policy.  This is a system which I believe would be

fraught with blessings to our country, securing advanced

education to those who can profit by it, and strengthening

their country by means of it.





[7] It has since been greatly increased by the bequest of a

public-spirited New York merchant.





On the other hand, the system of gratuitous remission

of instruction fees to all students alike, whether rich or

poor, I believe to be injurious to the country, for the

following reasons:  First, it generally cripples the insti-

tution which gives it.  Two or three large institutions

which have thought themselves in possession of endowments

sufficient to warrant giving gratuitous instruction

have tried it, but as a rule have not been able to go on

with it, and have at last come to the principle of charging

moderate fees.  Secondly, it simply makes a present of a

small sum to a large number of young men, most of whom

neither need nor appreciate it, and who would be better

for regarding their university instruction as something

worth paying for.



But my main objection to the system of indiscriminate

gratuitous instruction is that it does the country a positive

injury in drawing away from the farms, workshops,

and stores large numbers of young persons who would

better have been allowed to remain there; that it tends to

crowd what have been called ``the learned professions''

with men not really fitted for them; that it draws masses

of men whose good right arms would be of great value in

the rural districts, and makes them parasites in the cities. 

The farmers and the artisans complain of the lack of

young men and women for their work; the professional

men complain that the cities are overstocked with young

men calling themselves lawyers, doctors, engineers, and

the like, but really unworthy to exercise either profession,

who live on the body politic as parasites more or less

hurtful.  This has certainly become an evil in other

countries: every enlightened traveler knows that the ranks of

the anarchists in Russia are swollen by what are called

``fruits secs''--that is, by young men and young women

tempted away from manual labor and avocations for which

they are fit into ``professions'' for which they are unfit. 

The more FIRST-RATE young men and young women our

universities and technical schools educate the better; but the

more young men and women of mediocre minds and weak

purpose whom they push into the ranks of poor lawyers,

poor doctors, poor engineers, and the like, the more injury

they do to the country.



As I now approach the end of life and look back over

the development of Cornell University, this at least seems

to me one piece of good fortune--namely, that I have

aided to establish there the principle of using our means,

so far as possible, not for indiscriminate gratuitous higher

education of men unfit to receive it; not, as President

Jordan has expressed it, in ``trying to put a five-thousand-

dollar education into a fifty-cent boy''; but in establishing

a system which draws out from the community, even from

its poorest and lowliest households, the best, brightest,

strongest young men and women, and develops their best

powers, thus adding to the greatest treasure which their

country can possess.







CHAPTER XXIII



``COEDUCATION'' AND AN UNSECTARIAN PULPIT--1871-1904



Still another new departure was in some respects

bolder than any of those already mentioned.  For

some years before the organization of Cornell, I had

thought much upon the education of women, and had

gradually arrived at the conclusion that they might well be

admitted to some of the universities established for young

men.  Yet, at the same time, Herbert Spencer's argument

as to the importance of avoiding everything like ``mandarinism''

--the attempt to force all educationalinstitutions 

into the same mold--prevented my urging this admission 

of women upon all universities alike.  I recognized obstacles

to it in the older institutions which did not exist in the

newer; but I had come to believe that where no special

difficulties existed, women might well be admitted to

university privileges.  To this view I had been led by my own

observation even in my boyhood.  At Cortland Academy

I had seen young men and women assembled in the classrooms

without difficulty or embarrassment, and at Yale I

had seen that the two or three lecture-rooms which

admitted women were the most orderly and decent of all; but

perhaps the strongest influence in this matter was exercised

upon me by my mother.  She was one of the most conservative

of women, a High-church Episcopalian, and generally

averse to modern reforms; but on my talking over

with her some of my plans for Cornell University, she

said:  ``I am not so sure about your other ideas, but as to

the admission of women you are right.  My main education 

was derived partly from a boarding-school at Pittsfield

considered one of the best in New England, and partly

from Cortland Academy.  In the boarding-school we had

only young women, but in the academy we had both young

men and young women; and I am sure that the results of

the academy were much better than those of the boarding-

school.  The young men and young women learned to respect

each other, not merely for physical, but for intellectual

and moral qualities; so there came a healthful

emulation in study, the men becoming more manly and the

women more womanly; and never, so far as I have heard,

did any of the evil consequences follow which some of

your opponents are prophesying.''



A conference with Dr. Woolworth, a teacher of the very

largest experience, showed me that none of the evil results

which were prophesied had resulted.  He solemnly assured

me that, during his long experiences as principal of two or

three large academies, and, as secretary of the Board of

Regents, in close contact with all the academies and high

schools of the State, he had never known of a serious scandal

arising between students of different sexes.



As I drafted the main features of the university charter

these statements were in my mind, but I knew well that it

would be premature to press the matter at the outset.  It

would certainly have cost us the support of the more

conservative men in the legislature.  All that I could do at

that time I did; and this was to keep out of the charter

anything which could embarrass us regarding the question

in the future, steadily avoiding in every clause relating to

students the word ``man,'' and as steadily using the word

``person.''  In conversations between Mr. Cornell and

myself on this subject, I found that we agreed; and in our

addresses at the opening of the university we both alluded

to it, he favoring it in general terms, and I developing

sundry arguments calculated to prepare the way for future

action upon it.  At the close of the exercises Mr. John

McGraw, who was afterward so munificent toward us,

came to me and said:  ``My old business partner, Henry

Sage, who sat next me during the exercises this morning,

turned to me during your allusion to Mr. Cornell with

tears in his eyes, and said:  `John, we are scoundrels to

stand doing nothing while those men are killing themselves

to establish this university.' ''  In the afternoon Mr. Sage

himself came to me and said:  ``I believe you are right in

regard to admitting women, but you are evidently carrying

as many innovations just now as public opinion will

bear; when you are ready to move in the matter, let me

know.''



The following year came the first application of a young

woman for admission.  Her case was strong, for she presented

a certificate showing that she had passed the best

examination for the State scholarship in Cortland County;

and on this I admitted her.  Under the scholarship clause

in the charter I could not do otherwise.  On reporting

the case to the trustees, they supported me unanimously,

though some of them reluctantly.  The lady student

proved excellent from every point of view, and her

admission made a mere temporary ripple on the surface

of our affairs; but soon came a peculiar difficulty.  The

only rooms for students in those days on the University

Hill were in the barracks filled with young men; and therefore

the young woman took rooms in town, coming up to

lectures two or three times a day.  It was a hard struggle;

for the paths and roads leading to the university grounds,

four hundred feet above the valley, were not as in these

days, and the electric trolley had not been invented.  She

bore the fatigue patiently until winter set in; then she

came to me, expressing regret at her inability to toil up the

icy steep, and left us.  On my reporting this to the trustees,

Mr. Sage made his proposal.  I had expected from him

a professorship or a fellowship; but to my amazement

he offered to erect and endow a separate college for young

women in the university, and for this purpose to give us

two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.  A committee

of trustees having been appointed to examine and

report upon this proposal, I was made its chairman; and,

in company with Mr. Sage, visited various Western

institutions where experiments in the way of what was

called ``coeducation'' had been tried.  At Oberlin College

in Ohio two serious doubts were removed from my mind. 

The first of these was regarding the health of the young

women.  I had feared that in the hard work and vigorous

competitions of the university they would lose their physical

strength; but here we found that, with wise precautions,

the health of the young women had been quite equal

to that of the young men.  My other fear was that their

education with young men might cost some sacrifice of the

better general characteristics of both sexes; but on

studying the facts I became satisfied that the men had been

made more manly and the women more womanly.  As to

the manliness there could be little doubt; for the best

of all tests had been applied only a few years before, when

Oberlin College had poured forth large numbers of its

young men, as volunteers, into the Union army.  As to the

good effect upon women, it was easy to satisfy myself

when I met them, not only at the college, but in various

beautiful Western homes.



Very striking testimony was also given at the University

of Michigan.  Ten years earlier I had known that institution

well, and my professorship there, which lasted six

years, had made me well acquainted with the character and

spirit of its students; but, since my day, women had been

admitted, and some of the results of this change surprised

me much.  Formerly a professor's lecture- or recitation-

room had been decidedly a roughish place.  The men had

often been slouchy and unkempt.  Now all was quiet and

orderly, the dress of the students much neater; in fact, it

was the usual difference between assemblages of men alone

and of men and women together, or, as I afterward phrased

it, ``between the smoking-car and the car back of it.'' 

Perhaps the most convincing piece of testimony came from

an old janitor.  As I met him I said:  ``Well, J----, do the

students still make life a burden to you?''  ``Oh, no,'' he

answered; ``that is all gone by.  They can't rush each

other up and down the staircases or have boxing-matches

in the lobbies any longer, for the girls are there.''



My report went fully into the matter, favored the admission

of women, and was adopted by the trustees unanimously--

a thing which surprised me somewhat, since two

of them, Judge Folger and Mr. Erastus Brooks, were

among the most conservative men I have ever known.  The

general results were certainly fortunate; though one or

two minor consequences were, for a year or two, somewhat

disappointing.  Two or three of the faculty and a

considerable number of the students were greatly opposed to

the admission of women, a main cause of this being the

fear that it would discredit the institution in the eyes of

members of other universities, and the number of the

whole student body was consequently somewhat diminished;

but that feeling died away, the numbers became

larger than ever, and the system proved a blessing, not

only to the university, but to the State at large.  None of

the prophecies of evil so freely made by the opponents of

the measure have ever been fulfilled.  Every arrangement

was made in Mr. Sage's building to guard the health of the

young women; and no one will say that the manliness of

men or the womanliness of women has ever suffered in

consequence of the meeting of the two sexes in classrooms,

laboratories, chapel, or elsewhere.  From one evil

which was freely prophesied the university has been

singularly free.  It was declared that a great deal of

``spooning'' would result.  This has not been the case.  Both

sexes seem to have been on their guard against it; and,

although pleasant receptions have, as a rule, taken place

weekly at Sage College, and visits to its residents have

been permitted at suitable times, no embarrassing attachments

have resulted.



The main difficulties arose from a cause which proved

very short-lived.  Several of the young women who first

applied for admission held high ideas as to their rights. 

To them Sage College was an offense.  Its beautiful parlors,

conservatories, library, lecture-rooms, and lawns,

with its lady warden who served as guide, philosopher, and

friend, were all the result of a deep conspiracy against the

rights of women.  Again and again a committee of them

came to me, insisting that young women should be treated

exactly like young men; that there should be no lady warden;

that every one of them should be free to go and come

from Sage College at every hour in the twenty-four, as

young men were free to go and come from their dormitories. 

My answer was that the cases were not the same;

that when young women insisted on their right to come and

go at all times of the day and night, as they saw fit, without

permission, it was like their right to walk from the campus

to the beautiful point opposite us on the lake: the right they

undoubtedly had, but insurmountable obstacles were in the

way; and I showed them that a firm public opinion was

an invincible barrier to the liberties they claimed.  Still,

they were allowed advisory powers in the management of

the college; the great majority made wise use of this

right, and all difficulty was gradually overcome.



Closely connected with the erection of Sage College was

the establishment of Sage Chapel.  From the first I had

desired to have every working-day begun with a simple

religious service at which attendance should be voluntary,

and was glad to see that in the cheerless lecture-room

where this service was held there usually assembled a

goodly number of professors and students, in spite of the

early hour and long walk from town.  But for Sunday

there was no provision; and one day, on my discussing the

matter with Mr. Sage, he said that he would be glad to

establish a chapel on the university grounds for the general

use of professors and students, if I saw no objection.  This

proposal I heartily welcomed, but on two conditions: first,

that the chapel should never be delivered over to any one

sect; secondly, that students should be attracted, but not

coerced into it.  To these conditions Mr. Sage agreed, and

the building was erected.



As it approached completion there came a proposal

which opened a new era in our university life.  Mr. Dean

Sage, the eldest son of him who had given us the women's

college and the chapel, proposed to add an endowment for

a chaplaincy, and suggested that a clergyman of the Protestant

Episcopal Church be appointed to that office.  This

would have been personally pleasing to me; for, though

my churchmanship was ``exceeding broad,'' I was still

attracted to the church in which I was brought up, and felt

nowhere else so much at home.  But it seemed to me that

we had no right, under our charter, to give such prominence

to any single religious organization; and I therefore

proposed to the donor that the endowment be applied to a

preachership to be filled by leading divines of all

denominations.  In making this proposal I had in view, not only

the unsectarian feature embodied in our charter, but my

observation of university chaplaincies generally.  I had

noticed that, at various institutions, excellent clergymen,

good preachers, thorough scholars, charming men, when

settled as chaplains, had, as a rule, been unable to retain

their hold upon the great body of the students.  The

reason was not far to seek.  The average parish clergyman,


even though he be not a strong preacher or profound

scholar or brilliant talker, if he be at all fit for his

position, gradually wins the hearts of his congregation.  He

has baptized their children, married their young men and

maidens, buried their dead, rejoiced with those who have

rejoiced, and wept with those who have wept.  A strong

tie has thus grown up.  But such a tie between a chaplain

and bodies of students shifting from year to year, is, in

the vast majority of cases, impossible.  Hence it is that

even the most brilliant preachers settled in universities

have rapidly lost their prestige among the students.  I

remembered well how, at Geneva and at Yale, my college-

mates joked at the peculiarities of clergymen connected

with the college, who, before I entered it, had been objects

of my veneration.  I remembered that at Yale one of my

class was wont to arouse shouts of laughter by his droll

imitations of the prayers of the leading professors--

imitations in which their gestures, intonations, and bits of

rhetoric and oratory were most ludicrously caricatured.  I

remembered, too, how a college pastor, a man greatly

revered, was really driven out of the university pulpit by

a squib in a students' paper, and how several of his

successors had finally retreated into professorships in the

Divinity School; and I felt that leading men coming from

week to week from the outside world would be taken at

the value which the outside world puts upon them, and

that they would bring in a fresh atmosphere.  My expectations

were more than fulfilled.  The preachership having

been established, I sent invitations to eminent clergymen

along the whole gamut of belief, from the Roman Catholic

bishop of the diocese to the most advanced Protestants. 

The bishop answered me most courteously; but, to my

sincere regret, declined.  One or two bishops of the

Protestant Episcopal Church also made some difficulties at

first, but gradually they were glad to accept; for it was

felt to be a privilege and a pleasure to preach to so large

a body of open-minded young men, and the course of sermons

has for years deepened and strengthened what is best

in university life.  The whole system was indeed at first

attacked; and while we had formerly been charged with

godlessness, we were now charged with ``indifferentism''

--whatever that might mean.  But I have had the pleasure

of living to see this system adopted at other leading

universities of our country, and it is evidently on its way to

become the prevailing system among all of them.  I believe

that no pulpit in the United States has exercised a

more powerful influence for good.  Strong men have been

called to it from all the leading religious bodies; and they,

knowing the character of their audience, have never

advocated sectarianism, but have presented the great

fundamental truths upon which all religion must be based.



The first of these university preachers was Phillips

Brooks, and he made a very deep impression.  An interesting

material result of his first sermon was that Mr.

William Sage, the second son of our benefactor, came

forward at the close of the service, and authorized me to

secure a beautiful organ for the university chapel.[8]  In

my addresses to students I urged them to attend for

various good reasons, and, if for none of these, because a

man is but poorly educated who does not keep himself

abreast of the religious thought of his country.  Curious

was it to see Japanese students, some of them Buddhists,

very conscientious in their attendance, their eyes steadily

fixed upon the preacher.





[8] Sunday, June 13, 1875.





My selections for the preachership during the years of

my presidency were made with great care.  So far as possible,

I kept out all ``sensational preaching.''  I had no

wish to make the chapel a place for amusement or for

ground and lofty tumbling by clerical performers, and the

result was that its ennobling influence was steadily maintained.



Some other pulpits in the university town were not so

well guarded.  A revivalist, having been admitted to one

of them, attempted to make a sensation in various ways--

and one evening laid great stress on the declaration that

she was herself a brand plucked from the burning, and

that her parents were undoubtedly lost.  A few minutes

afterward, one of the Cornell students present, thinking

doubtless, that his time would be better employed upon his

studies, arose and walked down the aisle to the door.  At

this the preacher called out, ``There goes a young man

straight down to hell.''  Thereupon the student turned

instantly toward the preacher and asked quietly, ``Have

you any message to send to your father and mother?''



Our list of university preachers, both from our own and

other countries, as I look back upon it, is wonderful to me. 

Becoming acquainted with them, I have learned to love

very many men whom I previously distrusted, and have

come to see more and more the force of the saying, ``The

man I don't like is the man I don't know.''  Many of

their arguments have not appealed to me, but some

from which I have entirely dissented, have suggested

trains of profitable thought; in fact, no services have ever

done more for me, and, judging from the numbers who

have thronged the chapel, there has been a constant good

influence upon the faculty and students.



In connection with the chapel may be mentioned the

development of various religious associations, the first of

these being the Young Men's Christian Association.  Feeling

the importance of this, although never a member of it,

I entered heartily into its plan, and fitted up a hall for its

purposes.  As this hall had to serve also, during certain

evenings in the week, for literary societies, I took pains

to secure a series of large and fine historical engravings

from England, France, and Germany, among them some

of a decidedly religious cast, brought together after a

decidedly Broad-church fashion.  Of these, two, adjoining

each other, represented--the one, Luther discussing with

his associates his translation of the Bible, and the other,

St. Vincent de Paul comforting the poor and the afflicted;

and it was my hope that the juxtaposition of these two

pictures might suggest ideas of toleration in its best sense

to the young men and women who were to sit beneath

them.  About the room, between these engravings, I placed

some bronze statuettes, obtained in Europe, representing

men who had done noble work in the world; so that it

was for some years one of the attractions of the university.



Some years later came a gift very advantageous to this

side of university life.  A gentleman whom I had known

but slightly--Mr. Alfred S. Barnes of Brooklyn, a trustee

of the university--dropped in at my house one morning,

and seemed to have something on his mind.  By and by he

very modestly asked what I thought of his putting up a

building for the religious purposes of the students.  I

welcomed the idea joyfully; only expressing the hope that

it would not be tied up in any way, but open to all forms

of religious effort.  In this idea he heartily concurred, and

the beautiful building which bears his honored name was

the result,--one of the most perfect for its purposes that

can be imagined,--and as he asked me to write an inscription

for the corner-stone, I placed on it the words:  ``For

the Promotion of God's work among Men.''  This has

seemed, ever since, to be the key-note of the work done

in that building.



It has been, and is, a great pleasure to me to see young

men joining in religious effort; and I feel proud of the

fact that from this association at Cornell many strong and

earnest men have gone forth to good work as clergymen

in our own country and in others.



In the erection of the new group of buildings south of

the upper university quadrangle, as well as in building

the president's house hard by, an opportunity was offered

for the development of some minor ideas regarding the

evolution of university life at Cornell which I had deeply

at heart.  During my life at Yale, as well as during visits

to various other American colleges, I had been painfully

impressed by the lack of any development of that which

may be called the commemorative or poetical element.  In

the long row of barracks at Yale one longed for some

little bit of beauty, and hungered and thirsted for something

which connected the present with the past; but, with

the exception of the portraits in the Alumni Hall, there

was little more to feed the sense of beauty or to meet one 's

craving for commemoration of the past than in a cotton-

factory.  One might frequent the buildings at Yale or

Harvard or Brown, as they then were, for years, and see

nothing of an architectural sort which had been put in

its place for any other reason than bare utility.



Hence came an effort to promote at Cornell some development

of a better kind.  Among the first things I ordered

were portraits by competent artists of the leading non-

resident professors, Agassiz, Lowell, Curtis, and Goldwin

Smith.  This example was, from time to time, followed

by the faculty and trustees, the former commemorating

by portraits some of their more eminent members, and the

latter ordering portraits of some of those who had connected

their names with the university by benefactions or

otherwise, such as Mr. Cornell, Senator Morrill, Mr. Sage,

Mr. McGraw, and others.  The alumni and undergradu-

ates also added portraits of professors.  This custom has

proved very satisfactory; and the line of portraits hanging

in the library cannot fail to have an ennobling influence

on many of those who, day after day, sit beneath them.



But the erection of these new buildings--Sage College,

Sage Chapel, Barnes Hall, and, finally, the university

library--afforded an opportunity to do something of a

different sort.  There was a chance for some effort to

promote beauty of detail in construction, and, fortunately,

the forethought of Goldwin Smith helped us greatly in

this.  On his arrival in Ithaca, just after the opening of

the university, he had seen that we especially needed

thoroughly trained artisans; and he had written to his

friend Auberon Herbert, asking him to select and send

from England a number of the best he could find.  Nearly

all proved of value, and one of them gave himself to the

work in a way which won my heart.  This was Robert

Richardson, a stone-carver.  I at first employed him to

carve sundry capitals, corbels, and spandrels for the

president's house, which I was then building on the university

grounds; and this work was so beautifully done that, in

the erection of Sage College, another opportunity was

given him.  Any one who, to-day, studies the capitals of

the various columns, especially those in the porch, in the

loggia of the northern tower, and in some of the front

windows, will feel that he put his heart into the work.  He

wrought the flora of the region into these creations of

his, and most beautifully.  But best of all was his work

in the chapel.  The tracery of the windows, the capitals

of the columns, and the corbels supporting the beams of

the roof were masterpieces; and, in my opinion, no investment

of equal amount has proved to be of more value to

us, even for the moral and intellectual instruction of our

students, than these examples of a conscientious devotion

of genius and talent which he thus gave us.



The death of Mr. Cornell afforded an opportunity for

a further development in the same direction.  It was felt

that his remains ought to rest on that beautiful site, in the

midst of the institution he loved so well; and I proposed

that a memorial chapel be erected, beneath which his

remains and those of other benefactors of the university

might rest, and that it should be made beautiful.  This was

done.  The stone vaulting, the tracery, and other decorative

work, planned by our professor of architecture, and

carried out as a labor of love by Richardson, were all that

I could desire.  The trustees, entering heartily into the

plan, authorized me to make an arrangement with Story,

the American sculptor at Rome, to execute a reclining

statue of Mr. Cornell above the crypt where rest his

remains; and citizens of Ithaca also authorized me to

secure in London the memorial window beneath which the

statue is placed.  Other memorials followed, in the shape

of statues, busts, and tablets, as others who had been loved

and lost were laid to rest in the chapel crypt, until the

little building has become a place of pilgrimage.  In the

larger chapel, also, tablets and windows were erected from

time to time; and the mosaic and other decorations of the

memorial apse, recently erected as a place of repose for

the remains of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Sage, are a beautiful

development of the same idea.



So, too, upon the grounds, some effort was made to

connect the present with the past.  Here, as elsewhere in

our work, it seemed to me well to impress, upon the more

thinking students at least, the idea that all they saw

had not ``happened so,'' without the earnest agency of

human beings; but that it had been the result of the earnest

life-work of men and women, and that no life-work to

which a student might aspire could be more worthy.  In

carrying out this idea upon the ``campus'' Goldwin Smith

took the lead by erecting the stone seat which has now

stood there for over thirty years.  Other memorials

followed, among them a drinking-fountain, the stone bridge

across the Cascadilla, the memorial seat back of the

library, the entrance gateway, and the like; and, at the

lamented death of Richardson, another English stone

carver put his heart into some of the details of the newly

erected library.



Meanwhile, the grounds themselves became more and

more beautiful.  There was indeed one sad mistake; and

I feel bound, in self-defense, to state that it was made

during an absence of mine in Europe: this was the

erection of the chemical laboratory upon the promontory

northwest of the upper quadrangle.  That site afforded

one of the most beautiful views in our own or any other

country.  A very eminent American man of letters, who

had traveled much in other countries, said to me, as we

stood upon it, ``I have traveled hundreds of miles in

Europe to obtain views not half so beautiful as this.''  It

was the place to which Mr. Cornell took the trustees at

their first meeting in Ithaca, when their view from it led

them to choose the upper site for the university buildings

rather than the lower.  On this spot I remember once

seeing Phillips Brooks evidently overawed by the amazing

beauty of the scene spread out at his feet--the great

amphitheater to the south and southwest, the hills beyond,

and Cayuga Lake stretching to the north and northwest. 

But though this part of the grounds has been covered by

a laboratory which might better have been placed elsewhere,

much is still left, and this has been treated so as to

add to the natural charm of the surroundings.  With the

exception of the grounds of the State University of

Wisconsin and of the State University and Stanford

University in California, I know of none approaching in beauty

those of Cornell.  I feel bound to say, however, that there

is a danger.  Thus far, though mistakes have been made

here and there, little harm has been done which is irremediable. 

But this may not always be the case.  In my view,

one of the most important things to be done by the trustees

is to have a general plan most carefully decided upon

which shall be strictly conformed to in the erection of all

future buildings, no matter what their size or character

may be.  This has been urged from time to time, but

deferred.[9]  The experience of other universities in the

United States is most instructive in this respect.  Nearly

every one of them has suffered greatly from the want

of some such general plan.  One has but to visit almost

any one of them to see buildings of different materials and

styles--classical, Renaissance, Gothic, and nondescript

--thrown together in a way at times fairly ludicrous. 

Thomas Jefferson, in founding the University of Virginia,

was wiser; and his beautiful plan was carried out so fully,

under his own eyes, that it has never been seriously

departed from.  At Stanford University, thanks to the

wisdom of its founders, a most beautiful plan was adopted,

to which the buildings have been so conformed that

nothing could be more satisfactory; and recently another

noble Californian--Mrs. Hearst--has devoted a queenly

gift to securing a plan worthy of the University of

California.  At the opening of Cornell, as I have already

said, a general plan was determined upon, with an upper

quadrangle of stone, plain but dignified, to be at some

future time architecturally enriched, and with a freer

treatment of buildings on other parts of the grounds; but

there is always danger, and I trust that I may be allowed

to remind my associates and successors in the board of

trustees, of the necessity, in the future development of the

university, for a satisfactory plan, suitable to the site, to

be steadily kept in mind.





[9]  It has now--1904--been very intelligently developed.







CHAPTER XXIV



ROCKS, STORMS, AND PERIL--1868-1874



Thus far I have dwelt especially upon the steady

development of the university in its general system of

instruction, its faculty, its equipment, and its daily life;

but it must not be supposed that all was plain sailing.  On

the contrary, there were many difficulties, some

discouragements, and at times we passed through very deep

waters.  There were periods when ruin stared us in the

face--when I feared that my next move must be to close

our doors and announce the suspension of instruction. 

The most serious of these difficulties were financial.  Mr.

Cornell had indeed endowed the institution munificently,

and others followed his example: the number of men

and women who came forward to do something for it

was astonishing.  In addition to the great endowments

made by Mr. Cornell, Mr. Sage, Mr. McGraw, Mr. Sibley,

and others, which aggregated millions, there were smaller

gifts no less encouraging:  Goldwin Smith's gift of his

services, of his library, and of various sums to increase

it, rejoiced us all; and many other evidences of confidence,

in the shape of large collections of books and material,

cheered us in that darkest period; and from that day to

this such gifts have continued.



Some of the minor gifts were especially inspiring,

as showing the breadth of interest in our work.  One of

them warmed my heart when it was made, and for many

years afterward cheered me amid many cares.  As Mr. Sage

and myself were one day looking over matters upon the

grounds, there came along, in his rough wagon, a plain

farmer from a distant part of the county, a hard-working

man of very small means, who had clearly something

upon his mind.  Presently he said:  ``I would very much

like to do something for the university if I could.  I have

no money to give; but I have thought that possibly some

good elm-trees growing on my farm might be of use to

you, and if you wish them I will put them in the best

condition and bring them to you.''  This offer we gladly

accepted; the farmer brought the trees; they were carefully

planted; they have now, for over twenty years, given

an increasing and ever more beautiful shade to one of

the main university avenues; and in the line of them stands

a stone on which are engraved the words, ``Ostrander

Elms.''



But while all this encouraged us, there were things of a

very different sort.  Could the university have been

developed gradually, normally, and in obedience to a policy

determined solely by its president, trustees, and faculty

all would have gone easily.  But our charter made this

impossible.  Many departments must be put into operation

speedily, each one of them demanding large outlay for

buildings, equipment, and instruction.  From all parts of

the State came demands--some from friends, some from

enemies--urging us to do this, blaming us for not doing

that, and these utterances were echoed in various presses,

and re<e:>choed from the State legislature.  Every nerve had

to be strained to meet these demands.  I remember well

that when a committee of the Johns Hopkins trustees, just

before the organization of that university, visited Cornell

and looked over our work, one of them said to me:  ``We

at least have this in our favor: we can follow out our own

conceptions and convictions of what is best; we have no

need of obeying the injunctions of any legislature, the

beliefs of any religious body, or the clamors of any press;

we are free to do what we really believe best, as slowly,

and in such manner, as we see fit.''  As this was said a

feeling of deep envy came over me: our condition was the

very opposite of that.  In getting ready for the opening

of the university in October, 1868, as required by our

charter, large sums had to be expended on the site now so

beautiful, but then so unpromising.  Mr. Cornell's private

affairs, as also the constant demands upon him in locating

the university lands on the northern Mississippi, kept him

a large part of the time far from the university; and my

own university duties crowded every day.  The president

of a university in those days tilled a very broad field.  He

must give instruction, conduct examinations, preside over

the faculty, correspond with the trustees, address the

alumni in various parts of the country, respond to calls

for popular lectures, address the legislature from time

to time with reference to matters between the university

and the State and write for reviews and magazines; and

all this left little time for careful control of financial

matters.



In this condition of things Mr. Cornell had installed, as

``business manager,'' a gentleman supposed to be of wide

experience, who, in everything relating to the ordinary

financial management of the institution, was all-powerful. 

But as months went on I became uneasy.  Again and

again I urged that a careful examination be made of

our affairs, and that reports be laid before us which

we could clearly understand; but Mr. Cornell, always

optimistic, assured me that all was going well, and the

matter was deferred.  Finally, I succeeded in impressing

upon my colleagues in the board the absolute necessity

of an investigation.  It was made, and a condition of

things was revealed which at first seemed appalling.  The

charter of the university made the board of trustees

personally liable for any debt over fifty thousand dollars, and

we now discovered that we were owing more than three

times that amount.  At this Mr. Cornell made a characteristic

proposal.  He said:  ``I will pay half of this debt if

you can raise the other half.''  It seemed impossible.  Our

friends had been called upon so constantly and for such

considerable sums that it seemed vain to ask them for

more.  But we brought together at Albany a few of the

most devoted, and in fifteen minutes the whole amount was

subscribed: four members of the board of trustees agreed

to give each twenty thousand dollars; and this, with Mr.

Cornell's additional subscription; furnished the sum needed.



Then took place one of the things which led me later in

life, looking back over the history of the university, to

say that what had seemed to be our worst calamities

had generally proved to be our greatest blessings.  Among

these I have been accustomed to name the monstrous

McGuire attack in the Assembly on Mr. Cornell, which

greatly disheartened me for the moment, but which eventually

led the investigation committee not only to show

to the world Mr. Cornell's complete honesty and self-

sacrifice, but to recommend the measures which finally

transferred the endowment fund from the State to the

trustees, thus strengthening the institution greatly.  So

now a piece of good luck came out of this unexpected debt. 

As soon as the subscription was made, Mr. George W.

Schuyler, treasurer of the university, in drawing up the

deed of gift, ended it with words to the following effect: 

``And it is hereby agreed by the said Ezra Cornell, Henry

W. Sage, Hiram Sibley, John McGraw, and Andrew D.

White, that in case the said university shall ever be in

position to repay their said subscriptions, then and in that

case the said entire sum of one hundred and sixty thousand

dollars SHALL BE REPAID INTO A UNIVERSITY FUND FOR THE

CREATION OF FELLOWSHIPS AND SCHOLARSHIPS in the said

university.''  A general laugh arose among the subscribers, Mr.

McGraw remarking that this was rather offhand dealing

with us; but all took it in good part and signed the agreement. 

It is certain that not one of us then expected in his

lifetime to see the university able to repay the money; but,

within a few years, as our lands were sold at better prices

than we expected, the university was in condition to make

restitution.  At first some of the trustees demurred to

investing so large a sum in fellowships and scholarships, 

and my first effort to carry through a plan to this effect

failed; but at the next meeting I was successful; and so, in

this apparently calamitous revelation of debt began that

system of university fellowships and scholarships which

has done so much for the development of higher instruction

at Cornell.



So far as the university treasury was concerned,

matters thenceforth went on well.  Never again did the

university incur any troublesome debt; from that day to this

its finances have been so managed as to excite the

admiration even of men connected with the most successful and

best managed corporations of our country.  But financial

difficulties far more serious than the debt just referred

to arose in a different quarter.  In assuming the

expenses of locating and managing the university lands,

protecting them, paying taxes upon them, and the like, Mr.

Cornell had taken upon himself a fearful load, and it

pressed upon him heavily.  But this was not all.  It was,

indeed, far from the worst; for, in his anxiety to bring

the university town into easy connection with the railway

system of the State, he had invested very largely in local

railways leading into Ithaca.  Under these circumstances,

while he made heroic efforts and sacrifices, his relations

to the comptroller of the State, who still had in his charge

the land scrip of the university, became exceedingly

difficult.  At the very crisis of this difficulty Mr. Cornell's

hard work proved too much for him, and he lay down to

die.  The university affairs, so far as the land-grant fund

was concerned, seemed hopelessly entangled with his own

and with those of the State: it seemed altogether likely

that at his death the institution would be subjected to

years of litigation, to having its endowment tied up in the

courts, and to a suspension of its operations.  Happily, we

had as our adviser Francis Miles Finch, since justice of

the Court of Appeals of the State, and now dean of the

Law School--a man of noble character, of wonderfully

varied gifts, an admirable legal adviser, devoted personally

to Mr. Cornell, and no less devoted to the university.



He set at work to disentangle the business relations of

Mr. Cornell with the university, and of both with the State. 

Every member of the board, every member of Mr. Cornell's

family,--indeed, every member of the community,--

knew him to be honest, faithful, and capable.  He labored

to excellent purpose, and in due time the principal financial

members of the board were brought together at Ithaca

to consider his solution of the problem.  It was indeed

a dark day; we were still under the shadow of ``Black

Friday,'' the worst financial calamity in the history of

the nation.  Mr. Finch showed us that the first thing

needful was to raise about two hundred and fifty thousand

dollars, which could be tendered to the comptroller

of the State in cash, who, on receiving it, would

immediately turn over to the trustees the land scrip, which

it was all-important should be in our possession at the

death of Mr. Cornell.  He next pointed out the measures

to be taken in separating the interests of the university

from Mr. Cornell's estate, and these were provided

for.  The sum required for obtaining control of the land

scrip was immediately subscribed as a loan, virtually

without security, by members of the board then present;

though at that depressing financial period of the country

strong men went about with the best of securities, unable

to borrow money upon them.  In a few days Mr. Cornell

was dead; but the university was safe.  Mr. Finch's plan

worked well in every particular; and this, which appeared

likely to be a great calamity, resulted in the board of

trustees obtaining control of the landed endowment of

the institution, without which it must have failed.  But

the weeks while these negotiations were going on were

gloomy indeed for me; rarely in my life have I been so

unhappy.  That crisis of our fate was the winter of 1874. 

The weather was cold and depressing, my family far off in

Syracuse.  My main refuge then, as at sundry other times

of deep personal distress, was in work.  In the little southwest

room of the president's house, hardly yet finished and

still unfurnished, I made my headquarters.  Every morn-

ing a blazing fire was lighted on the hearth; every day I

devoted myself to university work and to study for my

lectures.  Happily, my subject interested me deeply.  It was

``The Age of Discovery''; and, surrounded with my books,

I worked on, forgetful, for the time, of the December

storms howling about the house, and of the still more fearful

storms beating against the university.  Three new lectures

having been thus added to my course on the Renaissance

period, I delivered them to my class; and, just as I

was finishing the last of them, a messenger came to tell me

that Mr. Cornell was dying.  Dismissing my students, I

hurried to his house, but was just too late; a few minutes

before my arrival his eyes had closed in death.  But his

work was done--nobly done.  As I gazed upon his dead

face on that 9th of December, 1874, I remember well

that my first feeling was that he was happily out of the

struggle; and that, wherever he might be, I could wish to

be still with him.  But there was no time for unavailing

regrets.  We laid him reverently and affectionately to

rest, in the midst of the scenes so dear to him, within the

sound of the university chimes he so loved to hear, and

pressed on with the work.



A few years later came another calamity, not, like the

others, touching the foundations and threatening the

existence of the university, yet hardly less crushing at the

time; indeed, with two exceptions, it was the most depressing

I have ever encountered.  At the establishment of the

university in Ithaca, one of the charter trustees who

showed himself especially munificent to the new enterprise

was Mr. John McGraw.  One morning, while I was in the

midst of the large collection of books sent by me from

Europe, endeavoring to bring them into some order before

the opening day, his daughter, Miss Jenny McGraw,

came in, and I had the pleasure of showing her some of

our more interesting treasures.  She was a woman of kind

and thoughtful nature, had traveled in her own country

and abroad to good purpose, and was evidently deeply

interested.  Next day her father met me and said:  ``Well,

you are pressing us all into the service.  Jenny came home

yesterday, and said very earnestly, `I wish that I could

do something to help on the university'; to which I

replied, `Very well.  Do anything you like; I shall be glad

to see you join in the work.' ''  The result was the gift

from her of the chime of bells which was rung at the

opening of the university, and which, with the additions

afterward made to it, have done beautiful service.  On the

bells she thus gave were inscribed the verses of the ninety-

fifth chant of Tennyson's ``In Memoriam''; and some

weeks afterward I had the pleasure of placing in her

hands what she considered an ample return for her gift--

a friendly letter from Tennyson himself, containing some

of the stanzas written out in his own hand.  So began her

interest in the university--an interest which never faltered.



A few years later she married one of our professors, an

old friend of mine, and her marriage proved exceedingly

happy; but, alas, its happiness was destined to be brief! 

Less than two years after her wedding day she was

brought home from Europe to breathe her last in her

husband's cottage on the university grounds, and was

buried from the beautiful residence which she had built

hard by, and had stored with works of art in every field.



At the opening of her will it was found that, while she

had made ample provision for all who were near and dear

to her, and for a multitude of charities, she had left to the

university very nearly two millions of dollars, a portion

of which was to be used for a student hospital, and the

bulk of the remainder, amounting to more than a million

and a half, for the university library.  Her husband

joined most heartily in her purpose, and all seemed ready

for carrying it out in a way which would have made

Cornell University, in that respect, unquestionably the

foremost on the American continent.  As soon as this

munificent bequest was announced, I asked our leading

lawyer, Judge Douglas Boardman, whether our charter allowed

the university to take it, calling his attention to the

fact that, like most of its kind in the State of New York,

it restricted the amount of property which the university

could hold, and reminding him that we had already exceeded

the limit thus allowed.  To this he answered that

the restriction was intended simply to prevent the endowment

of corporations beyond what the legislature might

think best for the commonwealth; that if the attorney-

general did not begin proceedings against us to prevent

our taking the property, no one else could; and that he

would certainly never trouble us.



In view of the fact that Judge Boardman had long

experience and was at the time judge of the Supreme Court

of the State, I banished all thought of difficulty; though

I could not but regret that, as he drew Mrs. Fiske's will,

and at the same time knew the restrictions of our charter,

he had not given us a hint, so that we could have had our

powers of holding property enlarged.  It would have been

perfectly easy to have the restrictions removed, and, as

a matter of fact, the legislature shortly afterward removed

them entirely, without the slightest objection; but this

action was too late to enable us to take the McGraw-Fiske

bequest.



About a fortnight after these assurances that we were

perfectly safe, Judge Boardman sent for me, and on meeting

him I found that he had discovered a decision of the

Court of Appeals--rendered a few years before--which

might prevent our accepting the bequest.



But there was still much hope of inducing the main heirs

to allow the purpose of Mrs. Fiske to be carried out.  Without

imputing any evil intentions to any person, I fully

believe--indeed, I may say I KNOW--that, had the matter

been placed in my hands, this vast endowment would have

been saved to us; but it was not so to be.  Personal

complications had arisen between the main heir and two of

our trustees which increased the embarrassments of the

situation.  It is needless to go into them now; let all that

be buried; but it may at least be said that day and night I

labored to make some sort of arrangement between the

principal heir and the university, and finally took the

steamer for Europe in order to meet him and see if some

arrangement could be made.  But personal bitterness had

entered too largely into the contest, and my efforts were

in vain.  Though our legal advisers insisted that the

university was sure of winning the case, we lost it in every

court--first in the Supreme Court of the State, then in the

Court of Appeals, and finally in the Supreme Court of the

United States.  To me all this was most distressing.  The

creation of such a library would have been the

culmination of my work; I could then have sung my Nunc

dimittis.  But the calamity was not without its

compensations.  When the worst was known, Mr. Henry W. Sage,

a lifelong friend of Mr. McGraw and of Mrs. Fiske, came

to my house, evidently with the desire to console me.  He

said:  ``Don't allow this matter to prey upon you; Jenny

shall have her library; it shall yet be built and well

endowed.''  He was true to his promise.  On the final

decision against us, he added to his previous large gifts to the

university a new donation of over six hundred thousand

dollars, half of which went to the erection of the present

library building, and the other half to an endowment fund. 

Professor Fiske also joined munificently in enlarging the

library, adding various gifts which his practised eye

showed him were needed, and, among these, two collections,

one upon Dante and one in Romance literature, each

the best of its kind in the United States.  Mr. William

Sage also added the noted library in German literature

of Professor Zarncke of Leipsic; and various others

contributed collections, larger or smaller, so that the library

has become, as a whole, one of the best in the country.  As

I visit it, there often come back vividly to me remembrances

of my college days, when I was wont to enter the

Yale library and stand amazed in the midst of the sixty

thousand volumes which had been brought together during

one hundred and fifty years.  They filled me with awe. 

But Cornell University has now, within forty years from

its foundation, accumulated very nearly three hundred

thousand volumes, many among them of far greater value

than anything contained in the Yale library of my day;

and as I revise these lines comes news that the will of

Professor Fiske, who recently died at Frankfort-on-the-Main,

gives to the library all of his splendid collections in Italian

history and literature at Florence, with the addition of

nearly half a million of dollars.



Beside these financial and other troubles, another class

of difficulties beset us, which were, at times, almost as

vexatious.  These were the continued attacks made by good

men in various parts of the State and Nation, who thought

they saw in Cornell a stronghold-first, of ideas in religion

antagonistic to their own; and secondly, of ideas in

education likely to injure their sectarian colleges.  From

the day when our charter was under consideration at

Albany they never relented, and at times they were violent. 

The reports of my inauguration speech were, in sundry

denominational newspapers, utterly distorted; far and

wide was spread the story that Mr. Cornell and myself

were attempting to establish an institution for the

propagation of ``atheism'' and ``infidelity.''  Certainly nothing

could have been further from the purpose of either of us. 

He had aided, and loved to aid, every form of Christianity;

I was myself a member of a Christian church and a trustee

of a denominational college.  Everything that we could do

in the way of reasoning with our assailants was in vain. 

In talking with students from time to time, I learned that,

in many cases, their pastors had earnestly besought them

to go to any other institution rather than to Cornell;

reports of hostile sermons reached us; bitter diatribes

constantly appeared in denominational newspapers, and

especially virulent were various addresses given on public

occasions in the sectarian colleges which felt themselves

injured by the creation of an unsectarian institution on so

large a scale.  Typical was the attack made by an eminent

divine who, having been installed as president over one

of the smaller colleges of the State, thought it his duty

to denounce me as an ``atheist,'' and to do this especially

in the city where I had formerly resided, and in the church

which some of my family attended.  I took no notice of the

charge, and pursued the even tenor of my way; but the

press took it up, and it recoiled upon the man who made it.



Perhaps the most comical of these attacks was one made

by a clergyman of some repute before the Presbyterian

Synod at Auburn in western New York.  This gentleman,

having attended one or two of the lectures by Agassiz

before our scientific students, immediately rushed off to

this meeting of his brethren, and insisted that the great

naturalist was ``preaching atheism and Darwinism'' at the

university.  He seemed about to make a decided impression,

when there arose a very dear old friend of mine, the

Rev. Dr. Sherman Canfield, pastor of the First Presbyterian

Church in Syracuse, who, fortunately, was a scholar

abreast of current questions.  Dr. Canfield quietly

remarked that he was amazed to learn that Agassiz had, in

so short a time, become an atheist, and not less astonished

to hear that he had been converted to Darwinism; that

up to that moment he had considered Agassiz a deeply

religious man, and also the foremost--possibly, indeed,

the last--great opponent of the Darwinian hypothesis.  He

therefore suggested that the resolution denouncing Cornell

University brought in by his reverend brother be

laid on the table to await further investigation.  It was

thus disposed of, and, in that region at least, it was never

heard of more.  Pleasing is it to me to chronicle the fact

that, at Dr. Canfield's death, he left to the university a

very important part of his library.



From another denominational college came an attack

on Goldwin Smith.  One of its professors published, in

the Protestant Episcopal ``Gospel Messenger,'' an attack

upon the university for calling into its faculty a

``Westminster Reviewer''; the fact being that Goldwin Smith

was at that time a member of the Church of England,

and had never written for the ``Westminster Review''

save in reply to one of its articles.  So, too, when there

were sculptured on the stone seat which he had ordered

carved for the university grounds the words, ``Above all

nations is humanity,'' there came an outburst.  Sundry

pastors, in their anxiety for the souls of the students, could

not tell whether this inscription savored more of atheism

or of pantheism.  Its simple significance--that the claims

of humanity are above those of nationality--entirely

escaped them.  Pulpit cushions were beaten in all parts of

the State against us, and solemn warnings were renewed

to students by their pastors to go anywhere for their

education rather than to Cornell.  Curiously, this fact became

not only a gratuitous, but an effective, advertisement:

many of the brightest men who came to us in those days

confessed to me that these attacks first directed their

attention to us.



We also owed some munificent gifts to this same cause. 

In two cases gentlemen came forward and made large

additions to our endowment as their way of showing

disbelief in these attacks or contempt for them.



Still, the attacks were vexatious even when impotent. 

Ingenious was the scheme carried out by a zealous young

clergyman settled for a short time in Ithaca.  Coming

one day into my private library, he told me that he was

very anxious to borrow some works showing the more

recent tendencies of liberal thought.  I took him to one

of my book-cases, in which, by the side of the works of

Bossuet and F<e'>nelon and Thomas Arnold and Robertson

of Brighton, he found those of Channing, Parker, Renan,

Strauss, and the men who, in the middle years of the last

century, were held to represent advanced thought.  He

looked them over for some time, made some excuse for not

borrowing any of them just then, and I heard nothing

more from him until there came, in a denominational

newspaper, his eloquent denunciation of me for possessing

such books.  Impressive, too, must have been the utterances

of an eminent ``revivalist'' who, in various Western

cities, loudly asserted that Mr. Cornell had died

lamenting his inability to base his university on atheism,

and that I had fled to Europe declaring that in America

an infidel university was, as yet, an impossibility.



For a long time I stood on the defensive, hoping that

the provisions made for the growth of religious life

among the students might show that we were not so

wicked as we were represented; but, as all this seemed

only to embitter our adversaries, I finally determined to

take the offensive, and having been invited to deliver a

lecture in the great hall of the Cooper Institute at New

York, took as my subject ``The Battle-fields of Science.'' 

In this my effort was to show how, in the supposed

interest of religion, earnest and excellent men, for many

ages and in many countries, had bitterly opposed various

advances in science and in education, and that such

opposition had resulted in most evil results, not only to science

and education, but to religion.  This lecture was published

in full, next day, in the ``New York Tribune''; extracts

from it were widely copied; it was asked for by lecture

associations in many parts of the country; grew first into

two magazine articles, then into a little book which was

widely circulated at home, reprinted in England with a

preface by Tyndall, and circulated on the Continent in

translations, was then expanded into a series of articles in

the ``Popular Science Monthly,'' and finally wrought into

my book on ``The Warfare of Science with Theology.'' 

In each of these forms my argument provoked attack; but

all this eventually created a reaction in our favor, even in

quarters where it was least expected.  One evidence of this

touched me deeply.  I had been invited to repeat the

lecture at New Haven, and on arriving there found a

large audience of Yale professors and students; but, most

surprising of all, in the chair for the evening, no less a

personage than my revered instructor, Dr. Theodore

Dwight Woolsey, president of the university.  He was of

a deeply religious nature; and certainly no man was ever

under all circumstances, more true to his convictions of

duty.  To be welcomed by him was encouragement indeed. 

He presented me cordially to the audience, and at the

close of my address made a brief speech, in which he

thoroughly supported my positions and bade me Godspeed. 

Few things in my life have so encouraged me.



Attacks, of course, continued for a considerable time,

some of them violent; but, to my surprise and satisfaction,

when my articles were finally brought together in

book form, the opposition seemed to have exhausted itself. 

There were even indications of approval in some quarters

where the articles composing it had previously been

attacked; and I received letters thoroughly in sympathy

with the work from a number of eminent Christian men,

including several doctors of divinity, and among these

two bishops, one of the Anglican and one of the American

Episcopal Church.



The final result was that slander against the university

for irreligion was confined almost entirely to very narrow

circles, of waning influence; and my hope is that,

as its formative ideas have been thus welcomed by various

leaders of thought, and have filtered down through the

press among the people at large, they have done something

to free the path of future laborers in the field of

science and education from such attacks as those which

Cornell was obliged to suffer.







CHAPTER XXV



CONCLUDING YEARS--1881-1885



To this work of pressing on the development of the

leading departments in the university, establishing

various courses of instruction, and warding off attacks as

best I could, was added the daily care of the regular and

steady administration of affairs, and in this my duty was

to co<o:>perate with the trustees, the faculty, and the

students.  The trustees formed a body differently composed

from any organization for university government up to

that time.  As a rule, such boards in the United States

were, in those days, self-perpetuating.  A man once elected

into one of them was likely to remain a trustee during

his natural life; and the result had been much dry-rot and,

frequently, a very sleepy condition of things in American

collegiate and university administration.  In drawing the

Cornell charter, we provided for a governing body by first

naming a certain number of high State officers--the

governor, lieutenant-governor, speaker, president of the State

Agricultural Society, and others; next, a certain number

of men of special fitness, who were to be elected by the

board itself; and, finally, a certain proportion elected by

the alumni from their own number.  Beside these, the eldest

male lineal descendant of Mr. Cornell, and the president

of the university, were trustees ex officio.  At the first

nomination of the charter trustees, Mr. Cornell proposed

that he should name half the number and I the other half. 

This was done, and pains were taken to select men accustomed

to deal with large affairs.  A very important provision 

was also made limiting their term of office to five years.



During the first nine years the chairmanship of the

board was held by Mr. Cornell, but at his death Mr.

Henry W. Sage was elected to it, who, as long as he lived,

discharged its duties with the greatest conscientiousness

and ability.  To the finances of the university he gave

that shrewd care which had enabled him to build up his

own immense business.  Freely and without compensation,

he bestowed upon the institution labor for which any

great business corporation would have gladly paid him

a very large sum.  For the immediate management, in

the intervals of the quarterly meetings of the board, an

executive committee of the trustees was created, which

also worked to excellent purpose.



The faculty, which was at first comparatively small,

was elected by the trustees upon my nomination.  In

deciding on candidates, I put no trust in mere paper

testimonials, no matter from what source; but always saw

the candidates themselves, talked with them, and then

secured confidential communications regarding them from

those who knew them best.  The results were good, and

to this hour I cherish toward the faculty, as toward the

trustees, a feeling of the deepest gratitude.  Throughout

all the hard work of that period they supported me heartily

and devotedly; without their devotion and aid, my

whole administration would have been an utter failure.



To several of these I have alluded elsewhere; but one

should be especially mentioned to whom every member of

the faculty must feel a debt of gratitude--Professor Hiram

Corson.  No one has done more to redress the balance

between the technical side and the humanities.  His writings,

lectures, and readings have been a solace and an

inspiration to many of us, both in the faculty and

among the students.  It was my remembrance of the effect

of his readings that caused me to urge, at a public address

at Yale in 1903, the establishment not only of professorships

but of readerships in English literature in all our

greater institutions, urging especially that the readers

thus called should every day present, with little if any note

or comment, the masterpieces of our literature.  I can

think of no provision which would do more to humanize

the great body of students, especially in these days when

other branches are so largely supplanting classical studies,

than such a continuous presentation of the treasures of our

language by a thoroughly good reader.  What is needed is

not more talk about literature, but the literature itself. 

And here let me recall an especial service of Professor

Corson which may serve as a hint to men and women of

light and leading in the higher education of our country. 

On sundry celebrations of Founder's Day, and on various

other commemorative occasions, he gave in the university

chapel recitals from Milton, Wordsworth, Tennyson, and

other poets of the larger inspiration, while organ

interludes were given from the great masters of music. 

Literature and music were thus made to do beautiful service as

yokefellows.  It has been my lot to enjoy in various capitals

of the modern world many of the things which men

who have a deep feeling for art most rejoice in, but never

have I known anything more uplifting and ennobling than

these simple commemorations.



From one evil which has greatly injured many American

university faculties, especially in the middle and western

States, we were virtually free.  This evil was the prevalence

of feuds between professors.  Throughout a large

part of the nineteenth century they were a great affliction. 

Twice the State University of Michigan was nearly

wrecked by them; for several years they nearly paralyzed

two or three of the New York colleges; and in one of

these a squabble between sundry professors and the

widow of a former president was almost fatal.  Another

of the larger colleges in the same State lost a very eminent

president from the same cause; and still another,

which had done excellent work, was dragged down and

for years kept down by a feud between its two foremost

professors.  In my day, at Yale, whenever there

was a sudden influx of students, and it was asked whence

they came, the answer always was, ``Another Western college

has burst up''; and the ``burst up'' had resulted,

almost without exception, from faculty quarrels.



In another chapter I have referred to one of these

explosions which, having blown out of a Western university

the president, the entire board of trustees, and all

the assistant professors and instructors, convulsed the

State for years.  I have known gifted members of faculties,

term after term, substitute for their legitimate work

impassioned appeals to their religious denominations,

through synods or conferences, and to the public at large

through the press,--their quarrels at last entangling other

professors and large numbers of students.



In my ``Plan of Organization'' I called attention to this

evil, and laid down the principle that ``the presence of no

professor, however gifted, is so valuable as peace and

harmony.''  The trustees acquiesced in this view, and from

the first it was understood that, at any cost, quarrels must

be prevented.  The result was that we never had any which

were serious, nor had we any in the board of trustees.  One

of the most satisfactory of all my reflections is that I never

had any ill relations with any member of either body; that

there was never one of them whom I did not look upon as

a friend.  My simple rule for the government of my own

conduct was that I had NO TIME for squabbling; that life

was not long enough for quarrels; and this became, I

think, the feeling among all of us who were engaged in the

founding and building of the university.



As regards the undergraduates, I initiated a system

which, so far as is known to me, was then new in American

institutions of learning.  At the beginning of every year,

and also whenever any special occasion seemed to require

it, I summoned the whole body of students and addressed

them at length on the condition of the university, on their

relations to it, and on their duties to it as well as to

themselves; and in all these addresses endeavored to bring

home to them the idea that under our system of giving to

the graduates votes in the election of trustees, and to

representative alumni seats in the governing board, the whole

student body had become, in a new sense, part of the

institution, and were to be held, to a certain extent,

responsible for it.  I think that all conversant with the history

of the university will agree that the results of thus taking

the students into the confidence of the governing

board were happy.  These results were shown largely

among the undergraduates, and even more strongly

among the alumni.  In all parts of the country alumni

associations were organized, and here again I found a

source of strength.  These associations held reunions during

every winter, and at least one banquet, at which the

president of the university was invited to be present.  So

far as possible, I attended these meetings, and made use

of them to strengthen the connection of the graduates with

their alma mater.



The administrative care of the university was very

engrossing.  With study of the various interests combined

within its organization; with the attendance on meetings

of trustees, executive committee, and faculty, and

discussion of important questions in each of these bodies--

with the general oversight of great numbers of students

in many departments and courses; with the constant

necessity of keeping the legislature and the State informed

as to the reasons of every movement, of meeting hostile

forces pressing us on every side, of keeping in touch with

our graduates throughout the country, there was much

to be done.  Trying also, at times, to a man never in

robust health was the duty of addressing various

assemblies of most dissimilar purposes.  Within the space

of two or three years I find mention in my diaries of a

large number of addresses which, as president of the

university, I could not refuse to give; among these, those

before the legislature of the State, on Technical Education;

before committees of Congress, on Agriculture and

Technical Instruction; before the Johns Hopkins University,

on Education with Reference to Political Life; before

the National Teachers' Association at Washington, on the

Relation of the Universities to the State School Systems;

before the American Social Science Association of New

York, on Sundry Reforms in University Management; before

the National Association of Teachers at Detroit, on

the Relations of Universities to Colleges; before four

thousand people at Cleveland, on the Education of the

Freedmen; before the Adalbert College, on the Concentration

of Means for the Higher Education; before the

State Teachers' Association at Saratoga, on Education

and Democracy; at the Centennial banquet at Philadelphia,

on the American Universities; and before my

class at Yale University, on the Message of the

Nineteenth Century to the Twentieth; besides many public

lectures before colleges, schools, and special assemblies. 

There seemed more danger of wearing out than of rusting

out, especially as some of these discourses provoked

attacks which must be answered.  Time also was required

for my duties as president of the American Social Science

Association, which lasted several years, and of the American

Historical Society, which, though less engrossing,

imposed for a time much responsibility.  Then, too, there

was another duty, constantly pressing, which I had

especially at heart.  The day had not yet arrived when the

president of the university could be released from his

duties as a professor.  I had, indeed, no wish for such

release; for, of all my duties, that of meeting my senior

students face to face in the lecture-room and interesting

them in the studies which most interested me, and which

seemed most likely to fit them to go forth and bring the

influence of the university to bear for good upon the country

at large, was that which I liked best.  The usual routine

of administrative cares was almost hateful to me,

and I delegated minor details, as far as possible, to those

better fitted to take charge of them--especially to the vice-

president and registrar and secretary of the faculty.  But

my lecture-room I loved.  Of all occupations, I know of

none more satisfactory than that of a university professor 

who feels that he is in right relations with his

students, that they welcome what he has to give them,

and that their hearts and minds are developed, day by

day, by the work which he most prizes.  I may justly say

that this pleasure was mine at the University of Michigan

and at Cornell University.  It was at times hard to

satisfy myself; for next to the pleasure of directing

younger minds is the satisfaction of fitting one's self to

do so.  During my ordinary working-day there was little

time for keeping abreast with the latest and best in my

department; but there were odds and ends of time, day

and night, and especially during my frequent journeys by

rail and steamer to meet engagements at distant points,

when I always carried with me a collection of books which

seemed to me most fitted for my purpose; and as I had

trained myself to be a rapid reader, these excursions gave

me many opportunities.



But some of these journeys were not well suited to

study.  During the first few years of the university,

being obliged to live in the barracks on the University Hill

under many difficulties, I could not have my family with

me, and from Saturday afternoon until Monday morning

was given to them at Syracuse.  In summer the journey

by Cayuga Lake to the New York Central train gave me

excellent opportunity for reading and even for writing. 

But in winter it was different.  None of the railways now

connecting the university town with the outside world

had then been constructed, save that to the southward;

and, therefore, during those long winters there was at

least twice a week a dreary drive in wagon or sleigh

sometimes taking all the better hours of the day, in order

to reach the train from Binghamton to Syracuse.  Coming

out of my lecture-room Friday evening or Saturday

morning, I was conveyed through nearly twenty-five miles

of mud and slush or sleet and snow.  On one journey my

sleigh was upset three times in the drifts which made the

roads almost impassable, and it required nearly ten hours

to make the entire journey.  The worst of it was that,

coming out of my heated lecture-room and taking an open

sleigh at Ithaca, or coming out of the heated cars and taking

it at Cortland, my throat became affected, and for

some years gave me serious trouble.



But my greater opportunities--those which kept me

from becoming a mere administrative machine--were

afforded by various vacations, longer or shorter.  During the

summer vacation, mainly passed at Saratoga and the seaside,

there was time for consecutive studies with reference

to my work, my regular lectures, and occasional addresses. 

But this was not all.  At three different times I

was summoned from university work to public duties. 

The first of these occasions was when I was appointed

by President Grant one of the commissioners to Santo

Domingo.  This appointment came when I was thoroughly

worn out with university work, and it gave me a chance

of great value physically and intellectually.  During four

months I was in a world of thought as different from

anything that I had before known as that wonderful island

in the Caribbean Sea is different in its climate from

the hills of central New York swept by the winds of

December.  And I had to deal with men very different

from the trustees, faculty, and students of Cornell.  This

episode certainly broadened my view as a professor, and

strengthened me for administrative duties.



The third of these long vacations was in 1879--80--81,

when President Hayes appointed me minister plenipotentiary

in Berlin.  My stay at that post, and especially

my acquaintance with leaders in German thought and with

professors at many of the Continental universities, did

much for me in many ways.



It may be thought strange that I could thus absent

myself from the university, but these absences really enabled

me to maintain my connection with the institution.  My

constitution, though elastic, was not robust; an uninterrupted

strain would have broken me, while variety of

occupation strengthened me.  Throughout my whole life

I have found the best of all medicines to be travel and

change of scene.  Another example of this was during my

stay of a year abroad as commissioner at the Paris

Exposition.  During that stay I prepared several additions

to my course of general lectures, and during my official

stay in Berlin added largely to my course on German

history.  But the change of work saved me: though minor

excursions were frequently given up to work with book

and pen, I returned from them refreshed and all the more

ready for administrative duties.



As to the effect of such absences upon the university,

I may say that it accorded with the theory which I held

tenaciously regarding the administration of the university

at that formative period.  I had observed in various

American colleges that a fundamental and most injurious

error was made in relieving trustees and faculty from

responsibility, and concentrating all in the president.  The

result, in many of these institutions, had been a sort of

atrophy,--the trustees and faculty being, whenever an

emergency arose, badly informed as to the affairs of their

institutions, and really incapable of managing them.  This

state of things was the most serious drawback to President

Tappan's administration at the University of Michigan,

and was the real cause of the catastrophe which

finally led to his break with the regents of that university,

and his departure to Europe, never to return.  Worse still

was the downfall of Union College, Schenectady, from

the position which it had held before the death of President

Nott.  Under Drs. Nott and Tappan the tendency in

the institutions above named was to make the trustees

in all administrative matters mere ciphers, and to make

the faculty more and more incapable of administering

discipline or conducting current university business.  That

system concentrated all knowledge of university affairs

and all power of every sort in the hands of the president,

and relieved trustees and faculty from everything except

nominal responsibility.  From the very beginning I

determined to prevent this state of things at Cornell.  Great

powers were indeed given me by the trustees, and I used

them; but in the whole course of my administration I

constantly sought to keep ample legislative powers in the

board of trustees and in the faculty.  I felt that the

university, to be successful, should not depend on the life and

conduct of any one man; that every one of those called to

govern and to manage it, whether president or professor,

should feel that he had powers and responsibilities in its

daily administration.  Therefore it was that I inserted in

the fundamental laws of the university a provision that

the confirmation by the trustees of all nominations of

professors should be by ballot; so that it might never be in

the power of the president or any other trustee unduly to

influence selections for such positions.  I also exerted

myself to provide that in calling new professors they should

be nominated by the president, not of his own will, but

with the advice of the faculty and should be confirmed by

the trustees.  I also provided that the elections of students

to fellowships and scholarships and the administration of

discipline should be decided by the faculty, and by ballot. 

The especial importance of this latter point will not

escape those conversant with university management.  I

insisted that the faculty should not be merely a committee

to register the decrees of the president, but that it should

have full legislative powers to discuss and to decide

university affairs.  Nor did I allow it to become a body

merely advisory:  I not only insisted that it should have

full legislative powers, but that it should be steadily

trained in the use of them.  On my nomination the trustees

elected from the faculty three gentlemen who had shown

themselves especially fitted for administrative work to the

positions of vice-president, registrar, and secretary; and

thenceforth the institution was no longer dependent on any

one man.  To the first of these positions was elected

Professor William Channing Russel; to the second, Professor

William Dexter Wilson; to the third, Professor George C.

Caldwell; and each discharged his duties admirably.



Of the last two of these I have already spoken, and here

some record should be made of the services rendered by

Dr. Russel.  He was among those chosen for the instructing

body at the very beginning.  Into all of his work he

brought a perfect loyalty to truth, with the trained

faculties of a lawyer in seeking it and the fearlessness of an

apostle in announcing it.  As to his success in this latter

field, there may be given, among other testimonies, that of

an unwilling witness--a young scholar of great strength

of mind, who, though he had taken deep offense at sundry

acts of the professor and never forgiven them, yet, after a

year in the historical lecture-rooms of the University of

Berlin, said to me:  ``I have attended here the lectures of

all the famous professors of history, and have heard few

who equal Professor Russel and none who surpass him in

ascertaining the really significant facts and in clearly

presenting them.''



In the vice-presidency of the faculty he also rendered

services of the greatest value.  No one was more devoted

than he to the university or more loyal to his associates. 

There was, indeed, some friction.  His cousin, James

Russell Lowell, once asked me regarding this, and my reply

was that it reminded me of a character in the ``Biglow

Papers'' who ``had a dre'dful winnin' way to make folks

hate him.''  This was doubtless an overstatement, but it

contained truth; for at times there was perhaps lacking in

his handling of delicate questions something of the suaviter

in modo.  His honest frankness was worthy of all

praise; but I once found it necessary to write him:  ``I am

sorry that you have thought it best to send me so unsparing

a letter, but no matter; write me as many as you like;

they will never break our friendship; only do not write

others in the same strain.''  This brought back from him

one of the kindest epistles imaginable.  Uncompromising

as his manner was, his services vastly outweighed all the

defects of his qualities; and among these services were

some of which the general public never dreamed.  I could

tell of pathetic devotion and self-sacrifice on his part, not

only to the university, but to individual students.  No

professor ever had a kindlier feeling toward any scholar in

need, sickness, or trouble.  Those who knew him best loved

him most; and, in the hard, early days of the university,

he especially made good his title to the gratitude of every

Cornellian, not only by his university work, but by his

unostentatious devotion to every deserving student.



As to my professorial work, I found in due time

effective aid in various young men who had been members of

my classes.  Of these were Charles Kendall Adams, who

afterward became my successor in the presidency of Cornell,

and George Lincoln Burr, who is now one of my successors

in the professorship of history.



Thus it was that from time to time I could be absent

with a feeling that all at the university was moving on

steadily and securely; with a feeling, indeed, that it was

something to have aided in creating an institution which

could move on steadily and securely, even when the hands

of those who had set it in motion had been removed.



There was, however, one temporary exception to the rule. 

During my absence as minister at Berlin trouble arose in

the governing board so serious that I resigned my diplomatic

post before my term of service was ended, and hastened

back to my university duties.  But no permanent

injury had been done; in fact, this experience, by

revealing weaknesses in sundry parts of our system, resulted

in permanent good.



Returning thus from Berlin, I threw myself into university

work more heartily than ever.  It was still difficult,

for our lands had not as yet been sold to any extent, and

our income was sadly insufficient.  The lands were steadily

increasing in value, and it was felt that it would be a great

error to dispose of them prematurely.  The work of providing

ways and means to meet the constantly increasing

demands of the institution was therefore severe, and the

loss of the great library bequest to the university also

tried me sorely; but I labored on, and at last, thanks to

the admirable service of Mr. Sage in the management of

the lands, the university was enabled to realize, for the

first time, a large capital from them.  Up to the year 1885

they had been a steady drain upon our resources; now

the sale of a fraction of them yielded a good revenue. 

For the first time there was something like ease in the

university finances.



Twenty years had now elapsed since I had virtually

begun my duties as president by drafting the university

charter and by urging it upon the legislature.  The four

years of work since my return from Berlin had tried me

severely; and more than that, I had made a pledge some

years before to the one who, of all in the world, had the

right to ask it, that at the close of twenty years of service

I would give up all administrative duties.  To this pledge

I was faithful, but with the feeling that it was at the

sacrifice of much.  The new endowment coming in from the

sale of lands offered opportunities which I had longed for

during many weary years; but I felt that it was best to

put the management into new hands.  There were changes

needed which were far more difficult for me to make than

for a new-comer--especially changes in the faculty, which

involved the severing of ties very dear to me.



At the annual commencement of 1885, the twenty years

from the granting of our charter having arrived, I

presented my resignation with the declaration that it must

be accepted.  It was accepted in such a way as to make

me very grateful to all connected with the institution:

trustees, faculty, and students were most kind to me.  As

regards the first of these bodies, I cannot resist the

temptation to mention two evidences of their feeling

which touched me deeply.  The first of these was the

proposal that I should continue as honorary president of

the university.  This I declined.  To hold such a position

would have been an injury to my successor; I knew well

that the time had come when he would be obliged to

grapple with questions which I had left unsettled from

a feeling that he would have a freer hand than I could have. 

But another tender made me I accepted: this was that I

should nominate my successor.  I did this, naming my old

student at the University of Michigan, who had succeeded

me there as professor of history--Charles Kendall Adams;

and so began a second and most prosperous administration. 



In thus leaving the presidency of the university, it

seemed to me that the time had come for carrying out a

plan formed long before--the transfer to the university

of my historical and general library, which had become

one of the largest and, in its field, one of the best

private collections of books in the United States.  The

trustees accepted it, providing a most noble room for it in

connection with the main university library and with the

historical lecture-rooms; setting apart, also, from their

resources, an ample sum, of which the income should be

used in maintaining the library, in providing a librarian,

in publishing a complete catalogue, and in making the

collection effective for historical instruction.  My only

connection with the university thenceforward was that of

a trustee and member of its executive committee.  In this

position it has been one of the greatest pleasures and

satisfactions of my life to note the large and steady

development of the institution during the two administrations

which have succeeded my own.  At the close of the

administration of President Adams, who had especially

distinguished himself in developing the law department and

various other important university interests, in strengthening

the connection of the institution with the State, and

in calling several most competent professors, he was

succeeded by a gentleman whose acquaintance I had made

during my stay as minister to Germany, he being at that

time a student at the University of Berlin,--Dr. Jacob

Gould Schurman, whose remarkable powers and gifts have

more than met the great expectations I then formed

regarding him, and have developed the university to a yet

higher point, so that its number of students is now, as I

revise these lines, over three thousand.  He, too, has been

called to important duties in the public service; and he

has just returned after a year of most valuable work as

president of the Commission of the United States to the

Philippine Islands, the university progressing during his

absence, and showing that it has a life of its own and is

not dependent even on the most gifted of presidents.



On laying down the duties of the university presidency,

it did not seem best to me to remain in its neighborhood

during the first year or two of the new administration. 

Any one who has ever been in a position similar

to mine at that period will easily understand the reason. 

It is the same which has led thoughtful men in the

churches to say that it is not well to have the old pastor

too near when the new pastor is beginning his duties. 

Obedient to this idea of leaving my successor a free hand, my

wife and myself took a leisurely journey through England,

France, and Italy, renewing old acquaintances and making

new friends.  Returning after a year, I settled down

again in the university, hoping to complete the book for

which I had been gathering materials and on which I had

been working steadily for some years, when there came the

greatest calamity of my life,--the loss of her who had been

my main support during thirty years,--and work became

for a time, an impossibility.  Again I became a wanderer,

going, in 1888, first to Scotland, and thence, being ordered

by physicians to the East, went again through France and

Italy, and extended the journey through Egypt, Greece

and Turkey.  Of the men and things which seemed most

noteworthy to me at that period I speak in other chapters.  

From the East I made my way leisurely to Paris, with

considerable stops at Buda-Pesth, Vienna, Ulm, Munich

Frankfort-on-the-Main, Paris, London, taking notes in

libraries, besides collecting books and manuscripts.



Returning to the United States in the autumn of 1889,

and settling down again in my old house at Cornell, I was

invited to give courses of historical lectures at various

American universities, especially one upon the ``Causes

of the French Revolution,'' at Johns Hopkins, Columbian

University in Washington, the University of Pennsylvania,

Tulane University in New Orleans, and Stanford

University in California.  Excursions to these institutions

opened a new epoch in my life; but of this I shall speak

elsewhere.



During this period of something over fifteen years, I

have been frequently summoned from these duties, which

were especially agreeable to me--first, in 1892, as minister

to Russia; next, in 1896, as a member of the Venezuelan

Commission at Washington; and, in 1897, as ambassador

to Germany.  I have found many men and things which

would seem likely to draw me away from my interest in

Cornell; but, after all, that which has for nearly forty

years held, and still holds, the deepest place in my

thoughts is the university which I aided to found.



Since resigning its presidency I have, in many ways,

kept in relations with it; and as I have, at various times,

returned from abroad and walked over its grounds,

visited its buildings, and lived among its faculty and

students, an enjoyment has been mine rarely vouchsafed

to mortals.  It has been like revisiting the earth after

leaving it.  The work to which I had devoted myself for

so many years, and with more earnestness than any other

which I have ever undertaken, though at times almost

with the energy of despair, I have now seen successful

beyond my dreams.  Above all, as I have seen the crowd

of students coming and going, I have felt assured that the

work is good.  It was with this feeling that, just before I

left the university for the embassy at Berlin, I erected at

the entrance of the university grounds a gateway, on

which I placed a paraphrase of a Latin inscription noted

by me, many years before, over the main portal of the

University of Padua, as follows:



   ``So enter that daily thou mayest become more learned

        and thoughtful;

     So depart that daily thou mayest become more useful

        to thy country and to mankind.''





I often recall the saying of St. Philip Neri, who, in the

days of the Elizabethan persecutions, was wont to gaze

at the students passing out from the gates of the English

College at Rome, on their way to Great Britain,

and to say:  ``I am feasting my eyes on those martyrs

yonder.''  My own feelings are like his, but happier:  I

feast my eyes on those youths going forth from Cornell

University into this new twentieth century to see great

things that I shall never see, and to make the new time

better than the old.



During my life, which is now extending beyond the

allotted span of threescore and ten, I have been engaged

after the manner of my countrymen, in many sorts of

work, have become interested in many conditions of men

have joined in many efforts which I hope have been of

use; but, most of all, I have been interested in the founding

and maintaining of Cornell University, and by the part I

have taken in that, more than by any other work of my life

I hope to be judged.


