




Natural Value

	by Friedrich Wieser

Book 2

Exchange Value and Natural Value

Chapter 1

Price

    Exchange gives rise to a phenomenon which, originating from
value, reacts upon it in the most powerful manner; this
phenomenon is price. It is not our task here to deal either with
price or with the forms of value depending on it. Our concern --
as will be shown clearly enough later on -- is rather to describe
natural value; i.e. value as we should find it in a community at
a high stage of development carrying on its economic life without
price or exchange. Nevertheless it will not do simply to
disregard exchange and the forms of value connected with it. A
description of social conditions whose actual or possible
realisation is extremely doubtful, would be somewhat purposeless,
if the description did not admit of some applications to life as
we know it. Now to make these applications we must understand
price and exchange value to the extent of rendering a comparison
possible. At the least their general outlines must be indicated,
so as to serve as background against which the clearer picture of
natural value, which we intend to draw, will stand out in relief.
In this way we shall be able to judge whether the fundamental
features in both contrast or agree. 
    For this purpose it will be sufficient to describe that
particular case of the formation of price in which its peculiar
principle can be most clearly discerned. This is at the same time
the normal formation of price under the organised division of
labour. On the one side, we have numerous sellers, whose aim is
the sale of stocks which they have produced for the market, and
which they could not possibly use themselves; on the other side,
we have numerous buyers who compete with each other in buying,
just as the others compete in selling. Menger's theory of price,
and that contained in Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, which goes
considerably farther, may be used as starting-points for our own
statement. Into any further consideration of the abundant
literature existing on the subject of price our present task will
not permit us to enter. 
    Suppose a person wishes to acquire an object, no matter what,
he will not, however strong his desire, agree to pay any price
that may be asked. There is a certain maximum at which he would
rather withdraw from the market than raise his offer further.
This maximum is determined by two valuations: first, the value in
use of the good that is to be acquired (which will be determined
according to the laws laid down in the previous chapters), and,
second, the exchange value of the sum of money that will have to
be paid (the estimate of which will be considered in the next
chapter). The sum of money whose exchange value is equal to the
value in use of the desired good, determines the maximum offer.
To offer more would involve a loss, as more value would be given
than received. This rule holds equally for all would-be buyers
without exception. Every one who thinks of making a purchase puts
both these valuations before him; establishes in his own mind
this equation or equivalence; and comes to the market resolved
not to go beyond it. But although the rule is the same for all
concerned, the results of its application in the individual case
are very unequal, inasmuch as the amounts that enter into the
calculation differ greatly from each other. The value in use of
the good that one buys will vary according to the different
degree of individual need -- which may depend on natural
inclination, on accidental circumstances, or on the degree of
satisfaction already reached -- and according to the amount of
supply one already has. The exchange value of the money, on the
other hand, will vary principally according to the amount of the
person's wealth (see on this subject the following chapter). When
one considers the very great variety of possible economic
situations, it will be seen that the equation or equivalence of
both values cannot fail to be very different from buyer to buyer.
The highest offer can be made by the person who is actuated by
the strongest desire, and is at the same time the richest,
because for him the highest real value is expressed in the
greatest sum of money. What a contrast from the offers of poor
men, in whose case the same degrees of desire are represented
only by a most trifling sum of money, or from the bids of those
whose desire, in the particular case, is so slight that they do
not care to set apart anything but a small sum towards its
satisfaction! 
    If we begin with the highest equivalent, that of the man who
is the richest and the most anxious to obtain the goods, and come
down gradually to the lowest, we shall obtain a descending scale
of maximum offers. By way of example we shall assume that these
range, in the hands of a hundred purchasers, from ? down to 1s.;
and we shall assume, first, for simplicity's sake, that each
purchaser is desirous to buy only one single good or one single
item. 
    Here we can see clearly what is the power that must decide
the competition of prices. A skilled seller may at times succeed
in inducing an inexperienced buyer to pay a price which goes
beyond his maximum; but, as a rule, the sellers will not be able
to do more than drive the buyers to their maximum. The endeavour
of a seller, who is honest but looks to his own advantage and
acts purely according to his own interest, will be to find out
those, among all the buyers, who can pay most, and to drive them,
if possible, to the margin of their purchasing power. On the
other hand, the would-be buyers will try to buy as much below
that as is possible. The inter-competition of buyers, therefore,
is to the advantage of sellers, and the inter-competition of
sellers is to the advantage of buyers. We shall now see how far
it is possible for each side to achieve its object. We assume as
before that the sellers are forced to get rid of the entire
quantity of goods they have brought to market, aid have no wish
to reserve any part of it for their own use, the goods having
been produced for sale and being of no personal use to the
sellers. 
    Supposing one single good is put upon the market, it will
obviously -- if all are equally alive to their own advantage --
fall to that buyer who has the highest purchasing power, viz.
that one whose money equivalent we put down at ?. He is in a
position which enables him to exclude all competing buyers, and
he will do so if he understands his own interest. He must, of
course, make up his mind to go the length of 99/, as this is the
price to which his most dangerous competitor may go, -- that one
whose purchasing power stands next to his own. And as he, for his
own part, is unable to give more than 100/, the price settles
between 99/ and 100/. 
    Suppose, again, that two goods are put on the market; the one
must fall to the first, the other to the second in the series of
competing buyers. The price paid by the latter, if rightly
determined, must lie between 99/ and, 98/; that is, between his
own equivalent and that of the next competitor, -- the buyer whom
he must outbid if he would not have his acquisition of the
desired good disputed. But that buyer, again, whom we called the
first, will not, under these circumstances, pay any higher price.
There is now no necessity for him to offer more than, 99/; it
will suffice if he, along with the second buyer, outbid the third
buyer's offer of 98/. Whoever buys in an open market, and from
competing sellers, pays for the same article the same price as is
paid by every one else. However great may be his own purchasing
power, he need not use it to its full extent; there will always
be a seller willing to let him have the good at that same lowest
price which has to be conceded on the market to buyers generally.

    If there are three goods, they will fall to the first three
purchasers, and the price will be fixed equally for all three
goods between 98/ and 97/, -- between the money equivalent of the
third and fourth purchasers. Where there are ten goods the one
price is fixed, for all buyers, between 91/ and 90/; in order to
dispose of all their goods the sellers must keep the price below
91/, and, in order to exclude the other competitors, the buyers
must keep it over 90/. For fifty goods the price will stand
between 51/ and 50/, corresponding to the equivalent of the 50th
and 51st purchasers; for seventy goods it will be between 31/ and
30/, corresponding to the equivalents of the 70th and 71st
purchasers. In short, the larger the stock which has to be sold,
the lower will fall the price, as this permits of the entrance of
more numerous and less capable purchasers, and the market price
established is one and the same for the whole market. If we give
the name of Marginal Buyer (following an expression of
Bohm-Bawerk's) to the weakest buyer, who, all the same, must be
allowed to purchase if the whole stock is to be sold, the law of
price will run thus: Price must at all times settle between the
equivalents of the marginal buyer and that of the buyer who
stands next under him; viz. that one among the excluded
competitors who has the greatest purchasing power. Where
commodities come forward in great quantities and have a large
sale, the degrees of difference between the equivalents of
various buyers, whom we should more correctly consider as classes
of buyers, -- are not great. And for such cases the law of price
may, quite correctly, be still more simply stated as follows:
Price is determined by the money equivalent of the current
marginal buyer, or marginal class of buyers. It settles at a
figure very near it, and indeed a little under it. 
    The very first glance shows us that the law of price is
nearly related to the law of value. The value of a stock
consisting of separate items is determined as a marginal value,
according to the marginal utility of the single good; the price
of a stock which is sold in separate items is also determined as
a marginal amount, according to the purchasing power of the
marginal buyer of the single good. In both cases what decides,
is, on the one side, the amount of the stock, -- addition to
which shifts the margin and lessens the determining amount, while
diminution enlarges it -- and, on the other side, the want with
its varying gradations. In the case of price, however, there is,
along with the degree of want, another determining fact which
does not exist in the case of value. This fact is the valuation
of money from the side of the buyer; that is to say, his wealth
and income. Before however proceeding to examine the exceedingly
important effects of this fact, we must assure ourselves that the
law of price just explained holds also in the case where buyers,
instead of desiring to purchase one single good, desire to
purchase several or more than one. Only if this is the case can
the law have any real interest for us. 
    We need not waste much time over this point. Such a buyer
will have in his mind a maximum offer determined in the manner
just described. The collective value in use of the goods to be
acquired, estimated in a sum of money whose exchange value,
according to the subjective valuation of the would-be purchaser,
is equal to this value in use, gives the maximum. The more items
there are to calculate, the greater will be the maximum, reckoned
as a whole, but the smaller will be the maximum of the single
item, because in this case the value in use of the unit will be
proportionally less (and the higher also will rise the exchange
value of the money as consequence of the increased expenditure on
the whole). If e.g. a person were willing to buy 10 goods at a
shilling each, but were made by the seller to buy 20 instead, he
would be able to give only a smaller price per item, as the
larger purchase would bring with it a smaller utility, and at the
same time the larger expenditure would be more heavily felt. At
no time, however, will any purchaser -- and this is our most
weighty proposition -- consent to pay anything but one and the
same price for one and the same article, and that price will be
the equivalent of the current "marginal item," say the 10th good
in the case of 10 items, or the 20th in that of 20 items --
always assuming that the market is an open one, and the buyer at
liberty to purchase more or less according to his pleasure. If in
any open market a price were demanded for any particular good
which was in excess of the money estimate of the marginal good,
the buyer would do better to abstain from purchasing this
particular good, for which he would have to pay more than its
value. The same considerations which -- in estimating the value
in use of a stock that may be divided up at pleasure -- lead to
every good, without exception, being valued at its marginal
utility, also necessitate that, in the purchase of a stock which
may be greater or less according to desire, for every good
without exception only the equivalent of the marginal utility
shall be paid. And here we see that the laws of value which we
have already explained have a direct influence on the laws of
price, and that the latter could not be understood without the
former.(1*) If this is once established there is little more to
say. At every extension o?his purchases the buyer will calculate
his maximum. If we were to add together the calculations of all
buyers we should obtain the quantities of goods which might be
placed against every conceivable price. Where goods are held for
high figures only small quantities will be sold, and that to the
most "capable" buyers for the satisfaction of their most urgent
demand. Where prices are low larger quantities will be sold,
partly to the richest buyers to meet their less urgent demand,
partly to others who are less "capable." But, at a fixed price,
only a fixed amount will be demanded and may be sold. If now
sellers, on their side, come to market with a fixed quantity of
goods which must be entirely got rid of, they will find the price
already determined. It is that price at which just this amount is
demanded. 
    Here again we have the same determinant facts; -- the amount
of supply already owned, the degree of want or desire; and the
purchasing power of the buyers. The two latter have, however, the
peculiarity that what decides is not simply the money equivalent
of the marginal purchaser, or the marginal class of purchasers,
but the money equivalent of the marginal purchaser, or class of
purchasers, for the marginal good or goods. 
    Where sellers do not wish to part with their whole supply,
but to retain a portion, either for their own use or for future
sale in some altered condition of the market; where, instead of
free competition on both sides, some monopoly exists, or the
sale, instead of being public and open to all, takes place
privately and in small groups or quite in isolation; -- in such
cases our law of price can act only imperfectly or in a greatly
weakened manner. At the same time the characteristic element in
the formation of price -- that the purchasing power of the buyers
is put in the scale -- will always, excepting, at most, the ease
of monopoly on the side of the buyers, be present and retain its
importance. Goods are not paid for simply according to the amount
of utility (i.e. of marginal utility) which they render to the
buyers, but also according to the amount of purchasing power
which the marginal buyers put on that utility. 
    Of the many weighty consequences arising from this
proposition, I shall at present refer only to one. "The highest
prices therefore," (to quote from the Ursprung des Werthes, p.
26) "are obtainable for those goods which are to be had only in
small quantity and are objects of desire to the richest classes;
the prices of such goods rise till all but the wealthiest classes
-- even those groups of the middle classes who are in most
comfortable circumstances -- are excluded from the circle of
purchasers. Goods which, owing to their inferior quality, are
desired only by the poorer classes obtain extremely low prices,
as also do those goods of better quality which are so plentiful
that the poorer classes must be admitted, to a considerable
degree, within the circle of purchasers. Medium prices are
reached by those goods of which the middle classes form the
majority of the purchasers, those who have small means either
being entirely excluded from purchase, or entering the struggle
of competition only in so far as will satisfy their intensest
sensation of desire for such goods. Changes in the economic
possibilities of great classes in a community will naturally
induce changes in the prices of goods. The greater the
inequalities of wealth, the greater will be the differences in
price. Luxuries will rise in price when great fortunes increase,
and will fall when they decrease."(2*)

NOTES:

1. Here we have a proof from experience for our statement in Book
I, chap. ix that (for the same owner) the separate items of a
stock, so far as they are equal to each other, have the same use
value, and are all valued according to the amount of the marginal
utility. One and the same buyer will not consent to pay other
than one price for the similar items which are all bought at the
same time: he will not pay more for one than for another, and for
none will he pay a higher sum than the marginal equivalent. This
shows that he values them all equally, and all according to the
same marginal amount. Otherwise there would be nothing to prevent
his paying different prices for them, and possibly paying more
than the marginal equivalent for a great many of them -- indeed
for all except one, the marginal item. 

2. It is as result of the recognition of this principle that we
first arrive at a complete understanding of the remarkable
phenomenon which has occupied the attention of so many theorists;
that the value of goods which can quite well be done without,
such as diamonds, may be so much greater than that of the
indispensable necessaries of life; the value of gold, for
instance, so much higher than that of iron. It has already been
shown, in the elementary theory of value, that the value in use
of an entirely insignificant good must be greater than that of a
much more useful one when the marginal utility of the former is,
owing to its scarcity, comparatively high, while that of the
latter, by reason of its superfluity, has fallen very low down on
the scale. Even greater differences are found, under certain
circumstances, in prices, and consequently in the estimates of
exchange value, than are shown in the different estimates of use
value. Diamonds and gold stand exceptionally high in price
because they are luxuries, valued and paid for according to the
purchasing power of the richest classes; while the coarser food
stuffs and iron are low in price, because they are common goods,
in regard to which the decisive factor is the purchasing power
and the valuation of the poor. 



Chapter 2

Exchange Value in the Subjective Sense

    The fact that goods can be bought and sold gives a new and
powerful impulse to the estimating of values in all individual
economies which exchange with one another. In the housekeeping of
a Crusoe only the value in use of things obtains; whereas, in all
individual economies which trade with each other, exchange value
also has to be considered. The best explanation of the nature of
exchange value, of its relation to value in use, and of the
services which it renders to the individual economy, will be got
if we examine separately the different cases of its occurrence. 
    Money is always, and by all who possess it, estimated
according to its exchange value. Its use consists in the spending
of it, -- in the parting with it in purchase of other goods (1*)
that are expected to satisfy those sensations of want which would
otherwise have no provision. The exchange value of money is the
anticipated use value of the things which can be obtained for it.
The law, therefore, which obtains for the latter obtains for the
former; it is demand and supply, according as these express
themselves in marginal utility, that decide the exchange value.
The various things which determine money value to the individual
are the following: -- the amount of money which is at his
disposal; the nature and quantity of the goods which can be
obtained under the existing market conditions and prices; the
utility which those goods are able to give, as also the utility
already secured by possessions otherwise acquired; and, lastly,
the amount and urgency of demand.(2*) 
    The unit of money always receives its value from the least
important expenditure which, in the circumstances of the
possessor, it serves economically to defray; every larger sum of
money, and the entire amount of money owned, contains this
marginal unit value as often as there are units. It is inevitable
that different persons give very various estimates of value to
the same sum of money. The circumstance which most largely
influences these estimates is amount of wealth and income.(5*)
The penny is more to the poor man than the shilling to the rich.
Every one must be conscious how very important it is, for the
proper ordering of his own economic affairs, that he should have
an exact idea of the value which money has for him. No one is
utterly ignorant of this, and with every good householder the
knowledge is almost a part of himself. 
    Besides money, all goods which are made or held for sale are
estimated by their possessors according to this exchange value,
-- whether it be that the owner cannot himself make use of them,
because they are unsuited to his personal needs, or that,
although he might be able to use them, the utility they would
furnish seems too trifling to be weighed against the proceeds of
a sale.(4*) The proximate basis of valuation is the expected
money proceeds, or the exchange value of that money; the ultimate
basis is that use value which is anticipated from the exchange
value of the money proceeds. Again the estimate of value leads us
back to use value, and again the law of marginal utility obtains.
The same good on the same market obtains for all sellers the same
price, but how different are the valuations of that good on the
part of those whose whole yearly income is dependent on their
sale, as compared with those whose enjoyment would scarcely surer
were they to do without selling them from one year's end to the
other! 
    Finally, numerous goods which their owners have not the
smallest intention of selling, are estimated by their exchange
value. In frustration we may make use of the example which
Bohm-Bawerk, who was the first to examine this particular
instance, gives in his Werth (p. 37). A poor man values his
overcoat on account of the use he expects from it as a defence
against cold, knowing well that, should he lose the coat, he will
be exposed to all the severity of the winter weather, as he does
not possess sufficient means to purchase another. Even to a man
in better circumstances the loss of his overcoat would be a loss;
but in this case it could and would be replaced at the price of
making another. The rich man, therefore, will not value his coat
according to its utility, but according to the cost of procuring
it; in his estimation this cost will stand lower than the
utility, and to that cost he can always reduce the injury he
suffers from its loss. Cases of this kind of valuation by
exchange value are innumerable. All household goods which, when
lost or stolen, can be replaced by purchase are thus valued. Here
we see that the proximate basis for valuation is the market price
at which the purchase can he made, while the ultimate basis is
again a use value; that, namely, which is anticipated in the
valuation of the purchase price.(5*) To sum up. The exchange
value which we have here explained is that value which is
ascribed to goods, either by reason of the owners' intention to
sell them, or because of the possibility of replacing them by
purchase. More briefly stated, it is that value which attaches to
goods on account of an anticipated act of exchange. Exchange
value in this sense and use value are of the same nature; the
former is derived from the latter, and is one of its forms of
development. Both forms of value follow the same general laws;
both are subjective; and the amount of both varies according to
personal circumstances. The price of an article never completely
expresses the exchange value it has for its owner. This depends
further upon the "personal equation" of money to him. 
    Subjective exchange value cannot be absent in any individual
economy without causing the greatest confusion in all its
exchange relations. The "personal equation" of money is
indispensable in every economy, in order that we may weigh
against each other goods estimated according to their use value,
and goods estimated according to their exchange value. Without it
no expenditure, no purchase, no sale could be logically made. The
poor man could not enter the market as a poor man, nor the rich
man as a rich. Every separate act of exchange depends upon it,
and thus not only the regulation of individual economies, but the
whole of exchange depends upon it. 
    It is most wonderful that a fact of such universal practice,
and of so great importance, has, until quite lately, been almost
entirely neglected by theory. Menger was the first to give it a
clear theoretical explanation, and to adopt it in his system; and
it is not the least of his many services to economics. 

NOTES:

1. Or, as we say simply, in purchase of goods -- money and goods
being generally thought of as in opposition to each other. 

2. For instance, the value of a shilling to me depends (1) on the
number of shillings I have to spend; (2) on what and how much I
can buy in the shops for a shilling; (3) on what use I can make
of the shilling's worth of goods when I get them -- which, again,
depends (a) on how much I have of similar goods already; and (b)
on my natural or acquired capacity of consuming or employing such
goods. -- W.S.

3. See Jevons, p. 152. 

4. Of course the author does not mean that the consideration of
possible personal use of his goods ever comes into the mind of
the maker or merchant who supplies the market. Their "use" to him
is their "exchange." Wieser is only making out the logical point
that even goods made for sale would not be estimated at their
exchange value if it were not that the personal use is less than
the exchange use. -- W.S. 

5. On the change of motive which results from this in the
conflict of price, see Bohm-Bawerk's Werth (p. 515). I may
perhaps be allowed to point out that in my Ursprung des Werthes
(p. 185) I alluded briefly to the case described above. 




Chapter 3

Exchange Value in the Objective Sense


    No one can take his own personal valuation of money, and of
the money value of goods, outside of himself, and apply it to
other people. No one will persuade a business man to let him have
a commodity at half-price simply by proving that it is more
difficult for him to procure the half-price than for some other
person to procure double the price. And no business man could
sell an article at twice the market price, simply because he
could prove that the double gain was necessary to enable him to
satisfy his most urgent wants. Every one needs to have an exact
subjective estimate of the value of money to himself, as a
private individual economising his own resources, in order to
decide for himself what attitude he may take up with regard to
things outside of him. But this personal attitude can have no
effect on the movement of goods in the great economic exchange
between one economy and another, or in the end between any
economy and his own, except in so far as he may succeed in
influencing the prices of goods. It is the prices that absolutely
decide in exchange. Goods fall to those who pay the highest
prices, and -- what is most important -- the amount expended upon
production is regulated by the prices expected from the sale of
the goods. Those goods which will be sold at the highest prices
attract the most means of production. The rank of goods in
economic exchange -- their external economic power -- is
absolutely decided by their prices, however individuals may judge
as to their intrinsic importance. 
    When we speak generally of the value of goods we mean the
economic rank given them by their prices. A good whose market
price is ?00 has, in the common usage of speech, absolutely, and
for every one, ten times more value than one whose price is only
?0. The dearest good is, in the ordinary use of words, also the
most valuable. But we must make one single limitation: goods have
ascribed to them as value only those prices which are paid for
them in the usual run of cases. Exceptional prices, usurious
prices, and "cut" prices form no foundation for value; and
accordingly goods whose prices fluctuate greatly have, in common
usage, no fixed "intrinsic" value.
    As a matter of fact some particular designation is
indispensable for the ranking of goods in economic exchange, and
it is impossible to find any other designation than that of
value. And this not simply because we are forced to it from the
outside as it were, by ordinary usage of speech, but because it
essentially justifies itself. What subjective value does for the
individual economy, -- measuring every outlay and every return,
and deciding the amount of consumption that is permissible and
the extent to which production may be extended, -- is done for
economy generally by this ranking of goods as it is determined by
relation to the objective prices. It is the measure for outlay
and returns, and upon it distribution and production are
dependent. But it must be emphasised that the word value alters
its original sense somewhat, when transferred from the subjective
relation to wants to the objective relation to price. Subjective
value represents a distinct feeling; that of being dependent upon
the possession of a good for the satisfaction of a want, -- a
distinct degree of personal interest in goods. Objective value,
on the other hand, merely represents a definite price; a definite
amount of payment which is expected or required in buying and
selling. The former has its measure in the different gradations
of desire, the latter in the quantities of coin, -- in the
figures of the price. 
    Of course internal valuations of personal interest do, always
and without exception, attach to objective value also, but these
valuations are only subjective, being greater for one and smaller
for another. Objective value or price is not in the least the
expression of the economic valuation of goods, even when it is
the result of economic competition, and of the individual
valuations of all the different members of the economic
community. Price is a social fact, but it does not denote the
estimate put upon goods by society.(2*) Luxuries are paid for
more highly than necessaries, but who would affirm that they are
therefore of greater social importance? Those very persons who,
on the market, come to an agreement regarding the price of goods
-- compelled thereto by the power of circumstances -- will each
reserve his own judgment upon the importance of the goods to him
personally; and that authority which is earliest called upon to
deliver the social judgment, the government, is universally
considered to be the furthest removed from recognising the prices
of goods as a measure of their social importance. A government,
indeed, is, for the most part, concerned with the carrying
through of just such economic tasks as could not be justified by
their money return, if they were not justified by their utility. 
    In what follows, when the word "exchange value" occurs, I
shall always mean "exchange value in the objective sense." There
is no need to formulate the law of "exchange value"; we know it
already, if only in a general way. It is the law of price.(2*) 

NOTES:

1. The ordinary conception, which makes price the social estimate
put upon goods, has to the superficial judgment the attraction of
simplicity. A good A whose market price is ?00 is not only ten
times as dear as B whose market price is ?0, but it is also
absolutely and for every one ten times as valuable. In our
conception the matter is much more complicated, and according to
it we obtain the following propositions. 1. A is paid for with
ten times as much money as B: its price is ten times greater. 2.
Its objective exchange value is also ten times greater -- the
weightiest consequence of which is that ten times the cost may,
and, if practicable, will be expended upon its production. 3. But
these relations of price and of objective value do not in the
least degree correspond with the relative position of the two
goods in regard to their economic importance or subjective
valuation. Price alone forms no basis whatever for an estimate of
the economic importance of the goods. We must go further and find
out their relation to wants. But this relation to want can only
be realised and measured individually. Suppose both goods are
owned by the same person (or by people under exactly similar
conditions of want and provision), A will, of course, have ten
times the importance of B. But it may just as well happen that A
has exactly the same importance for one owner as B has for
another; it may indeed happen that A, in spite of its greater
exchange value, has for its owner, supposing him to be a rich
man, even less value than B has to its owner, supposing him to be
a poor man. If there are many goods of the class A and many of
the class B, the individual valuations of the various owners will
be widely diverse, and a unanimous judgment is not to be
expected. And the question how it is possible to unite those
divergent individual valuations into one social valuation, is one
that cannot be answered quite so easily as those imagine who are
rash enough to conclude that price represents the social estimate
of value. 
    See further, on the relation of objective to subjective
exchange value, my Ursprung des Werthes (pp. 10 and 21; also
Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, introd., etc.), and Sax (chapters xlviii and
xlix). 

2. Exchange value is, so far as concerns its application, without
doubt the most important form of value, inasmuch as it governs
the largest sphere; -- that of industrial economy generally.
Political economy, outside that chapter where the theory of value
is given, is almost exclusively concerned with it. No wonder,
then, that theoretical treatises have taken it as their end. But
application is one thing and explanation another. To explanation
subjective value is chief in importance, for only through it can
exchange value be reached. Subjective value is the original and
perfect form of value; exchange value taken by itself and
unrelated to subjective value is imperfect and unintelligible.
What does it signify to say that one article costs this and
another that price in money, if we cannot say how money and
prices are themselves valued? Theorists who have confined
themselves to the examination of exchange value, or, what comes
to the same thing, of price, may have succeeded in discovering
certain empirical laws of changes in amounts of value, but they
could never unfold the real nature of value, and discover its
true measure. As regards these questions, so long as examination
was confined to exchange value, it was impossible to get beyond
the formula that value lies in the relation of exchange; -- that
everything is so much more valuable the more of other things it
can be exchanged for. Why the exchanged things had value; why
things generally were worth anything to us; and how this value
was to be measured; -- these theories could never explain nor
hope to explain. Value was conceived of relatively, by referring
one thing to another; -- as the ratio of valuable things.
Absolutely and by itself value was not to be understood. It is
significant of this inception to state that one thing cannot be
an object of value in itself; that a second must be present
before the first can be valued. 
    Theory has only very gradually shaken itself free from this
misconception, this circle. Where an absolute theory was
attempted -- such as the labour theory, or that which explained
value as usefulness -- some logical leap generally reconnected it
with the relative conception. It was forced into this by the
overestimate of exchange value from which it seemed impossible to
get free. A striking example of this is Ricardo's theory of
value. As a matter of fact value is still chiefly regarded
relatively. German literature has for long had the great advance
of much penetrating criticism of exchange value, and of manifold
attempts to supplement it, but it has nevertheless failed in any
final solution. Among the later reformers of the theory of value,
Jevons is distinguished for the strictness and accuracy with
which he separates the two conceptions of value from one another,
but he fails to construct a theory of subjective value (see
second note to Book I. chap. ix), and to determine the functions
of both kinds of value. Menger, on the other hand, has a complete
theory of subjective value, but makes no attempt to develop
objective value. 
    My own investigations in the Ursprung des Werthes are almost
entirely occupied with subjective value. And even favourable
critics have concluded from this that I do not recognise
objective value. The reproach is the less merited that (on page
38) I have especially acknowledged the necessity for an objective
conception of value. The relation of subjective and objective
value has been best described by Bohm-Bawerk, and -- particularly
as regards the distinction of their separate functions in
economic life -- by Sax. 


Chapter 4

The Antinomy of Exchange Value

    Exchange value -- that is, as just explained, objective
exchange value -- shows the same movement as subjective value.
With every addition to the amount to be sold (demand remaining
constant), goes a fall in the return got for the single item,
while the total return rises: this is the "up grade" of value.
But, when a certain point is reached, the total return also
falls: this is the "down grade" of value. And where, finally,
there is universal superfluity, no price whatever can be
obtained. 
    The causes of this movement are even stronger in the case of
exchange value. It is induced not only by the natural limitation
of wants, inasmuch as these cannot reach beyond the point of
satiation, but also by the actual limitation of the purchasing
power of many buyers, who have not means enough to satisfy their
wants to the point of satiation. Goods which would still find
purchasers, so far as wants are concerned, often find no sale in
the market, and consequently the upper limit of price is often
reached sooner than that of subjective value. 
    There would, nevertheless, be just as little reason to speak
of an antinomy of exchange value as of an antinomy of subjective
value, were it not that the economic order, under which society
exists, gives to exchange value an efficiency in the general
business economy, which goes far beyond that of subjective value
in the individual economy. In every self-contained private
economy utility is the highest principle; but, in the business
world, wherever the prodding of society with goods is in the
hands of undertakers who desire to make a gain out of it, and to
obtain a remuneration for their services, exchange value takes
its place. The private undertaker is not concerned to provide the
greatest utility for society generally; his aim is rather to
obtain the highest value for himself: -- which is at the same
time his highest utility. Utility approves itself as the first
principle in the undertaker's economy; but, just because of this,
in the conflict between exchange value and social utility, it is
exchange value which is victorious, -- so far at least as the
undertaker has power to act according to his own interest. 
    Proudhon, therefore, is right -- although he may not have
formulated his contention quite correctly -- when he affirms the
antinomy of exchange value. Every undertaker finds it to his
advantage when he succeeds in turning free goods which he cannot
sell, into economically scarce goods which he can sell. And it is
to his advantage when he is successful in reducing the amount to
be sold, and raising the returns, just as it is to his
disadvantage to increase the amount that is to be sold, and
thereby diminish the returns. 
    The conclusion which Proudhon draws from this -- that the
discord can only be resolved by a socialist organisation of
society -- is nevertheless incorrect. 
    In the main the antinomy does not exist in the "up grade" of
the movement of value. And in this up grade is found by far the
greater number of the actual forms of value. Further, the
antinomy only holds in so far as the undertaker is able to rule
society. But where there is really free competition no undertaker
has this power. Under free competition, social utility will be --
as it ought to be the first principle of economic life. Here each
of the competing undertakers is bound to strive to widen to the
utmost the compass of his undertaking. The increase of supply
which the individual producer causes is, in relation to supply as
a whole, too trifling to have any material effect in lowering
prices, while it materially increases the amount which the
individuals have to sell. Thus every one calculates, and, on the
strength of this calculation, production is stretched to the
utmost possible extent. The economic history of our own time is
rich in examples which prove that competition can press prices
far on the down grade of exchange value. 
    In any remaining cases, society -- if it is to escape injury
-- will, of course, require to carry on production, or have it
carried on by individuals, on common account; but such cases are
too few to call for the socialist organisation of society. From
the first, governments have undertaken such responsibilities. The
antinomy of exchange value does not necessitate a complete
overturn of the free economic order of society; it merely
requires that it be supplemented by suitable interference on the
part of governments. 

Chapter 5

The Service of Exchange Value in General Economy

    If we consider the elements which go to form exchange value,
we are forced to the conclusion that the charge of antinomy is
not the heaviest that may be raised against it. Entirely apart
from this, the law of its formation remains such that, even in
the most favourable circumstances -- say when there is no
disturbing element, no suspicion of force, dishonesty, or error,
and when the transaction is one we are accustomed to call free
and just, -- exchange value is calculated to render its service
in economic life only in an imperfect manner, and with
consequences which society feels to be serious evils. 
    It must be premised that the service rendered by exchange
value to general or industrial economy, as compared with the
service rendered by subjective value to the self-contained
economy, is greater by one additional task. In the latter, value
has only to measure outlay and return materially against each
other, in the former, it must also do so personally. The material
or economic-technical service of exchange value relates chiefly
to production. Here it has the function of control. It gives the
measure for production and for expenditure of costs. Goods should
be produced according to the rank of their value, and other goods
should be sacrificed for them as costs only in so far as the
comparison between the value of amount produced and the value of
costs allows. The personal service of exchange value, on the
other hand, comes in, principally, in the distribution of the
products acquired among the separate individuals taking part in
the exchange; in this case value is the measure of the personal
acquisition. To every participator in the great economic process
must be assigned a return equal in value to the amount of his
outlay -- whether it be outlay of wealth or expenditure of
labour. 
    The exchange value of all goods which are brought upon the
market in stocks or quantities, is measured as a marginal value.
That is to say, each unit of the stock is valued at the same as
the marginal equivalent, and the whole stock is estimated as a
multiple of the unit, -- as product of the amount into the unit
value. So far exchange value gives the same appropriate and
faultless assistance in the economic calculation as marginal
value generally does. Its applicability to this kind of
calculation is indisputable. It is, then, unnecessary to repeat
in detail what has already been said on the subject in general in
in Book I chapter xi. 
    In order, however, properly to appraise the service of
exchange value in economic life, it must be remembered that it
does not contain exactly the same elements as does value in use
in the self-contained economy. The latter simply depends upon
utility: the former is besides dependent upon purchasing power
(see Book II. chap. i). Value in use measures utility; exchange
value measures a combination of utility and purchasing power. The
stock which is greater in use value (in the "up grade") is also
always the richer in utility; the stock which is greater in
exchange value is not necessarily so. In the latter case the
higher value may arise from higher utility, but it may also arise
from the greater wealth of the buyers, and the strong inducement
held out to them to throw their riches into the balance in the
war of competition. 
    In the material service of exchange value, as well as in the
personal, this peculiar method of its formation obtains
importance. As a consequence of it, production is ordered not
only according to simple want, but also according to wealth.
Instead of things which would have the greatest utility, those
things are produced for which the most will be paid. The greater
the differences in wealth, the more striking will be the
anomalies of production. It will furnish luxuries for the wanton
and the glutton, while it is deaf to the wants of the miserable
and the poor. It is therefore the distribution of wealth which
decides how production is set to work, and induces consumption of
the most uneconomic kind: a consumption which wastes upon
unnecessary and culpable enjoyment what might have served to heal
the wounds of poverty.(1*)
    It may be of interest to follow somewhat more particularly
the law of distribution, in so far as it is conditioned by the
law of exchange value. The favouring of the rich, and with it the
perverted employment of goods, really goes much further than the
mere fact of wealth would allow one to suspect. The rich have not
only the advantage over the poor of possessing more means
wherewith to purchase goods; they have the further advantage of
being for the most part in a more favorable position to utilise
their means. In the battle of price the decision lies with the
weakest buyers, who are, as a rule, also the poorest; and price
is adapted to their valuation. They must, therefore, pay for the
goods exactly as highly as they value them, while their stronger
competitors, who pay the same price, pay under their personal
valuation. The beggar and the millionaire eat the same bread and
pay the same price for it; the beggar according to the measure of
his hunger, and the millionaire according to the same measure --
that is, according to the beggar's hunger. The price which the
millionaire might be willing to pay for the bread, supposing he
were hungry and driven to offer his maximum, never comes into the
question. It is only where the rich compete among themselves for
luxuries which they mean to reserve for their own enjoyment, that
they pay according to their own ability, and are measured
according to their own personal standard. 
    But the more the ability of the rich is spared in the
purchasing of necessaries, the greater are the means which they
have over, wherewith to extend and increase the prices they offer
for luxuries, and the more defective is the impulse given by
consumption to production. 
    The law of value in the individual economy is strict, but its
strictness is undoubtedly necessary and salutary. It forbids
satisfaction to go beyond a certain marginal point, namely, the
point beyond which, when everything, including the future, is
carefully weighed, the means possessed at the moment will not
suffice. Any violation of this prohibition brings its own
punishment, when, to make up for the trifling want that has been
rashly satisfied at the moment, a far more urgent desire later on
has to go unsatisfied. The law of price follows the law of value
in demanding a marginal point beyond which purchase must not go,
but it does not present the same unquestionable and material
necessity; and the natural and reasonable strictness of the
prohibition is thereby changed into what seems personal and
inconsistent severity. The man who cannot furnish the price paid
by the marginal buyer is excluded from competition within the
economic circle, just as, in the individual household, the quite
trifling desires are excluded from satisfaction. As in the
household there are marginal wants, so in economic life are there
marginal entities, and anything below that level is permitted to
exist only by way of charity. But while, in the individual
household, the marginal line is drawn naturally, in economic life
generally it is influenced also by the manner of the distribution
of wealth. In the midst of the comfort and luxury of the opulent
classes, law condemns the poor to a restriction, as though there
was no affluence, and nature herself forbade the greater
satisfaction. 
    These are the charges which may be brought against the law of
exchange value. They would soon make short work of it could we
not answer them. The examination of these charges and their
answer does not, however, belong to the theory of value, but to
the greater theory of economics and economical laws; and this
book does not propose even to exhaust the theory of value. I only
wished to explain the elements in the formation of exchange value
so far as is necessary to show clearly what I should like to be
understood by the term "Natural Value." We have now arrived at
this point, and need hesitate no longer in presenting to the
reader my explanation of the expression. The thing itself is not
new to us; the value which we looked at in the first book, under
the elementary theory, is natural value. 

NOTES:

1. On the effect of exchange value on distribution see
Bohm-Bawerk's Werth, p. 510.


Chapter 6

Natural Value


    Even in a community or state whose economic affairs were
ordered on communistic principles, goods would not cease to have
value. Wants there would still be, there as elsewhere; the
available means would still be insufficient for their full
satisfaction; and the human heart would still cling to its
possessions. All goods which were not free would be recognised as
not only useful but valuable; they would rank in value according
to the relation in which the available stocks stood to the
demand; and that relation would express itself finally in the
marginal utility. Social supply and demand, or amount of goods
and utility socially compared with one another, would decide
value. The elementary laws of valuation, as we have explained
them, would be entirely and unlimitedly effective for the whole
community. 
    That value which arises from the social relation between
amount of goods and utility, or value as it would exist in the
communist state, we shall henceforth call "Natural Value."(1*) I
choose the name in full consciousness of the double sense which
an appeal to the "natural" has in the disposition of human
affairs. In its simplicity, purity, and originality it is so
attractive, and at the same time so contradictory to all
experience, that it is doubtful whether it can ever be more than
a dream. So too we shall think of the communistic state as the
perfect state. Everything will be ordered in the best possible
way; there will be no misuse of power on the part of its
officials, or selfish isolation on the part of its individual
citizens; no error or any other kind of friction will ever occur.
Natural value shall be that which would be recognised by a
completely organic and most highly rational community.(2*)
    The laws which we found in the elementary theory of value are
its natural laws, as those would take shape under the simplified
assumption that goods come into men's disposal without requiring
to be first produced. If we do away with this assumption we
obtain the natural laws of value in production. It will now be
our task to find out these laws. We shall ask ourselves what
productive instruments would be likely to obtain value in a
communistic state, whether labour alone, or also land and
capital; in what measure they would obtain value; whether there
is a natural rent from land and a natural interest on capital --
and so on through all the circumstances of production, till we
arrive at the question of cost value and its natural measurement.

    The relation of natural value to exchange value is clear.
Natural value is one element in the formation of exchange value.
It does not, however, enter simply and thoroughly into exchange
value. On the one side, it is disturbed by human imperfection, by
error, fraud, force, chance; and on the other, by the present
order of society, by the existence of private property, and by
the differences between rich and poor, -- as a consequence of
which latter a second element mingles itself in the formation of
exchange value, namely, purchasing power. In natural value goods
are estimated simply according to their marginal utility; in
exchange value, according to a combination of marginal utility
and purchasing power. In the former, luxuries are estimated far
lower, and necessaries, comparatively, much higher than in the
latter. Exchange value, even when considered as perfect, is, if
we may so call it, a caricature of natural value; it disturbs its
economic symmetry, magnifying the small and reducing the great. 
    The fact that natural value forms an element in the formation
of exchange value, puts our investigation in touch with reality,
and gives it its empirical importance. The value which would be
recognised by an extremely rational and completely united
commonwealth is not entirely foreign to that value which is
recognised by the society of to-day. Every individual desires for
his own part to form a rational judgment about value, but it is
not always within his power to do so; and, in the coming into
connection with others in exchange, the final effect becomes
altered, as I said, into caricature. There are innumerable more
or less correct approximations to natural value. Every one finds
them within his own economic circle; and even when the single
circles come together these individual valuations are not
entirely lost, but only somewhat altered. It will be of interest
to investigate closely to what extent the phenomena of exchange
value are of natural origin, and how great, accordingly, is the
formative power of natural value in existing conditions of
society. I believe the sequel will show that it is enormously
greater than is usually supposed. Land rent is, perhaps, the
formation of value that is most frequently attacked in our
present economy. Now I believe our examination will show that,
even in the communistic state, there must be land rent. Such a
state must, under certain circumstances, calculate the return
from land, and must, from certain portions of land, calculate a
greater return than from others: the circumstances upon which
such a calculation is dependent are essentially the same as those
which to-day determine the existence of rent, and the height of
rent, The only difference lies in this, that, as things now are,
rent goes to the private owner of the land, whereas, in a
communistic state, it would fall to the entire united community.
In such a state it would not form personal property, but it would
be calculated separately in the total income of the community,
and that on essential grounds; -- namely, in order to find out
what is the quota which individual lands contribute to the total
return, and to judge therefrom what outlay may and ought to be
expended to obtain this quota. In other words, the
economic-technical service, that of controlling production, would
remain, while the personal part it plays, as a source of private
income, would fall away. Should our examination succeed in
establishing this and similar facts, no one will be able to deny
that it helps us to a clearer understanding of existing economic
conditions. It would show what part of the present forms of value
not only exists for the satisfaction of self-interest, but
renders at the same time a technical service to social economy;
it would show therefore what part must never be given up, on pain
of leaving the economy without power of calculation and without
control.
    On this account the examination of natural value will be
useful, as well for those who wish to understand the economy of
the present, as for those who wish to evolve a new one. Defenders
of the existing order of things, equally with those who are
fighting to prepare the way for a new and ideal state, may,
without prejudice and without going against their principles,
unite in this study. Natural value is a neutral phenomenon, the
examination of which, whatever may come of it, can prove nothing
for and nothing against socialism. If land rent and interest on
capital are natural phenomena of value, they will have their
place in the socialistic state also, without necessarily breaking
it up and leaving the way clear again for capitalists and
landowners. Every natural form of value may be left its material
office, without connecting with it any personal privilege of
income. 
    So little is natural value a weapon against socialism, that
socialists could scarcely make use of a better witness in favour
of it. Exchange value can have no severer criticism than that
which exposes its divergences from the natural measurement,
although, indeed, this forms no particular proof for the essence
of socialism. As is well known, however, the socialists have
another theory of value. This we shall find again and again in
contradiction with the claims that rest on natural value, and
although we say nothing against socialism, but wish to remain
throughout within the neutral sphere of natural value, we shall
be obliged again and again to speak against the socialists. 
    It will be of advantage to the statement which follows if we
first try to make a general survey of the socialist theory of
value. 

NOTES:

1. What I propose to call "Natural Value" has been hitherto
called social use value. With the word "value in use"
(Gebrauchswerth) are connected too many misunderstandings to
permit of our using it without danger. Use value is commonly
understood as usefulness, or something closely related to that,
and not as actual value. It is, moreover, rarely used in
connection with production, and I wish to speak as much of the
value of production goods and of costs, as of the direct use
value of consumption goods. 

2. The question whether such a community can or ever will exist
is one which does not in the least concern us. We shall content
ourselves with imagining it, and it will be an excellent aid in
raising what would remain. of our present economy if we could
think away private property, as well as all the troubles which
are a consequence of human imperfection. Most theorists,
particularly those of the classical school, have tacitly made
similar abstractions. In particular, that point of view from
which price becomes a social judgment of value, really amounts to
a disregard of all the individual differences which emerge in
purchasing power, and which separate price from natural value. A
great many theorists have thus written the value theory of
communism without being aware of it, and in doing so have omitted
to give the value theory of the present state. By making our
assumptions quite clear, and guarding against a similar error, we
may do more for value as we find it than they have. 



Chapter 7

The Socialist Theory of Value


    Socialist writers, however much they find to object to in
value as it is in the present day, have little enough to say
concerning its future. They give us very scanty information as to
the part it would have to play in the socialist state. Karl Marx,
in explanation of this reserve, says that "the social relations
of man to his labour and to the products of his labour are here
transparently simple." It would appear that value, in the
socialist sense, resembles those organs of the human body of
whose existence, when diseased, we are painfully conscious, while
in health they are scarcely noticed. Physicians even, who know
their pathology thoroughly, are not able to say what vital
functions they serve. 
    The socialists teach that the one and only source of value is
labour. In the socialist state there are to be only two objects
of value, -- labour, and consumption goods produced by labour.
Land and capital will not be objects of value. Value presupposes
utility, but does not originate in it. It is created by labour,
and the expenditure of labour naturally attracts to itself the
interest of man. Its measure is labour-time, or even the exertion
involved in labour. Of the social services rendered by value only
that of the distribution of goods is retained, and even this only
to a limited extent; the produced consumption goods, estimated
according to their labour-value, are distributed among the
labourers according to the amount of labour service they have
rendered. Productive land and capital are the exclusive property
of the state, and are neither objects nor standards of the
distribution. The other service rendered by value, that of being
the controlling power of social economy, and, in particular, of
production, is not claimed at all. The only claims allowed are
those of utility or of use value, but by "use value" is not to be
understood value in the sense we give to it, but utility pure and
simple, and therefore utility without that peculiar measuring
power which arises from comparison of want and provision. 
    This, in outline, is the socialist programme of the future
for the valuation of goods, -- although, of course, not expressed
in the original language of its authors. In my opinion there has
never been, in the whole course of history, a more important
change contemplated in the social order than that now desired in
economic life; and never has plan of alteration been more
imperfectly thought out. To change a feudal kingdom into a modern
administration, or a monarchy into a republic, or an aristocracy
into a democracy, would be nothing to this; for it is the attempt
at an economic revolution which would affect not only those few
who are interested in political matters, but the whole body of
the people, -- affect them, too, just where they are most
strongly conscious of their own interests. Dreams of political
freedom, of equality, of brotherhood, even the religious dreams
of a kingdom of God on the earth, however fantastically tricked
out, have never betrayed so imperfect a knowledge of their
object, as does the socialist theory of value. These have at
least the excuse that they appeal to feelings of human nature
which may soar to unknown heights, and which, of their very
nature, give nourishment to the most extravagant expectations.
But value is a thing for the most unimpassioned thought. Here it
is wrong for any one to let imagination speak instead of reason,
-- wrong for the academic writer, and ever so much more wrong for
the social reformer and agitator. Not for one day could the
economic state of the future be administered according to any
such reading of value; indeed the first preliminary arrangements
for its introduction would show its utter uselessness. 
    To a certain extent, however, the socialists are justified by
their very opponents. The idea of labour value, and many other
ideas of socialist theory, originated among the bourgeois
economists, and were found by the leaders of the labour party to
be, theoretically, perfectly developed: it only refined to make a
practical application of them for the benefit of the socialist
party. It was hard not to make use of the advantage thus put into
their hands. If it be acknowledged that labour alone creates
value, it seems impossible to deny the claim that the labourer
alone should enjoy the value. In the academic struggle the
socialists undoubtedly got an important tactical advantage
through the unqualified acceptance of that theory -- the theory
held by a large section of their opponents, and a section which,
under the circumstances, might be considered the most formidable.
If all the tremendous conflict of interests could have been ended
by the arguments used by the spokesmen of the socialist party in
their wordy warfare, at a certain period of the literary
development the victory of socialism would probably have been
complete. But, of course, what was good enough in argument would
have broken down in face of facts, for no amount of plausibility
can impose on them, -- and, after vanquishing their opponents
with one theory, the socialists would have required to make up
another to support their position. 
    In the socialist theory of value pretty nearly everything is
wrong. The origin of value, which lies in utility and not in
labour, is mistaken. The relation of supply to demand -- that
fact which impels us to attribute utility to goods, and upon
whose fluctuations depend, in the last resort, the fluctuations
in amount of value -- is overlooked. The objects to which value
attaches are not all embraced, for among those must be included
productive land and capital, both as elements in the calculation
of costs, and also per se. And the service rendered by value in
economic life is only half understood, inasmuch as the most
essential part of it, the material control of economy, is
neglected. 
    All of this we shall require, -- now that we have made
acquaintance with the elementary phenomena, -- to demonstrate in
the circumstances of production. In particular we shall have to
show that, in the natural order of economy, labour is valued
according to its utility, value attaches to land and capital, and
land rent, as well as interest on capital, is calculated among
costs. If this were to be neglected production would become
chaos. 

