





BOOK V







I



B.C. 388. Such was the state of affairs in the Hellespont, so far at

least as Athens and Sparta are concerned. Eteonicus was once more in

Aegina; and notwithstanding that the Aeginetans and Athenians had up

to this time held commercial intercourse, yet now that the war was

plainly to be fought out on the sea, that officer, with the

concurrence of the ephorate, gave permission to any one who liked to

plunder Attica.[1] The Athenians retaliated by despatching a body of

hoplites under their general Pamphilus, who constructed a fort against

the Aeginetans,[2] and proceeded to blockade them by land and sea with

ten warships. Teleutias, however, while threading his way among the

islands in question of contributions, had chanced to reach a point

where he received information of the turn in affairs with regard to

the construction of the fortress, whereupon he came to the rescue of

the beleaguered Aeginetans, and so far succeeded that he drove off the

enemy's blockading squadron. But Pamphilus kept a firm hold on the

offensive fortress, and was not to be dislodged.



[1] Or, "determined to let slip the hounds of war;" or, more

    prosaically, "issued letters of marque." See Grote, "H. G." ix.

    517.



[2] I.e. in Aegina as an {epiteikhisma}.



After this the new admiral Hierax arrived from Lacedaemon. The naval

force was transferred into his successor's hands, and under the

happiest auspices Teleutias set sail for home. As he descended to the

seashore to start on his homeward voyage there was not one among his

soldiers who had not a warm shake of the hand for their old admiral.

Here one presented him with a crown, and there another with a victor's

wreath; and those who arrived too late, still, as the ship weighed

anchor, threw garlands into the sea and wafted him many a blessing

with prayerful lips. I am well aware that in the above incident I have

no memorable story of munificence, peril, or invention to narrate, but


in all sincerity I protest that a man may find food for reflection in

the inquiry what Teleutias had done to create such a disposition in

his subordinates. Here we are brought face to face with a true man's

work more worthy of account than multitudes of riches or adventure.[3]



[3] See Grote, "H. G." ix. 518: "The ideal of government as it

    presented itself to Xenophon was the paternal despotism or

    something like it," {to ethelonton arkhein}. Cf. "Cyrop." passim,

    "Heiro," and his various other compositions.



The new admiral Hierax, taking with him the larger portion of the

fleet, set sail once more for Rhodes. He left behind him twelve

vessels in Aegina under his vice-admiral Gorgopas, who was now

installed as governor of that island. In consequence of this chance

the Athenian troops inside the fortres were more blockaded than the

Aeginetans themselves, so much so that a vote was passed by the

Athenian assembly, in obedience to which a large fleet was manned, and

the garrison, after four months' sojourn in Aegina, were brought back.

But this was no sooner done than they began to be harassed by Gorgopas

and the privateers again. To operate aganst these they fitted out

thirteen vessels, choosing Eunomus as admiral in command. Hierax was

still in Rhodes when the Lacedaemonians sent out a new admiral,

Antalcidas; they believed that they could not find a better mode of

gratifying Tiribazus. Accordingly Antalcidas, after visiting Aegina in

order to pick up the vessels under Gorgopas, set sail for Ephesus. At

this point he sent back Gorgopas with his twelve ships to Aegina, and

appointed his vice-admiral Nicolochus to command the remainder of the

fleet.



Nicolochus was to relieve Abydos, and thither set sail; but in the

course of the voyage turned aside to Tenedos, where he ravaged the

territory, and, with the money so secured, sailed on to Abydos. The

Athenian generals[4] on their side, collecting from Samothrace,

Thasos, and the fortresses in that quarter, hastened to the relief of

Tenedos; but, finding that Nicolochus had continued his voyage to

Abydos, they selected the Chersonese as their base, and proceeded to

blockade him and his fleet of five-and-twenty vessels with the two-

and-thirty vessels under their joint command.



[4] And among the rest Iphicrates and Diotimus. See below, S. 25;

    above, IV. viii. 39.



Meanwhile Gorgopas, returning from Ephesus, fell in with the Athenian

admiral Eunomus, and, shunning an encounter at the moment, sought

shelter in Aegina, which he reached a little before sunset; and at

once disembarking his men, set them down to their evening meal; whilst

Eunomus on his side, after hanging back for a little while, sailed

away. Night fell, and the Athenian, showing the customary signal light

to prevent his squadron straggling, led the way in the darkness.

Gorgopas instantly got his men on board again, and, taking the lantern

for his guide, followed the Athenians, craftily lagging behind a

little space, so as not to show himself or raise any suspicion of his

presence. In place of the usual cry the boatswains timed the rowers by

a clink of stones, and silently the oars slid, feathering through the

waves[5]; and just when the squadron of Eunomus was touching the

coast, off Cape Zoster[6] in Attica, the Spartan sounded the

bugle-note for the charge. Some of Eunomus's vessels were in the act

of discharging their crews, others were still getting to their

moorings, whilst others were as yet only bearing down to land. The

engagement was fought by the light of the moon, and Gorgopas captured

four triremes, which he tied astern, and so set sail with his prizes

in tow towards Aegina. The rest of the Athenian squadron made their

escape into the harbour of Piraeus.



[5] Lit. "the boatswains employing a clink of stones and a sliding

    motion of the oars."



[6] I.e. "Cape Girdle," mod. Cape Karvura. See Tozer, "Geog. of

    Greece," pp. 78, 372.



It was after these events that Chabrias[7] commenced his voyage to

Cyprus, bringing relief to Evagoras. His force consisted at first of

eight hundred light troops and ten triremes, but was further increased

by other vessels from Athens and a body of heavy infantry. Thus

reinforced, the admiral chose a night and landed in Aegina; and

secreted himself in ambuscade with his light troops in hollow ground

some way beyond the temple of Heracles. At break of day, as

prearranged, the Athenian hoplites made their appearance under command

of Demaenetus, and began mounting up between two and three miles[8]

beyond the Kerakleion at Tripurgia, as it is called. The news soon

reached Gorgopas, who sallied out to the rescue with the Aeginetans

and the marines of his vessels, being further accompanied by eight

Spartans who happened to be with him. Not content with these he issued

orders inviting any of the ships' crews, who were free men, to join

the relief party. A large number of these sailors responded. They

armed themselves as best they could, and the advance commenced. When

the vanguard were well past the ambuscade, Chabrias and his men sprang

up from their hiding-place, and poured a volley of javelins and stones

upon the enemy. At the same moment the hoplites, who had

disembarked,[9] were advancing, so that the Spartan vanguard, in the

absence of anything like collective action, were speedily cut down,

and among them fell Gorgopas with the Lacedaemonians. At their fall

the rest of course turned and fled. One hundred and fifty Aeginetans

were numbered among the slain, while the loss incurred by the

foreigners, metics, and sailors who had joined the relief party,

reached a total of two hundred. After this the Athnenians sailed the

sea as freely as in the times of actual peace. Nor would anything

induce the sailors to row a single stroke for Eteonicus--even under

pressure--since he had no pay to give.



[7] According to Diod. xiv. 92, Chabrias had been for some time in

    Corinth. See also above, IV. viii. 24.



[8] Lit. "about sixteen stades."



[9] Or, reading {oi anabebekotes}, "who had scaled the height." See

    Hartman, "Anal. Xen." p. 364.



Subsequently the Lacedaemonians despatched Teleutias once again to

take command of the squadron, and when the sailors saw it was he who

had come, they were overjoyed. He summoned a meeting and addressed

them thus: "Soldiers, I am back again, but I bring with me no money.

Yet if God be willing, and your zeal flag not, I will endeavour to

supply you with provisions without stint. Be well assured, as often as

I find myself in command of you, I have but one prayer--that your

lives may be spared no less than mine; and as for the necessaries of

existence, perhaps it would astonish you if I said I would rather you

should have them than I. Yet by the gods I swear I would welcome two

days' starvation in order to spare you one. Was not my door open in

old days to every comer? Open again it shall stand now; and so it

shall be; where your own board overflows, you shall look in and mark

the luxury of your general; but if at other times you see him bearing

up against cold and heat and sleepless nights, you must apply the

lesson to yourselves and study to endure those evils. I do not bid you

do aught of this for self-mortification's sake, but that you may

derive some after-blessing from it. Soldiers, let Lacedaemon, our own

mother-city, be to you an example. Her good fortune is reputed to

stand high. That you know; and you know too, that she purchased her

glory and her greatness not by faint-heartedness, but by choosing to

suffer pain and incur dangers in the day of need. 'Like city,' I say,

'like citizens.' You, too, as I can bear you witness, have been in

times past brave; but to-day must we strive to be better than

ourselves. So shall we share our pains without repining, and when

fortune smiles, mingle our joys; for indeed the sweetest thing of all

surely is to flatter no man, Hellene or Barbarian, for the sake of

hire; we will suffice to ourselves, and from a source to which honour

pre-eminently invites us; since, I need not remind you, abundance won

from the enemy in war furnishes forth not bodily nutrition only, but a

feast of glory the wide world over."



So he spoke, and with one voice they all shouted to him to issue what

orders he thought fit; they would not fail him in willing service. The

general's sacrifice was just concluded, and he answered: "Good, then,

my men; go now, as doubtless you were minded, and take your evening

meal, and next provide yourselves, please, with one day's food. After

that repair to your ships without delay, for we have a voyage on hand,

whither God wills, and must arrive in time." So then, when the men

returned, he embarked them on their ships, and sailed under cover of

night for the great harbour of Piraeus: at one time he gave the rowers

rest, passing the order to take a snatch of sleep; at another he

pushed forward towards his goal with rise and fall of oars. If any one

supposes that there was a touch of madness in such an expedition--with

but twelve triremes to attack an enemy possessed of a large fleet--he

should consider the calculations of Teleutias. He was under the firm

persuasion that the Athenians were more careless than ever about their

navy in the harbour since the death of Gorgopas; and in case of

finding warships riding at anchor--even so, there was less danger, he

conjectured, in attacking twenty ships in the port of Athens than ten

elsewhere; for, whereas, anywhere outside the harbour the sailors

would certainly be quartered on board, at Athens it was easy to divine

that the captains and officers would be sleeping at their homes, and

the crews located here and there in different quarters.



This minded he set sail, and when he was five or six furlongs[10]

distant from the harbour he lay on his oars and rested. But with the

first streak of dawn he led the way, the rest following. The admiral's

orders to the crews were explicit. They were on no account to sink any

merchant vessel; they were equally to avoid damaging[11] their own

vessels, but if at any point they espied a warship at her moorings

they must try and cripple her. The trading vessels, provided they had

got their cargoes on board, they must seize and tow out of the

harbour; those of larger tonnage they were to board wherever they

could and capture the crews. Some of his men actually jumped on to the

Deigma quay,[12] where they seized hold of various traders and pilots

and deposited them bodily on board ship. So the Spartan admiral

carried out his programme.



[10] Lit. "five or six stades."



[11] See Hartman, "Anal. Xen." pp. 365, 366.



[12] See Grote ("H. G." ix. 523): cf. Thuc. ii. 94, the attempt of

    Brasidas on the port of Megara. For the wealth of Piraeus, Grote

    "H. G." ix. 351. See below, "Pol. Ath." i. 17; "Rev." iii. 13.



As to the Athenians, meanwhile, some of them who got wind of what was

happening rushed from indoors outside to see what the commotion meant,

others from the streets home to get their arms, and others again were

off to the city with the news. The whole of Athens rallied to the

rescue at that instant, heavy infantry and cavalry alike, the

apprehension being that Piraeus was taken. But the Spartan sent off

the captured vessels to Aegina, telling off three or four of his

triremes to convoy them thither; with the rest he followed along the

coast of Attica, and emerging in seemingly innocent fashion from the

harbour, captured a number of fishing smacks, and passage boats laden

with passengers crossing to Piraeus from the islands; and finally, on

reaching Sunium he captured some merchantmen laden with corn or other

merchandise. After these performances he sailed back to Aegina, where

he sold his prizes, and with the proceeds was able to provide his

troops with a month's pay, and for the future was free to cruise about

and make what reprisals chance cast in his way. By such a procedure he

was able to support a full quota of mariners on board his squadron,

and procured to himself the prompt and enthusiastic service of his

troops.



B.C. 388-387. Antalcidas had now returned from the Persian court with

Tiribazus. The negotiations had been successful. He had secured the

alliance of the Persian king and his military co-operation in case the

Athenians and their allies refused to abide by the peace which the

king dictated. But learning that his second in command, Nicolochus,

was being blockaded with his fleet by Iphicrates and Diotimus[13] in

Abydos, he set off at once by land for that city. Being come thither

he took the fleet one night and put out to sea, having first spread a

story that he had invitations from a party in Calchedon; but as a

matter of fact he came to anchorage in Percote and there kept quiet.

Meanwhile the Athenian forces under Demaenetus and Dionysius and

Leontichus and Phanias had got wind of his movement, and were in hot

pursuit towards Proconnesus. As soon as they were well past, the

Spartan veered round and returned to Abydos, trusting to information

brought him of the approach of Polyxenus with the Syracusan[14] and

Italian squadron of twenty ships, which he wished to pick up and

incorporate with his own.



[13] See above; Lysias, "de bon. Arist." (Jebb, "Att. Or." i. p. 327).



[14] See below, VI. ii. 4 foll; Hicks, 71, 84, 88.



A little later the Athenian Thrasybulus[15] (of Collytus) was making

his way up with eight ships from Thrace, his object being to effect a

junction with the main Athenian squadron. The scouts signalled the

approach of eight triremes, whereupon Antalcidas, embarking his

marines on board twelve of the fastest sailers of his fleet, ordered

them to make up their full complements, where defective, from the

remaining vessels; and so lay to, skulking in his lair with all

possible secrecy. As soon as the enemy's vessels came sailing past he

gave chase; and they catching sight of him took to flight. With his

swiftest sailors he speedily overhauled their laggards, and ordering

his vanguard to let these alone, he followed hard on those ahead. But

when the foremost had fallen into his clutches, the enemy's hinder

vessels, seeing their leaders taken one by one, out of sheer

despondency fell an easy prey to the slower sailors of the foe, so

that not one of the eight vessels escaped.



[15] His name occurs on the famous stele of the new Athenian

    confederacy, B.C. 378. See Hicks, 81; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. 17;

    Demos. "de. Cor." p. 301; Arist. "Rhet." ii. 23; Demos. "c.

    Timocr." 742.



Presently the Syracusan squadron of twenty vessels joined him, and

again another squadron from Ionia, or rather so much of that district

as lay under the control of Tiribazus. The full quota of the

contingent was further made up from the territory of Ariobarzanes

(which whom Antalcidas kept up a friendship of long standing), in the

absence of Pharnabazus, who by this date had already been summoned up

country on the occasion of his marriage with the king's daughter. With

this fleet, which, from whatever sources derived, amounted to more

than eighty sail, Antalcidas ruled the seas, and was in a position not

only to cut off the passage of vessels bound to Athens from the

Euxine, but to convoy them into the harbours of Sparta's allies.



The Athenians could not but watch with alarm the growth of the enemy's

fleet, and began to fear a repetition of their former discomfiture. To

be trampled under foot by the hostile power seemed indeed no remote

possibility, now that the Lacedaemonians had procured an ally in the

person of the Persian monarch, and they were in little less than a

state of siege themselves, pestered as they were by privateers from

Aegina. On all these grounds the Athenians became passionately

desirous of peace.[16] The Lacedaemonians were equally out of humour

with the war for various reasons--what with their garrison duties, one

mora at Lechaeum and another at Orchomenus, and the necessity of

keeping watch and ward on the states, if loyal not to lose them, if

disaffected to prevent their revolt; not to mention that reciprocity

of annoyance[17] of which Corinth was the centre. So again the Argives

had a strong appetite for peace; they knew that the ban had been

called out against them, and, it was plain, that no fictitious

alteration of the calendar would any longer stand them in good stead.

Hence, when Tiribazus issued a summons calling on all who were willing

to listen to the terms of peace sent down by the king[18] to present

themselves, the invitation was promptly accepted. At the opening of

the conclave[19] Tiribazus pointed to the king's seal attached to the

document, and proceeded to read the contents, which ran as follows:



[16] See, at this point, Grote on the financial condition of Athens

    and the "Theorikon," "H. G." ix. 525.



[17] Or, "that give-and-take of hard knocks."



[18] See Hicks, 76.



[19] At Sardis, doubtless.



"The king, Artaxerxes, deems it just that the cities in Asia, with the

islands of Clazomenae and Cyprus, should belong to himself; the rest

of the Hellenic cities he thinks it just to leave independent, both

small and great, with the exception of Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros,

which three are to belong to Athens as of yore. Should any of the

parties concerned not accept this peace, I, Artaxerxes, will war

against him or them with those who share my views. This will I do by

land and by sea, with ships and with money."



After listening to the above declaration the ambassadors from the

several states proceeded to report the same to their respective

governments. One and all of these took the oaths[20] to ratify and

confirm the terms unreservedly, with the exception of the Thebans, who

claimed to take the oaths in behalf of all Boeotians. This claim

Agesilaus repudiated: unless they chose to take the oaths in precise

conformity with the words of the king's edict, which insisted on "the

future autonomy of each state, small or great," he would not admit

them. To this the Theban ambassadors made no other reply, except that

the instructions they had received were different. "Pray go, then,"

Agesilaus retorted, "and ask the question; and you may inform your

countrymen that if they will not comply, they will be excluded from

the treaty." The Theban ambassadors departed, but Agesilaus, out of

hatred to the Thebans, took active measures at once. Having got the

consent of the ephors he forthwith offered sacrifice. The offerings

for crossing the frontier were propitious, and he pushed on to Tegea.

From Tegea he despatched some of the knights right and left to vist

the perioeci and hasten their mobilisation, and at the same time sent

commanders of foreign brigades to the allied cities on a similar

errand. But before he had started from Tegea the answer from Thebes

arrived; the point was yielded, they would suffer the states to be

independent. Under these circumstances the Lacedaemonians returned

home, and the Thebans were forced to accept the truce unconditionally,

and to recognise the autonomy of the Boeotian cities.[21] But now the

Corinthians were by no means disposed to part with the garrison of the

Argives. Accordingly Agesilaus had a word of warning for both. To the

former he said, "if they did not forthwith dismiss the Argives," and

to the latter, "if they did not instantly quit Corinth," he would

march an army into their territories. The terror of both was so great

that the Argives marched out of Corinth, and Corinth was once again

left to herself;[22] whereupon the "butchers"[23] and their

accomplices in the deed of blood determined to retire from Corinth,

and the rest of the citizens welcomed back their late exiles

voluntarily.



[20] At Sparta, doubtless.



[21] See Freeman, op. cit. pp. 168, 169.



[22] See "Ages." ii. 21; Grote, "H. G." ix. 537.



[23] {oi sphageis}, a party catchword (in reference to the incidents

    narrated above, "Hell." IV. iv. 2). See below, {ton bareon

    demagogon}, "Hell." V. ii. 7; {oi kedomenoi tes Peloponnesou},

    "Hell." VII. v. 1; above, {oi sphageis}, "Hell." III. ii. 27, of

    the philo-Laconian oligarchs in Elis. See Dem. "c. Lept." 473.



Now that the transactions were complete, and the states were bound by

their oaths to abide by the peace sent down to them by the king, the

immediate result was a general disarmament, military and naval forces

being alike disbanded; and so it was that the Lacedaemonians and

Athenians, with their allies, found themselves in the enjoyment of

peace for the first time since the period of hostilities subsequent to

the demolition of the walls of Athens. From a condition which, during

the war, can only be described as a sort of even balance with their

antagonists, the Lacedaemonians now emerged; and reached a pinnacle of

glory consequent upon the Peace of Antalcidas,[24] so called. As

guarantors of the peace presented by Hellas to the king, and as

administrators personally of the autonomy of the states, they had

added Corinth to their alliance; they had obtained the independence of

the states of Boeotia at the expense of Thebes,[25] which meant the

gratification of an old ambition; and lastly, by calling out the ban

in case the Argives refused to evacuate Corinth, they had put a stop

to the appopriation of that city by the Argives.



[24] Or, more correctly, the peace "under," or "at the date of," {ep

    'Antalkidou}. See Grote, "H. G." x. 1, note 1.



[25] Or, "they had made the states of Boeotia independent of Thebes."

    See Grote, "H. G." x. 44.







II



B.C. 386. Indeed the late events had so entirely shaped themselves in

conformity with the wishes of the Lacedaemonians, that they determined

to go a step farther and chastise those of their allies who either had

borne hard on them during the war, or otherwise had shown themselves

less favourable to Lacedaemon than to her enemies.[1] Chastisement was

not all; they must lay down such secure foundations for the future as

should render the like disloyalty impossible again.[2] As the first

step towards this policy they sent a dictatorial message to the

Mantinaeans, and bade them raze their fortifications, on the sole

ground that they could not otherwise trust them not to side with their

enemies. Many things in their conduct, they alleged, from time to

time, had not escaped their notice: their frequent despatches of corn

to the Argives while at war with Lacedaemon; at other times their

refusal to furnish contingents during a campaign, on the pretext of

some holy truce or other;[3] or if they did reluctantly take the field

--the miserable inefficiency of their service. "But, more than that,"

they added, "we note the jealousy with which you eye any good fortune

which may betide our state; the extravagant pleasure[4] you exhibit at

the sudden descent of some disaster."



[1] See Hartman, "An. Xen." p. 367 foll.; Busolt, "Die Lak." p. 129

    foll.



[2] Or, "they determined to chastise . . . and reduce to such order

    that disloyalty should be impossible."



[3] See above, "Hell." IV. ii. 16.



[4] Ib. IV. v. 18.



This very year, moreover, it was commonly said,[5] saw the expiration,

as far as the Mantineans were concerned, of the thirty years' truce,

consequent upon the battle of Mantinea. On their refusal, therefore,

to raze their fortification walls the ban was called out against them.

Agesilaus begged the state to absolve him from the conduct of this war

on the plea that the city of Mantinea had done frequent service to his

father[6] in his Messenian wars. Accordingly Agesipolis led the

expedition--in spite of the cordial relations of his father

Pausanias[7] with the leaders of the popular party in Mantinea.



[5] As to this point, see Curtius, "H. G." V. v. (iv. 305 note, Eng.

    trans.) There appears to be some confusion. According to Thuc. v.

    81, "When the Argives deserted the alliance [with Mantinea,

    Athens, and Elis, making a new treaty of alliance with Lacedaemon

    for fifty years] the Mantineans held out for a time, but without

    the Argives they were helpless, and so they came to terms with the

    Lacedaemonians, and gave up their claims to supremacy over the

    cities in Arcadia, which had been subject to them. . . . These

    changes were effected at the close of winter [418 B.C.] towards

    the approach of spring [417 B.C.], and so ended the fourteenth

    year of the war." Jowett. According to Diod. xv. 5, the

    Lacedaemonians attacked Mantinea within two years after the Peace

    of Antalcidas, apparently in 386 B.C. According to Thuc. v. 82,

    and "C. I. A." 50, in B.C. 417 Argos had reverted to her alliance

    with Athens, and an attempt to connect the city with the sea by

    long walls was made," certain other states in Peloponnese being

    privy to the project" (Thuc. v. 83)--an attempt frustrated by

    Lacedaemon early in B.C. 416. Is it possible that a treaty of

    alliance between Mantinea and Lacedaemon for thirty years was

    formally signed in B.C. 416?



[6] I.e. Archidamus.



[7] See above, "Hell." III. v. 25.



B.C. 385. The first move of the invader was to subject the enemy's

territory to devastation; but failing by such means to induce them to

raze their walls, he proceeded to draw lines of circumvallation round

the city, keeping half his troops under arms to screen the entrenching

parties whilst the other half pushed on the work with the spade. As

soon as the trench was completed, he experienced no further difficulty

in building a wall round the city. Aware, however, of the existence of

a huge supply of corn inside the town, the result of the bountiful

harvest of the preceding year, and averse to the notion of wearing out

the city of Lacedaemon and her allies by tedious campaigning, he hit

upon the expedient of damming up the river which flowed through the

town.



It was a stream of no inconsiderable size.[8] By erecting a barrier at

its exit from the town he caused the water to rise above the basements

of the private dwellings and the foundations of the fortification

walls. Then, as the lower layers of bricks became saturated and

refused their support to the rows above, the wall began to crack and

soon to totter to its fall. The citizens for some time tried to prop

it with pieces of timber, and used other devices to avert the imminent

ruin of their tower; but finding themselves overmatched by the water,

and in dread lest the fall at some point or other of the circular

wall[9] might deliver them captive to the spear of the enemy, they

signified their consent to raze their walls. But the Lacedaemonians

now steadily refused any form of truce, except on the further

condition that the Mantineans would suffer themselves to be broken up

and distributed into villages. They, looking the necessity in the

face, consented to do even that. The sympathisers with Argos among

them, and the leaders of their democracy, thought their fate was

sealed. Then the father treated with the son, Pausanias with

Agesipolis, on their behalf, and obtained immunity for them--sixty in

number--on condition that they should quit the city. The Lacedaemonian

troops stood lining the road on both sides, beginning from the gates,

and watched the outgoers; and with their spears in their hands, in

spite of bitter hatred, kept aloof from them with less difficulty than

the Mantineans of the better classes themselves--a weighty testimony

to the power of Spartan discipline, be it said. In conclusion, the

wall was razed, and Mantinea split up into four parts,[10] assuming

once again its primitive condition as regards inhabitants. The first

feeling was one of annoyance at the necessity of pulling down their

present houses and erecting others, yet when the owners[11] found

themselves located so much nearer their estates round about the

villages, in the full enjoyment of aristocracy, and rid for ever of

"those troublesome demagogues," they were delighted with the turn

which affairs had taken. It became the custom for Sparta to send them,

not one commander of contingents,[12] but four, one for each village;

and the zeal displayed, now that the quotas for military service were

furnished from the several village centres, was far greater than it

had been under the democratic system. So the transactions in

connection with Mantinea were brought to a conclusion, and thereby one

lesson of wisdom was taught mankind--not to conduct a river through a

fortress town.



[8] I.e. the Ophis. See Leake, "Morea," III. xxiv. p. 71; Pausan.

    "Arcad." 8; Grote, "H. G." x. 48, note 2.



[9] Or, "in the circuit of the wall."



[10] See Diod. xv. 5; Strab. viii. 337; Ephor. fr. 138, ed. Did.; and

    Grote, "H. G." x. 51.



[11] Or, "holders of properties." The historian is referring not to

    the population at large, I think, but to the rich landowners, i.e.

    the {Beltistoi}, and is not so partial as Grote supposes ("H. G."

    x. 51 foll.)



[12] Technically {zenagoi}, Lacedaemonian officers who commanded the

    contingents of the several allies. See above, "Hell." III. v. 7;

    Thuc. ii. 76; and Arnold's note ad loc.; also C. R. Kennedy, "ap.

    Dict. of Greek and Roman Antiquities," s.v.; Muller, "Dorians,"

    ii. 250, Eng. tr.; Busolt, "Die Lak." p. 125.



B.C. 384-383. To pass on. The party in exile from Phlius, seeing the

severe scrutiny to which the behaviour of the allies of Lacedaemon

during the late war was being subjected, felt that their opportunity

had come. They repaired to Lacedaemon, and laid great emphasis on the

fact that, so long as they had been in power themselves at home,

"their city used to welcome Lacedaemonians within her walls, and her

citizens flocked to the campaign under their leadership; but no sooner

had they been driven into exile than a change had come. The men of

Phlius now flatly refused to follow Lacedaemon anywhere; the

Lacedaemonians, alone of all men living, must not be admitted within

their gates." After listening to their story, the ephors agreed that

the matter demanded attention. Then they sent to the state of Phlius a

message to this effect; the Phliasian exiles were friends of

Lacedaemon; nor did it appear that they owed their exile to any

misdoing. Under the circumstances, Lacedaemon claimed their recall

from banishment, not by force, but as a concession voluntarily

granted. When the matter was thus stated, the Phliasians were not

without alarm that an army might much upon Phlius, and a party inside

the town might admit the enemy within the walls; for within the walls

of Phlius were to be found many who, either as blood relations or for

other reasons, were partisans of the exiles, and as so often happens,

at any rate in the majority of states, there was a revolutionary party

who, in their ardour to reform, would welcome gladly their

restoration. Owing to fears of this character, a formal decree was

passed: to welcome home the exiles, and to restore to them all

undisputed property, the purchasers of the same being indemnified from

the treasury of the state; and in the event of any ambiguity or

question arising between the parties, the same to be determined before

a court of justice. Such was the position of affairs in connection

with the Phliasian exiles at the date in question.



B.C. 383.[13] And now from yet another quarter ambassadors arrived at

Lacedaemon: that is to say, from Acanthus and Apollonia, the two

largest and most important states of the Olynthian confederacy. The

ephorate, after learning from them the object of their visit,

presented them to the assembly and the allies, in presence of whom

Cleigenes of Acanthus made a speech to this effect:



[13] Al. B.C. 382.



"Men of Lacedaemon and of the allied states," he said, "are you aware

of a silent but portentous growth within the bosom of Hellas?[14] Few

here need to be told that for size and importance Olynthus now stands

at the head of the Thracian cities. But are you aware that the

citizens of Olynthus had already brought over several states by the

bribe of joint citizenship and common laws; that they have forcibly

annexed some of the larger states; and that, so encouraged, they have

taken in hand further to free the cities of Macedonia from Amyntas the

king of the Macedonians; that, as soon as their immediate neighbours

had shown compliance, they at once proceeded to attack larger and more

distant communities; so much so, that when we started to come hither,

we left them masters not only of many other places, but of Pella

itself, the capital of Macedonia. Amyntas,[15] we saw plainly, must

ere long withdraw from his cities, and was in fact already all but in

name an outcast from Macedonia.



[14] Or, "are you aware of a new power growing up in Hellas?"



[15] For Amyntas's reign, see Diod. xiv. 89, 92; xv. 19; Isocr.

    "Panegyr." 126, "Archid." 46.



"The Olynthians have actually sent to ourselves and to the men of

Apollonia a joint embassy, warning us of their intention to attack us

if we refuse to present ourselves at Olynthus with a military

contingent. Now, for our parts, men of Lacedaemon, we desire nothing

better than to abide by our ancestral laws and institutions, to be

free and independent citizens; but if aid from without is going to

fail us, we too must follow the rest and coalesce with the Olynthians.

Why, even now they muster no less than eight hundred[16] heavy

infantry and a considerably larger body of light infantry, while their

cavalry, when we have joined them, will exceed one thousand men. At

the date of our departure we left embassies from Athens and Boeotia in

Olynthus, and we were told that the Olynthians themselves had passed a

formal resolution to return the compliment. They were to send an

embassy on their side to the aforesaid states to treat of an alliance.

And yet, if the power of the Athenians and the Thebans is to be

further increased by such an accession of strength, look to it," the

speaker added, "whether hereafter you will find things so easy to

manage in that quarter.



[16] See Grote, "H. G." x. 72; Thirlwall, "H. G." v. 12 (ch. xxxvii).



"They hold Potidaea, the key to the isthmus of Pallene, and therefore,

you can well believe, they can command the states within that

peninsula. If you want any further proof of the abject terror of those

states, you have it in the fact that notwithstanding the bitter hatred

which they bear to Olynthus, not one of them has dared to send

ambassadors along with us to apprise you of these matters.



"Reflect, how you can reconcile your anxiety to prevent the

unification of Boeotia with your neglect to hinder the solidifying of

a far larger power--a power destined, moreover, to become formidable

not on land only, but by sea? For what is to stop it, when the soil

itself supplies timber for shipbuilding,[17] and there are rich

revenues derived from numerous harbours and commercial centres?--it

cannot but be that abundance of food and abundance of population will

go hand in hand. Nor have we yet reached the limits of Olynthian

expansion; there are their neighbours to be thought of--the kingless

or independent Thracians. These are already to-day the devoted

servants of Olynthus, and when it comes to their being actually under

her, that means at once another vast accession of strength to her.

With the Thracians in her train, the gold mines of Pangaeus would

stretch out to her the hand of welcome.



[17] See Hicks, 74, for a treaty between Amyntas and the Chalcidians,

    B.C. 390-389: "The article of the treaty between Amyntas III.,

    father of Philip, and the Chalcidians, about timber, etc., reminds

    us that South Macedonia, the Chalcidic peninsula, and Amphipolis

    were the chief sources whence Athens derived timber for her

    dockyards." Thuc. iv. 108; Diod. xx. 46; Boeckh, "P. E. A." p.

    250; and for a treaty between Athens and Amyntas, B.C. 382, see

    Hicks, 77; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. 397, 423.



"In making these assertions, we are but uttering remarks ten thousand

times repeated in the democracy of Olynthus. And as to their confident

spirit, who shall attempt to describe it? It is God, for aught I know,

who, with the growth of a new capacity, gives increase also to the

proud thoughts and vast designs of humanity. For ourselves, men of

Lacedaemon and of the allied states, our task is completed. We have

played our parts in announcing to you how things stand there. To you

it is left to determine whether what we have described is worthy of

your concern. One only thing further you ought to recognise: the power

we have spoken of as great is not as yet invincible, for those states

which are involuntary participants in the citizenship of Olynthus

will, in prospect of any rival power appearing in the field, speedily

fall away. On the contrary, let them be once closely knit and welded

together by the privileges of intermarriage and reciprocal rights of

holding property in land--which have already become enactments; let

them discover that it is a gain to them to follow in the wake of

conquerors (just as the Arcadians,[18] for instance, find it

profitable to march in your ranks, whereby they save their own

property and pillage their neighbours'); let these things come to

pass, and perhaps you may find the knot no longer so easy to unloose."



[18] For the point of the comparison, see Freeman, "Hist. Fed. Gov."

    ch. iv. "Real nature of the Olynthian scheme," pp. 190 foll., and

    note 2, p. 197; also Grote, "H. G." x. 67 foll., 278 foll.



At the conclusion of this address, the Lacedaemonians requested the

allies to speak, bidding them give their joint advice as to the best

course to be pursued in the interests of Peloponnese and the allies.

Thereupon many members, and especially those who wished to gratify the

Lacedaemonians, agreed in counselling active measures; and it was

resolved that the states should severally send contingents to form a

total of ten thousand men. Proposals were also made to allow any

state, so wishing, to give money instead of men, at the rate of three

Aeginetan obols[19] a day per man; or where the contingent consisted

of cavalry, the pay given for one horseman was to be the equivalent to

that of four hoplites; while, in the event of any defaulting in

service, the Lacedaemonians should be allowed to mulct the said state

of a stater per man per diem. These resolutions were passed, and the

deputies from Acanthus rose again. They argued that, though excellent,

these resolutions were not of a nature to be rapidly carried into

effect. Would it not be better, they asked, pending the mobilisation

of the troops, to despatch an officer at once in command of a force

from Lacedaemon and the other states, not too large to start

immediately. The effect would be instantaneous, for the states which

had not yet given in their adhesion to Olynthus would be brought to a

standstill, and those already forcibly enrolled would be shaken in

their alliance. These further resolutions being also passed, the

Lacedaemonians despatched Eudamidas, accompanied by a body of

neodamodes, with perioeci and Sciritae,[20] to the number of two

thousand odd. Eudamidas lost no time in setting out, having obtained

leave from the ephors for his brother Phoebidas to follow later with

the remainder of the troops assigned to him. Pushing on himself to the

Thracian territory, he set about despatching garrisons to various

cities at their request. He also secured the voluntary adhesion of

Potidaea, although already a member of the Olynthian alliance; and

this town now served as his base of operations for carrying on war on

a scale adapted to his somewhat limited armament.



[19] I.e. "rather more than sixpence a day for a hoplite, and two

    shillings for a horseman." "The Aeginetan stater weighed about 196

    grains, rather more than two of our shillings, and was divided

    into two drachms of 98 grains, each of which contained six obols

    of about 16 grains each." See Percy Gardner, "Types of Greek

    Coins," "Hist. Int." p. 8; Jowett, note to Thuc. III. lxx. 4, vol.

    i. pp. 201, 202.



[20] Or, "new citizens, provincials, and Sciritae."



Phoebidas, when the remaining portion of his brother's forces was duly

mustered, put himself at their head and commenced his march. On

reaching Thebes the troops encamped outside the city, round the

gymnasium. Faction was rife within the city. The two polemarchs in

office, Ismenias and Leontiades, were diametrically opposed,[21] being

the respective heads of antagonistic political clubs. Hence it was

that, while Ismenias, ever inspired by hatred to the Lacedaemonians,

would not come anywhere near the Spartan general, Leontiades, on the

other hand, was assiduous in courting him; and when a sufficient

intimacy was established between them, he made a proposal as follows:

"You have it in your power," he said, addressing Phoebidas, "this very

day to confer supreme benefit on your country. Follow me with your

hoplites, and I will introduce you into the citadel. That done, you

may rest assured Thebes will be completely under the thumb of

Lacedaemon and of us, your friends. At present, as you see, there is a

proclamation forbidding any Theban to take service with you against

Olynthus, but we will change all that. You have only to act with us as

we suggest, and we shall at once be able to furnish you with large

supplies of infantry and cavalry, so that you will join your brother

with a magnificent reinforcement, and pending his proposed reduction

of Olynthus, you will have accomplished the reduction of a far larger

state than that--to wit, this city of Thebes."



[21] See Grote, "H. G." vol. x. p. 80: "We have little or no

    information respecting the government of Thebes," etc. The "locus

    classicus" seems to be Plut. "de Genio Socratis." See Freeman, op.

    cit. ch. iv. S. 2, "Of the Boeotian League," pp. 154-184; and, in

    reference to the seizure of the Kadmeia, p. 170.



The imagination of Phoebidas was kindled as he listened to the

tempting proposal. To do a brilliant deed was far dearer to him than

life;[22] on the other hand, he had no reasoning capacity, and would

seem to have been deficient altogether in sound sense. The consent of

the Spartan secured, Leontiades bade him set his troops in motion, as

if everything were ready for his departure. "And anon, when the hour

is come," added the Theban, "I will be with you, and show you the way

myself."



[22] Or, "Renown was his mistress." See Grote, "H. G." x. 84.



The senate was seated in the arcade or stoa in the market-place, since

the Cadmeia was in possession of the women who were celebrating the

Thesmophoria.[23] It was noon of a hot summer's day; scarcely a soul

was stirring in the streets. This was the moment for Leontiades. He

mounted on horseback and galloped off to overtake Phoebidas. He turned

him back, and led him without further delay into the acropolis. Having

posted Phoebidas and his soldiers inside, he handed him the key of the

gates, and warning him not to suffer any one to enter into the citadel

without a pass from himself, he straightway betook himself to the

senate. Arrived there, he delivered himself thus: "Sirs, the

Lacedaemonians are in possession of the citadel; but that is no cause

for despondency, since, as they assure us, they have no hostile

intention, except, indeed, towards any one who has an appetite for

war. For myself, and acting in obedience to the law, which empowers

the polemarch to apprehend all persons suspected of capital crimes, I

hereby seize the person of Ismenias as an arch-formenter of war. I

call upon you, sirs, who are captains of companies, and you who are

ranked with them, to do your duty. Arise and secure the prisoner, and

lead him away to the place appointed."



[23] An ancient festival held by women in honour of Demeter and

    Persephone ({to Thesmophoro}), who gave the first impulse to civil

    society, lawful marriage, etc. See Herod. ii. 171; Diod. v. 5.



Those who were privy to the affair, it will be understood, presented

themselves, and the orders were promptly carried out. Of those not in

the secret, but opposed to the party of Leontiades, some sought refuge

at once outside the city in terror for their lives; whilst the rest,

albeit they retired to their houses at first, yet when they found that

Ismenias was imprisoned in the Cadmeia, and further delay seemed

dangerous, retreated to Athens. These were the men who shared the

views of Androcleidas and Ismenias, and they must have numbered about

three hundred.



Now that the transactions were concluded, another polemarch was chosen

in place of Ismenias, and Leontiades at once set out to Lacedaemon.

There he found the ephors and the mass of the community highly

incensed agaisnt Phoebidas, "who had failed to execute the orders

assigned to him by the state." Against this general indignation,

however, Agesilaus protested.[24] If mischief had been wrought to

Lacedaemon by this deed, it was just that the doer of it should be

punished; but, if good, it was a time-honoured custom to allow full

scope for impromptu acts of this character. "The sole point you have

to look to," he urged, "is whether what has been done is good or

evil." After this, however, Leontiades presented himself to the

assembly[25] and addressed the members as follows: "Sirs,

Lacedaemonians, the hostile attitude of Thebes towards you, before the

occurrence of late events, was a topic constantly on your lips, since

time upon time your eyes were called upon to witness her friendly

bearing to your foes in contrast with her hatred of your friends. Can

it be denied that Thebes refused to take part with you in the campaign

against your direst enemy, the democracy in Piraeus; and balanced that

lukewarmness by on onslaught on the Phocians, whose sole crime was

cordiality to yourselves?[26] Nor is that all. In full knowledge that

you were likly to be engaged in war with Olynthus, she proceeded at

once to make an alliance with that city. So that up to the last moment

you were in constant expectation of hearing that the whole of Boeotia

was laid at the feet of Thebes. With the late incidents all is

changed. You need fear Thebes no longer. One brief despatch[27] in

cipher will suffice to procure a dutiful subservience to your every

wish in that quarter, provided only you will take as kindly an

interest in us as we in you."



[24] See "Ages." vii.



[25] "Select Committee." See "Hell." II. iv. 38; and below, VI. iii.

    3.



[26] See above, "Hell." III. v. 4.



[27] Lit. "scytale."



This appeal told upon the meeting, and the Lacedaemonians[28] resolved

formally, now that the citadel had been taken, to keep it, and to put

Ismenias on his trial. In consequence of this resolution a body of

commissioners[29] was despatched, three Lacedaemonians and one for

each of the allied states, great and small alike. The court of inquiry

thus constituted, the sittings commenced, and an indictment was

preferred against Ismenias. He was accused of playing into the hands

of the barbarian; of seeking amity with the Persians to the detriment

of Hellas; of accepting sums of money as bribes from the king; and,

finally, of being, along with Androcleidas, the prime cause of the

whole intestine trouble to which Hellas was a prey. Each of these

charges was met by the defendant, but to no purpose, since he failed

to disabuse the court of their conviction that the grandeur of his

designs was only equalled by their wickedness.[30] The verdict was

given against him, and he was put to death. The party of Leontiades

thus possessed the city; and went beyond the injunctions given them in

the eager performance of their services.



[28] See Grote, "H. G." vol. x. p. 85; Diod. xv. 20; Plut. "Pelop."

    vi.; ib. "de Genio Socratis," V. vii. 6 A; Cor. Nep. "Pelop." 1.



[29] Lit. "Dicasts."



[30] Or, "that he was a magnificent malefactor." See Grote, "H. G."

    vol. ix. p. 420, "the great wicked man" (Clarendon's epithets for

    Cromwell); Plato, "Meno." 90 B; "Republic," 336 A, "a rich and

    mighty man." See also Plut. "Ages." xxxii. 2, Agesilaus's

    exclamation at sight of Epaminondas, {o tou megalopragmonos

    anthropou}.



B.C. 382. As a result of these transactions the Lacedaemonians pressed

on the combined campaign against Olynthus with still greater

enthusiasm. They not only set out Teleutias as governor, but by their

united efforts furnished him with an aggregate army of ten thousand

men.[31] They also sent despatches to the allied states, calling upon

them to support Teleutias in accordance with the resolution of the

allies. All the states were ready to display devotion to Teleutias,

and to do him service, since he was a man who never forgot a service

rendered him. Nor was Thebes an exception; for was not the governor a

brother of Agesilaus? Thebes, therefore, was enthusiastic in sending

her contribution of heavy infantry and cavalry. The Spartan conducted

his march slowly and surely, taking the utmost pains to avoid injuring

his friends, and to collect as large a force as possible. He also sent

a message in advance to Amyntas, begging him, if he were truly

desirous of recovering his empire, to raise a body of mercenaries, and

to distribute sums of money among the neighbouring kings with a view

to their alliance. Nor was that all. He sent also to Derdas, the ruler

of Elimia, pointing out to him that the Olynthians, having laid at

their feet the great power of Macedonia, would certainly not suffer

his lesser power to escape unless they were stayed up by force in arms

in their career of insolence. Proceeding thus, by the time he had

reached the territory of the allied powers he was at the head of a

very considerable army. At Potidaea he halted to make the necessary

disposition of his troops, and thence advanced into the territory of

the enemy. As he approached the hostile city, he abstained from

felling and firing alike, being persuaded that to do so was only to

create difficulties in his own path, whether advancing or retreating;

it would be time enough, when he retired from Olynthus, to fell the

trees and lay them as a barrier in the path of any assailant in the

rear.



[31] Lit. "sent out along with him the combined force of ten thousand

    men," in ref to S. 20 above.



Being now within a mile or so[32] of the city he came to a halt. The

left division was under his personal command, for it suited him to

advance in a line opposite the gate from which the enemy sallied; the

other division of the allies stretched away to the right. The cavalry

were thus distributed: the Laconians, Thebans, and all the Macedonians

present were posted on the right. With his own division he kept Derdas

and his troopers, four hundred strong. This he did partly out of

genuine admiration for this body of horse, and partly as a mark of

courtesy to Derdas, which should make him not regret his coming.



[32] Lit. "ten stades."



Presently the enemy issued forth and formed in line opposite, under

cover of their walls. Then their cavalry formed in close order and

commenced the attack. Dashing down upon the Laconians and Boeotians

they dismounted Polycharmus, the Lacedaemonian cavalry general,

inflicting a hundred wounds on him as he lay on the ground, and cut

down others, and finally put to flight the cavalry on the right wing.

The flight of these troopers infected the infantry in close proximity

to them, who in turn swerved; and it looked as if the whole army was

about to be worsted, when Derdas at the head of his cavalry dashed

straight at the gates of Olynthus, Teleutias supporting him with the

troops of his division. The Olynthian cavalry, seeing how matters were

going, and in dread of finding the gates closed upon them, wheeled

round and retired with alacrity. Thus it was that Derdas had his

chance to cut down man after man as their cavalry ran the gauntlet

past him. In the same way, too, the infantry of the Olynthians

retreated within their city, though, owing to the closeness of the

walls in their case, their loss was trifling. Teleutias claimed the

victory, and a trophy was duly erected, after which he turned his back

on Olynthus and devoted himself to felling the fruit-trees. This was

the campaign of the summer. He now dismissed both the Macedonians and

the cavalry force of Derdas. Incursions, however, on the part of the

Olynthians themselves against the states allied to Lacedaemon were

frequent; lands were pillaged, and people put to the sword.







III



B.C. 381. With the first symptoms of approaching spring the Olynthian

cavalry, six hundred strong, had swooped into the territory of

Apollonia--about the middle of the day--and dispersing over the

district, were employed in pillaging; but as luck would have it,

Derdas had arrived that day with his troopers, and was breakfasting in

Apollonia. He noted the enemy's incursion, but kept quiet, biding his

time; his horses were ready saddled, and his troopers armed cap-a-

pied. As the Olynthians came galloping up contemptuously, not only

into the suburbs, but to the very gates of the city, he seized his

opportunity, and with his compact and well-ordered squadron dashed

out; whereupon the invaders took to flight. Having once turned them,

Derdas gave them no respite, pursuing and slaughtering them for ten

miles or more,[1] until he had driven them for shelter within the very

ramparts of Olynthus. Report said that Derdas slew something like

eighty men in this affair. After this the Olynthians were more

disposed to keep to their walls, contenting themselves with tilling

the merest corner of their territory.



[1] Lit. "ninety stades."



Time advanced, and Teleutias was in conduct of another expedition

against the city of Olynthus. His object was to destroy any timber[2]

still left standing, or fields still cultivated in the hostile

territory. This brought out the Olynthian cavalry, who, stealthily

advancing, crossed the river which washes the walls of the town, and

again continued their silent march right up to the adversary's camp.

At sight of an audacity which nettled him, Teleutias at once ordered

Tlemonidas, the officer commanding his light infantry division, to

charge the assailants at the run. On their side the men of Olynthus,

seeing the rapid approach of the light infantry, wheeled and quietly

retired until they had recrossed the river, drawing the enemy on, who

followed with conspicuous hardihood. Arrogating to themselves the

position of pursuers towards fugitives, they did not hesitate to cross

the river which stood between them and their prey. Then the Olynthian

cavalry, choosing a favourable moment, when those who had crossed

seemed easy to deal with, wheeled and attacked them, putting

Tlemonidas himself to the sword with more than a hundred others of his

company. Teleutias, when he saw what was happening, snatched up his

arms in a fit of anger and began leading his hoplites swiftly forward,

ordering at the same time his peltasts and cavalry to give chase and

not to slacken. Their fate was the fate of many before and since, who,

in the ardour of pursuit, have come too close to the enemy's walls and

found it hard to get back again. Under a hail of missiles from the

walls they were forced to retire in disorder and with the necessity of

guarding themselves against the missiles. At this juncture the

Olynthians sent out their cavalry at full gallop, backed by supports

of light infantry; and finally their heavy infantry reserves poured

out and fell upon the enemy's lines, now in thorough confusion. Here

Teleutias fell fighting, and when that happened, without further pause

the troops immediately about him swerved. Not one soul longer cared to

make a stand, but the flight became general, some fleeing towards

Spartolus, others in the direction of Acanthus, a third set seeking

refuge within the walls of Apollonia, and the majority within those of

Potidaea. As the tide of fugitives broke into several streams, so also

the pursuers divided the work between them; this way and that they

poured, dealing death wholesale. So perished the pith and kernel of

the armament.



[2] I.e. fruit-trees.



Such calamities are not indeed without a moral. The lesson they are

meant to teach mankind, I think, is plain. If in a general sense one

ought not to punish any one, even one's own slave, in anger--since the

master in his wrath may easily incur worse evil himself than he

inflicts--so, in the case of antagonists in war, to attack an enemy

under the influence of passion rather than of judgment is an absolute

error. For wrath is but a blind impulse devoid of foresight, whereas

to the penetrating eye of reason a blow parried may be better than a

wound inflicted.[3]



[3] See, for the same sentiment, "Horsemanship," vi. 13. See also

    Plut. "Pel." and "Marc." (Clough, ii. p. 278).



When the news of what had happened reached Lacedaemon it was agreed,

after due deliberation, that a force should be sent, and of no

trifling description, if only to quench the victors' pride, and to

prevent their own achievements from becoming null and void. In this

determination they sent out King Agesipolis, as general, attended,

like Agesilaus[4] on his Asiatic campaign, by thirty Spartans.[5]

Volunteers flocked to his standard. They were partly the pick and

flower of the provincials,[6] partly foreigners of the class called

Trophimoi,[7] or lastly, bastard sons of Spartans, comely and

beautiful of limb, and well versed in the lore of Spartan chivalry.

The ranks of this invading force were further swelled by volunteers

from the allied states, the Thessalians notably contributing a corps

of cavalry. All were animated by the desire of becoming known to

Agesipolis, so that even Amyntas and Derdas in zeal of service outdid

themselves. With this promise of success Agesipolis marched forward

against Olynthus.



[4] See above, "Hell." III. iv. 2.



[5] Lit. "Spartiates." The new army was sent out B.C. 380, according

    to Grote.



[6] Lit. "beautiful and brave of the Perioeci."



[7] Xenophon's own sons educated at Sparta would belong to this class.

    See Grote, "H. G." x. 91.



Meanwhile the state of Phlius, complimented by Agesipolis on the

amount of the funds contributed by them to his expedition and the

celerity with which the money had been raised, and in full belief that

while one king was in the field they were secure against the hostile

attack of the other (since it was hardly to be expected that both

kings should be absent from Sparta at one moment), boldly desisted

from doing justice by her lately reinstated citizens. On the one hand,

these exiles claimed that points in dispute should be determined

before an impartial court of justice; the citizens, on the other,

insisted on the claimants submitting the cases for trial in the city

itself. And when the latter demurred to that solution, asking "What

sort of trial that would be where the offenders were also the judges?"

they appealed to deaf ears. Consequently the restored party appealed

at Sparta, to prefer a complaint against their city. They were

accompanied by other members of the community, who stated that many of

the Phliasians themselves besides the appellants recognised the

injustice of their treatment. The state of Phlius was indignant at

this manouvre, and retaliated by imposing a fine on all who had

betaken themselves to Lacedaemon without a mandate from the state.

Those who incurred the fine hesitated to return home; they preferred

to stay where they were and enforce their views: "It is quite plain

now who were the perpetrators of all the violence--the very people who

originally drove us into exile, and shut their gates upon Lacedaemon;

the confiscators of our property one day, the ruthless opponents of

its restoration the next. Who else but they have now brought it about

that we should be fined for appearing at Lacedaemon? and for what

purpose but to deter any one else for the future from venturing to

expose the proceedings at Phlius?" Thus far the appellants. And in

good sooth the conduct of the men of Phlius did seem to savour of

insolence; so much so that the ephors called out the ban against them.



B.C. 380. Nor was Agesilaus otherwise than well satisfied with this

decision, not only on the ground of old relations of friendly

hospitality between his father Archidamus and the party of Podanemus,

who were numbered among the restored exiles at this time, but because

personally he was bound by similar ties himself towards the adherents

of Procles, son of Hipponicus. The border sacrifices proving

favourable, the march commenced at once. As he advanced, embassy after

embassy met him, and would fain by presents of money avert invasion.

But the king answered that the purpose of his march was not to commit

wrongdoing, but to protect the victims of injustice. Then the

petitioners offered to do anything, only they begged him to forgo

invasion. Again he replied--How could he trust to their words when

they had lied to him already? He must have the warrant of acts, not

promises. And being asked, "What act (would satisfy him)?" he answered

once more, saying, "The same which you performed aforetime, and

suffered no wrong at our hands"--in other words, the surrender of the

acropolis.[8] But to this they could not bring themselves. Whereupon

he invaded the territory of Phlius, and promptly drawing lines of

circumvallation, commenced the siege. Many of the Lacedaemonians

objected, for the sake of a mere handful of wretched people, so to

embroil themselves with a state of over five thousand men.[9] For,

indeed, to leave no doubt on this score, the men of Phlius met

regularly in assembly in full view of those outside. But Agesilaus was

not to be beaten by this move. Whenever any of the townsmen came out,

drawn by friendship or kinship with the exiles, in every case the

king's instructions were to place the public messes[10] at the service

of the visitors, and, if they were willing to go through the course of

gymnastic training, to give them enough to procure necessaries. All

members of these classes were, by the general's strict injunctions,

further to be provided with arms, and loans were to be raised for the

purpose without delay. Presently the superintendents of this branch of

the service were able to turn out a detachment of over a thousand men,

in the prime of bodily perfection, well disciplined and splendidly

armed, so that in the end the Lacedaemonians affirmed: "Fellow-

soldiers of this stamp are too good to lose." Such were the concerns

of Agesilaus.



[8] See above, IV. iv. 15.



[9] See Grote, "H. G." x. 45, note 4; and below, V. iv. 13.



[10] See "Pol. Lac." v.



Meanwhile Agesipolis on leaving Macedonia advanced straight upon

Olynthus and took up a strategical position in front of the town.

Finding that no one came out to oppose him, he occupied himself for

the present with pillaging any remnant of the district till intact,

and with marching into the territory allied with the enemy, where he

destroyed the corn. The town of Torone he attacked and took by storm.

But while he was so engaged, in the height of mid-summer he was

attacked by a burning fever. In this condition his mind reverted to a

scene once visited, the temple of Dionysus at Aphytis, and a longing

for its cool and sparkling waters and embowered shades[11] seized him.

To this spot accordingly he was carried, still living, but only to

breathe his last outside the sacred shrine, within a week of the day

on which he sickened. His body was laid in honey and conveyed home to

Sparta, where he obtained royal sepulchre.



[11] Lit. "shady tabernacles."



When the news reached Agesilaus he displayed none of the satisfaction

which might possibly have been expected at the removal of an

antagonist. On the contrary, he wept and pined for the companionship

so severed, it being the fashion at Sparta for the kings when at home

to mess together and to share the same quarters. Moreover, Agesipolis

was admirably suited to Agesilaus, sharing with the merriment of youth

in tales of the chase and horsemanship and boyish loves;[12] while, to

crown all, the touch of reverence due from younger to elder was not

wanting in their common life. In place of Agesipolis, the

Lacedaemonians despatched Polybiades as governor to Olynthus.



[12] See "Ages." viii. 2.



B.C. 379. Agesilaus had already exceeded the time during which the

supplies of food in Phlius were expected to last. The difference, in

fact, between self-command and mere appetite is so great that the men

of Phlius had only to pass a resolution to cut down the food

expenditure by one half, and by doing so were able to prolong the

siege for twice the calculated period. But if the contrast between

self-restraint and appetite is so great, no less startling is that

between boldness and faint-heartedness. A Phliasian named Delphion, a

real hero, it would seem, took to himself three hundred Phliasians,

and not only succeeded in preventing the peace-party from carrying out

their wishes, but was equal to the task of incarcerating and keeping

safely under lock and key those whom he mistrusted. Nor did his

ability end there. He succeeded in forcing the mob of citizens to

perform garrison duty, and by vigorous patrolling kept them constant

to the work. Over and over again, accompanied by his personal

attendants, he would dash out of the walls and drive in the enemy's

outposts, first at one point and then at another of the beleaguering

circle. But the time eventually came when, search as they might by

every means, these picked defenders[13] could find no further store of

food within the walls, and they were forced to send to Agesilaus,

requesting a truce for an embassy to visit Sparta, adding that they

were resolved to leave it to the discretion of the authorities at

Lacedaemon to do with their city what they liked. Agesilaus granted a

pass to the embassy, but, at the same time, he was so angry at their

setting his personal authority aside, that he sent to his friends at

home and arranged that the fate of Phlius should be left to his

discretion. Meanwhile he proceeded to tighten the cordon of

investment, so as to render it impossible that a single soul inside

the city should escape. In spite of this, however, Delphion, with one

comrade, a branded dare-devil, who had shown great dexterity in

relieving the besieging parties of their arms, escaped by night.

Presently the deputation returned with the answer from Lacedaemon that

the state simply left it entirely to the discretion of Agesilaus to

decide the fate of Phlius as seemed to him best. Then Agesilaus

announced his verdict. A board of one hundred--fifty taken from the

restored exiles, fifty from those within the city--were in the first

place to make inquisition as to who deserved to live and who to die,

after which they were to lay down laws as the basis of a new

constitution. Pending the carrying out of these transactions, he left

a detachment of troops to garrison the place for six months, with pay

for that period. After this he dismissed the allied forces, and led

the state[14] division home. Thus the transactions concerning Phlius

were brought to a conclusion, having occupied altogether one year and

eight months.



[13] See below, "Hell." VII. i. 19.



[14] {to politokon}, the citizen army. See above, IV. iv. 19; "Pol.

    Lac." xi.



Meanwhile Polybiades had reducd the citizens of Olynthus to the last

stage of misery through famine. Unable to supply themselves with corn

from their own land, or to import it by sea, they were forced to send

an embassy to Lacedaemon to sue for peace. The plenipotentiaries on

their arrival accepted articles of agreement by which they bound

themselves to have the same friends and the same foes as Lacedaemon,

to follow her lead, and to be enrolled among her allies; and so,

having taken an oath to abide by these terms, they returned home.



On every side the affairs of Lacedaemon had signally prospered: Thebes

and the rest of the Boeotian states lay absolutely at her feet;

Corinth had become her most faithful ally; Argos, unable longer to

avail herself of the subterfuge of a movable calendar, was humbled to

the dust; Athens was isolated; and, lastly, those of her own allies

who displayed a hostile feeling towards her had been punished; so

that, to all outward appearance, the foundations of her empire were at

length absolutely well and firmly laid.







IV



Abundant examples might be found, alike in Hellenic and in foreign

history, to prove that the Divine powers mark what is done amiss,

winking neither at impiety nor at the commission of unhallowed acts;

but at present I confine myself to the facts before me.[1] The

Lacedaemonians, who had pledged themselves by oath to leave the states

independent, had laid violent hands on the acropolis of Thebes, and

were eventually punished by the victims of that iniquity single-handed

--the Lacedaemonians, be it noted, who had never before been mastered

by living man; and not they alone, but those citizens of Thebes who

introduced them to their acropolis, and who wished to enslave their

city to Lacedaemon, that they might play the tyrant themselves--how

fared it with them? A bare score of the fugitives were sufficient to

destroy their government. How this happened I will now narrate in

detail.



[1] Or, "it is of my own subject that I must now speak." For the

    "peripety," or sudden reversal of circumstances, on which the plot

    of the "Hellenica" hinges, see Grote, "H. G." x. 100-108. Cf.

    Soph. "Oed. Tyr." 450; "Antig." 1066; Thuc. v. 116; "Hellenica

    Essays," "Xenophon," p. 382 foll. This passage is perhaps the key

    to the historian's position.



There was a man named Phyllidas--he was secretary to Archias, that is,

to the polemarchs.[2] Beyond his official duties, he had rendered his

chief other services, and all apparently in an exemplary fashion. A

visit to Athens in pursuance of some business brought this man into

contact with a former acquaintance of his, Melon, one of the exiles

who had fled for safety to Athens. Melon had various questions to ask

touching the sort of tyranny practised by Archias in the exercise of

the polemarchy, and by Philip. He soon discovered that affairs at home

were still more detestable to Phyllidas than to himself. It only

remained to exchange pledges, and to arrange the details of what was

to be done. After a certain interval Melon, accompanied by six of the

trustiest comrades he could find among his fellow-exiles, set off for

Thebes. They were armed with nothing but daggers, and first of all

crept into the neighbourhood under cover of night. The whole of the

next day they lay concealed in a desert place, and drew near to the

city gates in the guise of labourers returning home with the latest

comers from the fields. Having got safely within the city, they spent

the whole of that night at the house of a man named Charon, and again

the next day in the same fashion. Phyllidas meanwhile was busily taken

up with the concerns of the polemarchs, who were to celebrate a feast

of Aphrodite on going out of office. Amongst other things, the

secretary was to take this opportunity of fulfilling an old

undertaking, which was the introduction of certain women to the

polemarchs. They were to be the most majestic and the most beautiful

to be found in Thebes. The polemarchs, on their side (and the

character of the men is sufficiently marked), were looking forward to

the pleasures of the night with joyful anticipation. Supper was over,

and thanks to the zeal with which the master of the ceremonies

responded to their mood, they were speedily intoxicated. To their oft-

repeated orders to introduce their mistresses, he went out and fetched

Melon and the rest, three of them dressed up as ladies and the rest as

their attendant maidens. Having brought them into the treasury of the

polemarchs' residence,[3] he returned himself and announced to Archias

and his friends that the women would not present themselves as long as

any of the attendants remained in the room; whereupon they promptly

bade all withdraw, and Phyllidas, furnishing the servants with a stoup

of wine, sent them off to the house of one of them. And now at last he

introduced the mistresses, and led them to their seats beside their

respective lords. It was preconcerted that as soon as they were seated

they were to throw aside their veils and strike home. That is one

version of the death of the polemarchs.[4] According to another, Melon

and his friends came in as revellers, and so despatched their victims.



[2] Lit. "to Archias and his (polemarchs)"; but the Greek phrase does

    not, as the English would, imply that there were actually more

    than two polemarchs, viz. Archias and Philippus. Hypates and

    Leontiades belonged to the faction, but were neither of them

    polemarchs.



[3] Lit. "Polemarcheion."



[4] Or, "and so, according to the prevalent version of the matter, the

    polemarchs were slain. But some say that . . ."



That over, Phyllidas, with three of the band, set off to the house of

Leontiades. Arrived there, he knocked on the door, and sent in word

that he had a message from the polemarchs. Leontiades, as chance

befell, was still reclining in privacy after dinner, and his wife was

seated beside him working wools. The fidelity of Phyllidas was well

known to him, and he gave orders to admit him at once. They entered,

slew Leontiades, and with threats silenced his wife. As they went out

they ordered the door to be shut, threatening that if they found it

open they would kill every one in the house. And now that this deed

was done, Phyllidas, with two of the band, presented himself at the

prison, telling the gaoler he had brought a man from the polemarchs to

be locked up. The gaoler opened the door, and was at once despatched,

and the prisoners were released. These they speedily supplied with

arms taken from the armoury in the stoa, and then led them to the

Ampheion,[5] and bade them take up a position there, after which they

at once made a proclamation calling on all Thebans to come out, horse

and foot, seeing that the tyrants were dead. The citizens, indeed, as

long as it was night, not knowing whom or what to trust, kept quiet,

but when day dawned and revealed what had occurred, the summons was

responded to with alacrity, heavy infantry and cavalry under arms

alike sallying forth. Horsemen were also despatched by the now

restored exiles to the two Athenian generals on the frontier; and

they, being aware of the object of the mesage [promptly responded].[6]



[5] See plan of Thebes, "Dict. Geog."; Arrian, "Anab." i. 8; Aesch.

    "Sept. c. Theb." 528.



[6] Supply {epeboethoun}. There is a lacuna in the MSS. at this point.



On the other hand, the Lacedaemonian governor in the citadel, as soon

as that night's proclamation reached his ears, was not slow to send to

Plataeae[7] and Thespiae for reinforcements. The approach of the

Plataeans was perceived by the Theban cavalry, who met them and killed

a score of them and more, and after that achievement returned to the

city, to find the Athenians from the frontier already arrived. Then

they assaulted the acropolis. The troops within recognised the paucity

of their own numbers, whilst the zeal of their opponents (one and all

advancing to the attack) was plainly visible, and loud were the

proclamations, promising rewards to those who should be first to scale

the walls. All this so worked upon their fears that they agreed to

evacuate the place if the citizens would allow them a safe-conduct to

retire with their arms. To this request the others gladly yielded, and

they made a truce. Oaths were taken on the terms aforesaid, and the

citizens dismissed their adversaries. For all that, as the garrison

retired, those of them who were recognised as personal foes were

seized and put to death. Some were rescued through the good offices of

the Athenian reinforcements from the frontier, who smuggled them

across and saved them. The Thebans were not content with putting the

men to death; if any of them had children, these also were sacrificed

to their vengeance.



[7] This city had been refounded in B.C. 386 (Isocr. "Plat." 20, 21).

    See Freeman, op. cit. ch. iv. p. 170: "Its restoration implied not

    only a loss of Theban supremacy, but the actual loss of that

    portion of the existing Theban territory which had formerly formed

    the Plataian district."



B.C. 378. When the news of these proceedings reached Sparta the first

thing the Lacedaemonians did was to put to death the governor, who had

abandoned the Cadmeia instead of awaiting reinforcements, and the next

was to call out the ban against Thebes. Agesilaus had little taste to

head the expedition; he pointed out that he had seen more than forty

years' service,[8] and that the exemption from foreign duty applicable

to others at that age was applicable on the same principle to the

king. Such were the ostensible grounds on which he excused himself

from the present expedition, but his real objections lay deeper. He

felt certain that if he led the expedition his fellow-citizens would

say: "Agesilaus caused all this trouble to the state in order to aid

and abet tyrants." Therefore he preferred to leave his countrymen to

settle the matter themselves as they liked. Accordingly the ephors,

instructed by the Theban exiles who had escaped the late massacres,

despatched Cleombrotus. He had not commanded before, and it was the

depth of winter.



[8] And was therefore more than fifty-eight years old at this date.

    See "Ages." i. 6.



Now while Chabrias, with a body of Athenian peltasts, kept watch and

ward over the road through Eleutherae, Cleombrotus made his way up by

the direct route to Plataeae. His column of light infantry, pushing

forward in advance, fell upon the men who had been released from the

Theban prison, guarding the summit, to the number of about one hundred

and fifty. These, with the exception of one or two who escaped, were

cut down by the peltasts, and Cleombrotus descended in person upon

Plataeae, which was still friendly to Sparta. Presently he reached

Thespiae, and that was the base for an advance upon Cynoscephalae,

where he encamped on Theban territory. Here he halted sixteen days,

and then again fell back upon Thespiae. At this latter place he now

left Sphodrias as governor, with a third portion of each of the

contingents of the allies, handing over to him all the moneys he had

brought with him from home, with directions to supplement his force

with a contingent of mercenaries.



While Sphodrias was so employed, Cleombrotus himself commenced his

homeward march, following the road through Creusis at the head of his

own moiety of the troops, who indeed were in considerable perplexity

to discover whether they were at war with the Thebans or at peace,

seeing that the general had led his army into Theban territory, had

inflicted the minimum of mischief, and again retired. No sooner,

however, was his back turned than a violent wind storm assailed him in

his rear, which some construed as an omen clearly significant of what

was about to take place. Many a blow this assailant dealt them, and as

the general and his army, crossing from Creusis, scaled that face of

the mountain[9] which stretches seaward, the blast hurled headlong

from the precipices a string of asses, baggage and all: countless arms

were wrested from the bearers' grasp and whirled into the sea;

finally, numbers of the men, unable to march with their arms,

deposited them at different points of the pass, first filling the

hollow of their shields with stones. For the moment, then, they halted

at Aegosthena, on Megarian soil, and supped as best they could. Next

day they returned and recovered their arms. After this adventure the

contingents lost no time in returning to their several homes, as

Cleombrotus disbanded them.



[9] I.e. "Cithaeron."



Meanwhile at Athens and Thebes alike fear reigned. To the Athenians

the strength of the Lacedaemonians was unmistakable: the war was

plainly no longer confined to Corinth; on the contrary, the

Lacedaemonians had ventured to skirt Athenian territory and to invade

Thebes. They were so worked upon by their alarm that the two generals

who had been privy to the insurrection of Melon against Leontiades and

his party had to suffer: the one was formally tried and put to death;

the other, refusing to abide his trial, was banished.



The apprehensions of the Thebans were of a different sort: their fear

was rather lest they should find themselves in single-handed war with

Lacedaemon. To prevent this they hit upon the following expedient.

They worked upon Sphodrias,[10] the Spartan governor left in Thespiae,

by offering him, as at least was suspected, a substantial sum, in

return for which he was to make an incursion into Attica; their great

object being to involve Athens and Lacedaemon in hostilities.

Sphodrias lent a willing ear, and, pretending that he could easily

capture Piraeus in its present gateless condition, gave his troops an

early evening meal and marched out of Thespiae, saying that he would

reach Piraeus before daybreak. As a matter of fact day overtook him at

Thria, nor did he take any pains even to draw a veil over his

intentions; on the contrary, being forced to turn aside, he amused

himself by recklessly lifting cattle and sacking houses. Meanwhile

some who chanced upon him in the night had fled to the city and

brought news to the men of Athens that a large body of troops was

approaching. It needs no saying with what speed the cavalry and heavy

infantry armed themselves and stood on guard to protect the city. As

chance befell, there were some Lacedaemonian ambassadors in Athens at

the moment, at the house of Callias their proxenos; their names were

Etymocles, Aristolochus, and Ocyllus. Immediately on receipt of the

news the Athenians seized these three and imprisoned them, as not

improbably concerned in the plot. Utterly taken aback by the affair

themselves, the ambassadors pleaded that, had they been aware of an

attempt to seize Piraeus, they would hardly have been so foolish as to

put themselves into the power of the Athenians, or have selected the

house of their proxenos for protection, where they were so easily to

be found. It would, they further urged, soon be plain to the Athenians

themselves that the state of Lacedaemon was quite as little cognisant

of these proceedings as they. "You will hear before long"--such was

their confident prediction--"that Sphodrias has paid for his behaviour

by his life." On this wise the ambassadors were acquitted of all

concern in the matter and dismissed. Sphodrias himself was recalled

and indicted by the ephors on the capital charge, and, in spite of his

refusal to face the trial, he was acquitted. This miscarriage of

justice, as it seemed to many, who described it as unprecedented in

Lacedaemon, has an explanation.



[10] See Plut. "Pel." xiv. (Clough, ii. p. 214).



Sphodrias had a son named Cleonymus. He was just at the age when youth

emerges from boyhood, very handsome and of high repute among his

fellows. To this youth Archidamus, the son of Agesilaus, was

passionately attached. Now the friends of Cleombrotus, as comrades of

Sphodrias, were disposed to acquit him; but they feared Agesilaus and

his friends, not to mention the intermediate party, for the enormity

of his proceeding was clear. So when Sphodrias addressed his son

Cleonymus: "You have it in your power, my son, to save your father, if

you will, by begging Archidamus to dispose Agesilaus favourably to me

at my trial." Thus instructed, the youth did not shrink from visiting

Archidamus, and implored him for his sake to save his father. Now when

Archidamus saw how Cleonymus wept, he too was melted to tears as he

stood beside him, but to his petition he made answer thus: "Nay,

Cleonymus, it is the bare truth I tell you, I cannot so much as look

my father in the face;[11] if I wished anything transacted for me in

the city I would beg assistance from the whole world sooner than from

my father. Still, since it is you who bid me, rest assured I will do

my best to bring this about for you as you desire." He then left the

common hall[12] and retired home to rest, but with dawn he arose and

kept watch that his father might not go out without his knowledge.

Presently, when he saw him ready to go forth, first some citizen was

present, and then another and another; and in each case he stepped

aside, while they held his father in conversation. By and by a

stranger would come, and then another; and so it went on until he even

found himself making way for a string of petitioning attendants. At

last, when his father had turned his back on the Eurotas, and was

entering his house again, he was fain to turn his back also and be

gone without so much as accosting him. The next day he fared no

better: all happened as on the previous day. Now Agesilaus, although

he had his suspicions why his son went to and fro in this way, asked

no questions, but left him to take his own course. Archidamus, on his

side, was longing, as was natural, to see his friend Cleonymus; but

how he was to visit him, without having held the desired conversation

with his father, he knew not. The friends of Sphodrias, observing that

he who was once so frequent a visitor had ceased coming, were in

agony; he must surely have been deterred by the reproaches of his

father. At last, however, Archidamus dared to go to his father, and

said, "Father, Cleonymus bids me ask you to save his father; grant me

this boon, if possible, I beg you." He answered: "For yourself, my

son, I can make excuse, but how shall my city make excuse for me if I

fail to condemn that man who, for his own base purpose, traffics to

the injury of the state?" For the moment the other made no reply, but

retired crestfallen before the verdict of justice. Afterwards, whether

the thought was his own or that he was prompted by some other, he came

and said, "Father, if Sphodrias had done no wrong you would have

released him, that I know; but now, if he has done something wrong,

may he not be excused by you for our sakes?" And the father answered:

"If it can be done without loss of honour on our parts, so shall it

be." At that word the young man, in deep despondency, turned and went.

Now one of the friends of Sphodrias, conversing with Etymocles,

remarked to him: "You are all bent on putting Sphodrias to death, I

take it, you friends of Agesilaus?" And Etymocles replied: "If that be

so, we all are bent on one thing, and Agesilaus on another, since in

all his conversations he still harps upon one string: that Sphodrias

has done a wrong there is no denying, yet Sphodrias is a man who, from

boyhood to ripe manhood,[13] was ever constant to the call of honour.

To put such a man as that to death is hard; nay, Sparta needs such

soldiers." The other accordingly went off and reported what he had

just heard to Cleonymus; and he in the joy of his heart went

straightway to Archidamus and said: "Now we know that you care for us;

rest assured, Archidamus, that we in turn will take great pains that

you shall never have cause to blush for our friendship." Nor did his

acts belie his words; but so long as he lived he was ever faithful to

the code of Spartan chivalry; and at Leuctra, fighting in front of the

king side by side with Deinon the polemarch, thrice fell or ever he

yielded up his breath--foremost of the citizens amidst the foe. And

so, albeit he caused his friend the bitterest sorrow, yet to that

which he had promised he was faithful, seeing he wrought Archidamus no

shame, but contrariwise shed lustre on him.[14] In this way Sphodrias

obtained his acquittal.



[11] See "Cyrop." I. iv. 12.



[12] Lit. "the Philition." See "Pol. Lac." iii. 6.



[13] Lit. "who, whether as child, boy, or young man"; and for the

    three stages of growth, see "Pol. Lac." ii. iii. iv.



[14] I.e. both in life and in death.



At Athens the friends of Boeotia were not slow to instruct the people

that his countrymen, so far from punishing Sphodrias, had even

applauded him for his designs on Athens; and in consequence of this

the Athenians not only furnished Piraeus with gates, but set to work

to build a fleet, and displayed great zeal in sending aid to the

Boeotians.[15] The Lacedaemonians, on their side, called out the ban

against the Thebans; and being persuaded that in Agesilaus they would

find a more prudent general than Cleombrotus had proved, they begged

the former to undertake the expedition.[16] He, replying that the wish

of the state was for him law, began making preparations to take the

field.



[15] For the new Athenian confederacy of Delos of this year, B.C. 378,

    see "Pol. Lac." xiv. 6; "Rev." v. 6; Diod. xv. 28-30; Plut.

    "Pelop." xv.; Hicks, 78, 81; and for an alliance between Athens

    and Chalcis in Euboea, see Hicks, 79; and for a treaty with Chios,

    Hicks, 80.



[16] See "Ages." ii. 22.



Now he had come to the conclusion that without the occupation of Mount

Cithaeron any attack on Thebes would be difficult. Learning then that

the men of Cleitor were just now at war with the men of

Orchomenus,[17] and were maintaing a foreign brigade, he came to an

understanding with the Cleitorians that in the event of his needing

it, this force would be at his service; and as soon as the sacrifices

for crossing the frontier proved favourable, he sent to the commander

of the Cleitorian mercenaries, and handing him a month's pay, ordered

him to occupy Cithaeron with his men. This was before he himself

reached Tegea. Meanwhile he sent a message to the men of Orchomenus

that so long as the campaign lasted they must cease from war. If any

city during his campaign abroad took on itself to march against

another city, his first duty, he declared, would be to march against

such offending city in accordance with a decree of the allies.



[17] In Arcadia. See Busolt, "Die Lak." 120 foll.



Thus crossing Cithaeron he reached Thespiae,[18] and from that base

made the territory of Thebes his objective. Finding the great plain

fenced round with ditch and palisade, as also the most valuable

portions of the country, he adopted the plan of shifting his

encampment from one place to another. Regularly each day, after the

morning meal, he marched out his troops and ravaged the territory,

confining himself to his own side of the palisadings and trench. The

appearance of Agesilaus at any point whatever was a signal to the

enemy, who within the circuit of his entrenchment kept moving in

parallel line to the invader, and was ever ready to defend the

threatened point. On one occasion, the Spartan king having retired and

being well on the road back to camp, the Theban cavalry, hitherto

invisible, suddenly dashed out, following one of the regularly

constructed roads out of the entrenchment. Taking advantage of the

enemy's position--his light troops breaking off to supper or busily

preparing the meal, and the cavalry, some of them on their legs

just[19] dismounted, and others in the act of mounting--on they rode,

pressing the charge home. Man after man of the light troops was cut

down; and three cavalry troopers besides--two Spartans, Cleas and

Epicydidas by name, and the third a provincial[20] named Eudicus, who

had not had time to mount their horses, and whose fate was shared by

some Theban[21] exiles. But presently Agesilaus wheeled about and

advanced with his heavy infantry to the succour; his cavalry dashed at

the enemy's cavalry, and the flower of the heavy infantry, the ten-

years-service men, charged by their side. The Theban cavalry at that

instant looked like men who had been imbibing too freely in the

noontide heat--that is to say, they awaited the charge long enough to

hurl their spears; but the volley sped without effect, and wheeling

about within that distance they left twelve of their number dead upon

the field.



[18] By Cynoscephalae. See "Ages." ii. 22.



[19] Read, after Courier, {arti} for the vulg. {eti}; or, better

    still, adopt Hartman's emendation (op. cit. p. 379), {ton men ede

    katabebekoton ton de katabainonton}, and translate "some--already

    dismounted, and others dismounting."



[20] Lit. "one of the perioeci."



[21] Reading {Thebaion} after Dind. for {'Athenaion}.



Agesilaus had not failed to note with what regularity the enemy

presented himself after the morning meal. Turning the observation to

account, he offered sacrifice with day's dawn, and marched with all

possible speed, and so crossed within the palisadings, through what

might have been a desert, as far as defence or sign of living being

went. Once well inside, he proceeded to cut down and set on fire

everything up to the city gates. After this exploit he beat a retreat,

retiring into Thespiae, where he fortified their citadel for them.

Here he left Phoebidas as governor, while he himself crossed the

passes back into Megara. Arrived here he disbanded the allies, and led

the city troops homewards.



After the departure of Agesilaus, Phoebidas devoted himself to

harrying the Thebans by sending out robber bands, and laid waste their

land by a system of regular incursions. The Thebans, on their side,

desiring to retaliate, marched out with their whole force into the

territory of Thespiae. But once well inside the district they found

themselves closely beset by Phoebidas and his light troops, who would

not give them the slightest chance to scatter from their main body, so

that the Thebans, heartily vexed at the turn their foray had taken,

beat a retreat quicker than they had come. The muleteers threw away

with their own hands the fruits they had captured, in their anxiety to

get home as quickly as possible; so dire a dread had fallen upon the

invading army. This was the chance for the Spartan to press home his

attack boldly, keeping his light division in close attendance on

himself, and leaving the heavy infantry under orders to follow him in

battle order. He was in hopes even that he might put the enemy to

complete rout, so valiantly did he lead the advance, encouraging the

light troops to "come to a close grip with the invadors," or summoning

the heavy infantry of the Thespiaeans to "bring up their supports."

Presently the Theban cavalry as they retired found themselves face to

face with an impassable glen or ravine, where in the first instance

they collected in a mob, and next wheeled right-about-face in sheer

resourcelessness where to cross. The handful of light troops who

formed the Spartan vanguard took fright at the Thebans and fled, and

the Theban horsemen seeing this put in practice the lesson of attack

which the fugitives taught them. As for Phoebidas himself, he and two

or three with him fell sword in hand, whereupon his mercenary troops

all took to their heels.



When the stream of fugitives reached the Thespiaean heavy infantry

reserves, they too, in spite of much boasting beforehand that they

would never yield to Thebans, took to flight, though there was now

absolutely no pursuit whatever, for it was now late. The number slain

was not large, but, for all that, the men of Thespiae did not come to

a standstill until they found themselves safe inside their walls. As a

sequel, the hopes and spirits of the Thebans were again kindled into

new life, and they made campaigns against Thespiae and the other

provincial cities of Boeotia.[22] It must be admitted that in each

case the democratical party retired from these cities to Thebes; since

absolute governments had been established in all of them on the

pattern previously adopted at Thebes; and the result was that the

friends of Lacedaemon in these cities also needed her assistance.[23]

After the death of Phoebidas the Lacedaemonians despatched a polemarch

with a division by sea to form the garrison of Thespiae.



[22] Lit. "their other perioecid cities." For the significance of this

    title as applied by the Thebans (and perhaps commonly) to the

    other cities of Boeotia, see Freeman, op. cit. ch. iv. pp. 157,

    173 foll.



[23] See Grote, "H. G." x. 174; Freeman, op. cit. iv. 171, 172.



B.C. 377. With the advent of spring[24] the ephors again called out

the ban against Thebes, and requested Agesilaus to lead the

expedition, as on the former campaign. He, holding to his former

theory with regard to the invasion, even before sacrificing the

customary frontier sacrifice, sent a despatch to the polemarch at

Thespiae, with orders to seize the pass which commands the road over

Cithaeron, and to guard it against his arrival. Then, having once more

crossed the pass and reached Plataeae, he again made a feint of

marching first into Thespiae, and so sent a despatch ordering supplies

to be in readiness, and all embassies to be waiting his arrival there;

so that the Thebans concentrated their attention on the approaches

from Thespiae, which they strongly guarded. Next morning, however,

Agesilaus sacrificed at daybreak and set out on the road to

Erythrae,[25] and completing in one day what was a good two days'

march for an army, gave the Thebans the slip, and crossed their

palisade-work at Scolus before the enemy had arrived from the closely-

guarded point at which he had effected his entrance formerly. This

done he proceeded to ravage the eastward-facing districts of the city

of Thebes as far as the territory of Tanagra, for at that date Tanagra

was still in the hands of Hypatodorus and his party, who were friends

of the Lacedaemonians. After that he turned to retire, keeping the

walls of Thebes on his left. But the Thebans, who had stolen, as it

were, upon the scene, drew up at the spot called "The Old Wife's

Breast,"[26] keeping the trench and palisading in their rear: they

were persuaded that here, if anywhere, lay their chance to risk a

decisive engagement, the ground at this point being somewhat narrow

and difficult to traverse. Agesilaus, however, in view of the

situation, refused to accept the challenge. Instead of marching upon

them he turned sharp off in the direction of the city; and the

Thebans, in alarm for the city in its undefended state, abandoned the

favourable ground on which they were drawn up in battle line, and

retired at the double towards the city along the road to Potniae,

which seemed the safer route. This last move of Agesilaus may be

described as a stroke of genius:[27] while it allowed him to retire to

a distance, it forced the enemy themselves to retreat at the double.

In spite of this, however, one or two of the polemarchs, with their

divisions, charged the foe as he raced past. But again the Thebans,

from the vantage-ground of their heights, sent volleys of spears upon

the assailants, which cost one of the polemarchs, Alypetus, his life.

He fell pierced by a spear. But again from this particular crest the

Thebans on their side were forced to turn in flight; so much so that

the Sciritae, with some of the cavalry, scaled up and speedily cut

down the rearmost ranks of the Thebans as they galloped past into the

city. When, however, they were close under cover of their walls the

Thebans turned, and the Sciritae seeing them retreated at more than a


steady walking pace. No one, it is true, was slain; but the Thebans

all the same set up a trophy in record of the incident at the point

where the scaling party had been forced to retreat.



[24] See for affairs of Delos, never actually named by Xenophon,

    between B.C. 377 and 374, the Sandwich Marble in Trinity College,

    Cambridge; Boeckh, "C. I. G" 158, and "P. E. A." ii. p. 78 foll.;

    Hicks, 82.



[25] Erythrae (Redlands) stands between Hysiae and Scolus, east of

    Katzula.--Leake, "N. Gr." ii. 329. See Herod. ix. 15, 25; Thuc.

    iii. 24; Paus. IX. ii. 1; Strab. IX. ii.



[26] Lit. "Graos Stethos."



[27] Or, "and this move of Agesilaus was regarded as a very pretty

    one."



And now, since the hour was come, Agesilaus fell back and encamped on

the very site on which he had seen the enemy drawn up in battle array.

Next day he retired by the road to Thespiae. The light troops, who

formed a free corps in the pay of the Thebans, hung audaciously at his

heels. Their shouts could be heard calling out to Chabrias[28] for not

bringing up his supports; when the cavalry of the Olynthians (who now

contributed a contingent in accordance with their oaths)[29] wheeled

round on them, caught the pursuers in the heat of their pursuit, and

drove them uphill, putting large numbers of them to the sword--so

quickly are infantry overhauled by cavalry on steep ground which can

be ridden over. Being arrived within the walls of Thespiae, Agesilaus

found the citizens in a state of party feud, the men of Lacedaemonian

proclivities desiring to put their political opponents, one of whom

was Menon, to death[30]--a proceeding which Agesilaus would not

sanction. After having healed their differences and bound them over by

solemn oath to keep the peace with one another, he at once retired,

taking his old route across Cithaeron to Megara. Here once more he

disbanded the allies, and at the head of the city troops himself

marched back to Sparta.



[28] For the exploits of Chabrias, who commanded a division of mixed

    Athenians and mercenaries (see above, S. 14), see Dem. "c. Lept."

    479; Polyaen. ii. 1, 2; Diod. xv. 32, 33, who gives interesting

    details; Grote, "H. G." x. 172 foll.



[29] See above, "Hell." V. iii. 26.



[30] Or, "under the pretext of furthering Laconian interests there was

    a desire to put political opponents to death." For "Menon," Diod.

    conj. "Melon."



The Thebans had not gathered in the fruits of their soil for two years

now, and began to be sorely pinched for want of corn; they therefore

sent a body of men on board a couple of triremes to Pagasae, with ten

talents[31] in hand for the purchase of corn. But while these

commissioners were engaged in effecting their purchases, Alcetas, the

Lacedaemonian who was garrisoning Oreus,[32] fitted out three

triremes, taking precautions that no rumour of his proceedings should

leak out. As soon as the corn was shipped and the vessels under weigh,

he captured not only the corn but the triremes, escort and all,

numbering no less than three hundred men. This done he locked up his

prisoners in the citadel, where he himself was also quartered. Now

there was a youth, the son of a native of Oreus, fair of mien and of

gentle breeding,[33] who danced attendance on the commandant: and the

latter must needs leave the citadel and go down to busy himself with

this youth. This was a piece of carelessness which the prisoners did

not fail to observe, and turned to good account by seizing the

citadel, whereupon the town revolted, and the Thebans experienced no

further difficulty in obtaining corn supplies.



[31] = 2,437 pounds: 10 shillings.



[32] Oreus, formerly called Histiaea, in the north of Euboea. See

    Thuc. vii. 57, viii. 95; Diod. xv. 30; Grote, "H. G." ix. 263. For

    Pagasae at the north extremity of the Pagasaean Gulf, "the cradle

    of Greek navigation," see Tozer, "Geog. Gr." vi. p. 124; Strab.

    IX. v. 15.



[33] Or, "beautiful and brave if ever youth was."



B.C. 376. At the return of spring Agesilaus lay sick--a bedridden

invalid. The history of the case is this: During the withdrawal of his

army from Thebes the year before, when at Megara, while mounting from

the Aphrodision[34] to the Government house he ruptured a vein or

other vessel of the body. This was followed by a rush of blood to his

sound leg. The knee was much swelled, and the pain intolerable, until

a Syracusan surgeon made an incision in the vein near the ankle. The

blood thus let flowed night and day; do what they could to stop the

discharge, all failed, till the patient fainted away; then it ceased.

In this plight Agesilaus was conveyed home on a litter to Lacedaemon,

and remained an invalid the rest of that summer and throughout the

winter.



[34] Pausanius (I. xi. 6) mentions a temple of Aphrodite

    {'Epistrophoa} (Verticordia), on the way up to the Carian

    Acropolis of Megara.



But to resume: at the first burst of spring the Lacedaemonians again

called out the ban, and gave orders to Cleombrotus to lead the

expedition. The king found himself presently with his troops at the

foot of Cithaeron, and his light infantry advanced to occupy the pass

which commands the road. But here they found a detachment of Thebans

and Athenians already in occupation of the desired height, who for a

while suffered them to approach; but when they were close upon them,

sprang from their position and charged, putting about forty to the

sword. This incident was sufficient to convince Cleombrotus that to

invade Thebes by this mountain passage was out of the question, and in

this faith he led back and disbanded his troops.



The allies met in Lacedaemon, and arguments were adduced on the part

of the allies to show that faintheartedness would very soon lead to

their being absolutely worn out by the war. They had got it in their

power, it was urged, to fit out a fleet far outnumbering that of

Athens, and to reduce that city by starvation; it was open to them, in

the self-same ships, to carry an army across into Theban territory,

and they had a choice of routes--the road into Phocis, or, if they

preferred, by Creusis. After thus carefully considering the matter

they manned a fleet of sixty triremes, and Pollis was appointed

admiral in command. Nor indeed were their expectations altogether

belied. The Athenians were soon so closely blockaded that their corn

vessels could get no farther than Geraestus;[35] there was no inducing

them to coast down father south, with a Lacedaemonian navy hovering

about Aegina and Ceos and Andros. The Athenians, making a virtue of

necessity, manned their ships in person, gave battle to Pollis under

the leadership of Chabrias, and came out of the sea-fight[36]

victorious.



[35] The promontory at the southern extremity of Euboea.



[36] Battle of Naxos, B.C. 376. For interesting details, see Diod. xv.

    35, 35.



B.C. 375. Then the corn supplies flowed freely into Athens. The

Lacedaemonians, on their side, were preparing to transport an army

across the water into Boeotia, when the Thebans sent a request to the

Athenians urging them to despatch an armament round Peloponnesus,

under the persuasion that if this were done the Lacedaemonians would

find it impossible at once to guard their own or the allied territory

in that part of the world, and at the same time to convery an army of

any size to operate against Thebes. The proposals fell in with the

present temper of the Athenians, irritated with Lacedaemon on account

of the exploit of Sphodrias. Accordingly they eagerly manned a fleet

of sixty vessels, appointing Timotheus as admiral in command, and

despatched it on a cruise round Peloponnesus.



The Thebans, seeing that there had been no hostile invasion of their

territory for so long (neither during the campaign of Cleombrotus nor

now,[37] whilst Timotheus prosecuted his coasting voyage), felt

emboldened to carry out a campaign on their own account against the

provincial cities;[38] and one by one they again recovered them.



[37] Lit. "nor at the date of Timotherus's periplus." To the historian

    writing of the events of this period several years later, the

    coasting voyage of Timotheus is a single incident ({periepleuse}),

    and as Grote ("H. G." x. 185, note 3) observes, the words may

    "include not simply the time which Timotheus took in actually

    circumnavigating Peloponnesos, but the year which he spent

    afterwards in the Ionian sea, and the time which he occupied in

    performing his exploits near Korkyra, Leukas, and the

    neighbourhood generally." For the character and exploits of

    Timotheus, son of Conon, see Isocr. "Or." xv. "On the Antidosis,"

    SS. 101-139; Jebb, "Att. Or." ii. p. 140 foll.; Rehdantz, "Vit.

    Iphicr. Chabr. Timoth. Atheniensium."



[38] Or, "the cities round about their territory," lit. "the perioecid

    cities." For the import of the epithet, see V. iv. 46; Freeman,

    op. cit. iv. 173, note 1, in reference to Grote, "H. G." x. 183,

    note 4. For the battle of Tegyra see Grote, ib. 182; Plut.

    "Pelop." 17; Diod. xv. 57 ("evidently this battle," Grote);

    Callisthenes, fr. 3, ed. Did. Cf. Steph. Byz., {Tegura}.



Timotheus in his cruise reached Corcyra, and reduced it at a blow.

That done, he neither enslaved the inhabitants nor drove them into

exile, nor changed their laws. And of this conduct he reaped the

benefit of the increased cordiality[39] of all the cities of those

parts. The Lacedaemonians thereupon fitted out and despatched a

counter fleet, with Nicolochus in command, an officer of consummate

boldness. This admiral no sooner caught sight of Timotheus's fleet

than without hesitation, and in spite of the absence of six Ambraciot

vessels which formed part of his squadron, he gave battle, with

fifty-five ships to the enemy's sixty. The result was a defeat at the

moment, and Timotheus set up a trophy at Alyzia. But as soon as the

six missing Ambraciot vessels had reinforced him--the ships of

Timotheus meanwhile being docked and undergoing repairs--he bore down

upon Alyzia in search of the Athenian, and as Timotheus refused to put

out to meet him, the Lacedaemonian in turn set up a trophy on the

nearest group of islands.



[39] The Corcyraeans, Acarnanians, and Cephallenians join the alliance

    B.C. 375; see Hicks, 83. "This decree dates from the autumn of

    B.C. 375, immediately after Timotheos's visit to Korkyra (Xen.

    'Hell.' V. iv. 64). The result was that the names of Korkyra,

    Kephallenia, and Akarnania were inscribed upon the list (No. 81),

    and an alliance was made with them." See "C. I. A." ii. p. 399

    foll.; Hicks, loc. cit.; "Hell." VI. v. 23); "C. I. A." ii. 14.

    The tablet is in the Asclepeian collection at the entrance of the

    Acropolis at Athens. See Milchofer, "Die Museum Athens," 1881, p.

    45.



B.C. 374. Timotheus, after repairing his original squadron and manning

more vessels from Corcyra, found himself at the head of more than

seventy ships. His naval superiority was undisputed, but he was forced

to send to Athens for moneys, seeing his fleet was large and his wants

not trifling.


