Chapter VI

Philosophy

I. Mill's Opponents

    Mill's logic embodies the cardinal principles of his
philosophy. The principles implied that little of what is called
philosophy could be valid. Mill necessarily held that many of the
most pretentious speculations were, in reality, nothing but
words; cobwebs of the brain to be swept into the dustbin,
finally, though politely, by the genuine thinkers. His view of
the consequences to theology and religion could for a long time
be inferred only from incidental remarks. Gradually he came to
think that the reticence was undesirable, and had given his final
conclusions in the Essays, which were published after his death.
The philosophical position which underlies them is most clearly
exhibited in his Examination of Hamilton (1865).(1*) This
included a criticism of Mansel's application of Hamilton's
metaphysical doctrines to theology. Mansel's doctrine, stated in
the Bampton Lectures of 1858, had provoked some sharp and
many-sided controversies. He defended himself against Mill's
criticism. Other writers joined the fray, and in one way or other
a perplexing set of intellectual encounters resulted. The leading
champions were Mill, representing the pure Utilitarian tradition,
Mansel, who represented the final outcome of what Mill called
'intuitionism,' and F. D. Maurice, who may be briefly called the
intellectual heir of Coleridge; while another line of inference
was represented by Mr. Herbert Spencer's First Principles. Many
of the arguments have already a strangely obsolete sound; but
they may serve to illustrate the direction of the main currents
of opinion.
    The writings of Sir William Hamilton provided the ostensible
battle-ground. Mill had seen in Hamilton certain symptoms of a
hopeful leaning towards the true faith. Upon taking up the study
more seriously, he discovered that Hamilton was really an
intuitionist at bottom, and even a 'chief pillar' of the
erroneous philosophy. I shall therefore inquire, in the first
place, into the true nature of this version of the evil
principle. It has been so often 'lucidly expounded' that it is
hard to say what it really means.
    Hamilton,(2*) born 8th March 1788, was grandnephew, grandson,
and son of three successive professors of anatomy at Glasgow.
While still an infant, he lost his father, and was ever
afterwards on terms of the tenderest affection with his mother,
who died in 1827. After at Glasgow, he went to Balliol as a Snell
studying exhibitioner in 1807, and there startled his examiners
by his portentous knowledge of Aristotle.(3*) After some medical
study, he decided to join the Scottish bar. He took, however,
more interest in the antiquarian than the practical branches of
the laws; and spent a great deal of time and labour on abstruse
genealogical researches to establish his claim to a baronetcy. He
had to show that he was heir to a Sir Robert Hamilton, who died
in 1701, through a common ancestor who died before 1552. His love
of obscure researches, or his want of aptitude for speaking,
together with his adherence to Whig principles, kept him out of
the road to professional success. He was known, however, as a
'monster of erudition.' He visited Germany with his college
friend J. G. Lockhart in 1817, and on a second visit in 1820
began a systematic study of the language.
    In 1820 Hamilton was a candidate for the chair of Moral
Philosophy at Edinburgh, vacant by the death of Thomas Brown. To
the scandal of Philosophers, it was given to Wilson, or
'Christopher North,' mainly on political grounds. Probably it was
also held that anybody could talk Moral Philosophy. Hamilton was
appointed to a small professorship in 1821, but the salary,
payable from a duty on beer, was stopped and he ceased to
lecture.
    In 1829, Macvey Napier, upon succeeding Jeffrey as editor of
the Edinburgh Review, applied to his friend Hamilton for an
article. The result was the review of Cousin, which appeared in
the number for October 1829. Jeffrey was rather scandalised by
this novelty in his old organ; the writer showed an unholy
familiarity with the Absolute and the Infinite and the jargon of
German metaphysics; he could not, said Jeffrey, be a 'very clever
man,' and the article was the 'most unreadable thing that had
ever appeared in the Review.'(4*) The average reader, however,
was awed if not interested; and a select few, including Cousin,
were greatly impressed. Hamilton's reputation was made; he wrote
other articles which confirmed the impression, and in 1836 was
appointed to the Edinburgh professorship of 'Logic and
Metaphysics'. He was at length in his proper place; and many
students of that generation became ardent disciples. For the next
twenty years he was regarded with an enthusiasm like that which
had surrounded Dugald Stewart in the previous period and Reid at
an earlier date. His impressive appearance and force of character
contributed the respect due to his vast reading and tone of
rightful authority. He was unmistakably upright, a lover of
speculation for its own sake, and a man of warm and pure
affections. No one could be happier in domestic life. In 1828,
after his mother's death, he married his cousin, Janet Marshall,
by whom he had four children; He is described as gentle and
kindly in his family; joining in childish games, writing in the
general room, and amusing himself with extravagant romances. He
possessed great physical strength till, in 1844, his imprudent
habits of study brought on a paralytic stroke. He recovered
partially, but became weaker and died on 6th May 1856.


    With all Hamilton's claims to respect, there was a very weak
side to his character. A queer vein of pedantry ran through the
man. A Philosopher ought surely not to spend two years unearthing
a baronetcy. Hamilton stickled for his rights in other cases in a
way which one feels to have been scarcely worthy of him. His real
magnanimity was combined with mental rigidity which made him
incapable of compromise. He is undeniably candid and always
speaks generously of his opponents; but his own logic always
appears to him to be infallible, and neither in practical matters
nor in argument would he yield a jot or a tittle of his case. His
self-confidence was unfailing, and he speaks even in his first
article with the air of an intellectual dictator. He was
resolved, it seems, to justify his position by knowing everything
that had ever been written upon philosophy. Like Browning's old
grammarian, he would 'know all,' both text and comment, and when
the 'little touch' of paralysis came, he was still preparing and
accumulating. He had read a vast mass of obscure literature and
helped a powerful memory by elaborate commonplace books. His
passion for imbibing knowledge, indeed, was out of proportion to
his giving out results. He has left comparatively little, and
much of that is fragmentary. His writings are all included in the
Discussions (from the Edinburgh Review and elsewhere), the often
elaborate notes to his edition of Reid, and the Lectures. The two
first volumes of these lectures (on Metaphysics), as we are told
by the editors, were written in the course of five months for his
first session. They were repeated for twenty years without
serious alteration. The lectures upon logic, filling two volumes
more, were written in the same way for the second session.
Writing in such haste, Hamilton naturally eked out his work by
making very free use of his commonplace book, and, in the course
upon logic, by long quotations from previous textbooks. The notes
to Reid consist in part of long chains of quotations. They show
one palpable weakness. The extracts, detached from their context,
lose their true significance. He gives a list of 101 authorities
from Hesiod to Lamennais, with quotations, in which an appeal of
some kind is made to 'common-sense.' He might have collected a
thousand; but instead of showing the approval of the special
Scottish doctrine, they really show that phrase may be used more
or less freely by holders of every doctrine. He seems to share is
opinion of old writers that every statement in a printed book is
an 'authority.' The results are sometimes grotesque. It was
natural enough that Hamilton should note an unfavourable opinion
of mathematical study expressed by Horace Walpole; but a grave
citation of Horace Walpole as an studies would have amused
authority upon mathematical nobody more than Walpole himself. On
such a method the fuel too often puts out the fire, and
Hamilton's direct expositions are few and his opinions often to
be inferred from fragmentary criticisms. They naturally vary as
he places himself at different points of view; and we are left to
guess how he would have tried to combine them.
    Henry Longueville Mansel (1820-1871),(5*) Hamilton's most
noteworthy interpreter, was a typical Oxford don, as became his
birth. He was the descendant of an old family of
country-gentlemen, the younger members of which had entered the
army or navy or held the family living. He had been a brilliant
schoolboy, had distinguished himself in Oxford examinations, and
became known as a wit in common-rooms, a writer of vivacious
squibs, and a sound Tory and high Churchman. He had a clear
intellect, a forcible style, and had studied theology and German
metaphysics with remarkable energy. He apparently began as a
Kantian; but he was greatly impressed by Sir William Hamilton,
with whom he had no personal relations; and he adopted from
Hamilton the peculiar theory which was to enlist Kant in the
service of the church of England. His Bampton Lectures in 1858
made him famous as a champion of orthodoxy. In 1868 he was
appointed to the deanery of St Paul's; but his labours had been
too much for his brain, and he died suddenly in 1871.
    Hamilton started under the double influence of the Scottish
philosophy and of Aristotle. Formal logic was to him the most
congenial of studies. He would have been thoroughly in his
element in the medieval schools, syllogising to the death.
According to an enthusiastic pupil, he laid the top stone on the
fabric founded by the 'master hand of the Stagirite.'(6*) He was
in his element when dividing, subdividing, and cross-dividing all
manner of philosophical tenets. The aim was admirable. To have
all opinions properly articulated and correlated would be the
final result of a history of philosophy and a step to further
progress. The danger of accepting such a classification
prematurely is equally obvious. The technical terms of
metaphysics have the most provoking habit of shifting their
meaning; they shade off imperceptibly into each other, and
sometimes even change places; they represent aspects of truth
caught from a particular point of view, which become inapplicable
or carry different implications as the point of view
imperceptibly shifts. What appear to be contradictory utterances
may be merely qualifications of each other, or may mean the same
thing in different dialects. A system built of such unsubstantial
and slippery materials is apt to crumble into mere chaos without
extreme care and penetration. Hamilton, most fully aware of this
in general terms, was nevertheless not sufficiently on his guard.
He always seems to fancy that he can avoid all ambiguities by a
definition, and does not remember that the words by which he
defines are as shifting in their sense as the word defined. The
consideration is especially important because it is Hamilton's
main purpose to mediate between conflicting opinions. He starts
from Reid's 'common-sense,' and has to show how the position can
be protected against scepticism on the one side and mysticism on
the other.
    Cousin, as a disciple of the Scottish philosophers,
represented one line of deviation from the judicious mean.
Beginning with Reid, he had become, with certain reserves, a
follower or developer of Schelling. Coleridge's 'genial
coincidence' with Schelling had led to no very tangible result;
but Cousin's systematic development showed the philosophy
diverging into a false track, and wasting itself upon the pursuit
of utterly chimerical aims. Hamilton, therefore, endeavoured to
expose the fallacies involved in the whole procedure. He agreed,
as we shall see, with an important part of Kant's doctrine; but
thought that by certain oversights Kant had opened the door to
Schelling's empty speculations. There was an opposite danger to
which Hamilton was equally awake. He insisted upon it in an
article published October 1830 upon the 'Philosophy of
Perception.' This is, in the main, a fierce attack upon Brown --
the one philosophical writer of whom he cannot speak without
betraying prejudice. Hamilton's antipathy has been already
explained. Brown shows Scottish philosophy lapsing into mere
empiricism and 'inductive psychology.' Hamilton never mentions
him without accusing him of blunders and of crass ignorance.
    Hamilton thus stands up for the orthodox common-sense theory
of Reid, and resents backslidings into transcendentalism on the
right hand and sensationalism on the left. Like the excellent
David Deans, he would keep the 'ridge of the hill, where wind and
water shears.' When, however, he set about the edition of Reid's
works, he began to discover inconsistencies. He doubted whether
Reid had really taught the true faith; and he was led to restate
more articulately his own view. To the end of his life, however,
Hamilton called himself a Natural Realist; and held, though with
increasing qualifications, that Reid's doctrine was an
approximate statement of the same doctrine. What Natural Realism
may be is another question.
    The two essays just mentioned(7*) give the pith of Hamilton's
philosophical theories. His other writings on philosophy are
mainly remodelled versions of the same views, or classifications
of. other solutions of the problems. His speculations in logic,
whatever their value, belong to a sphere which fortunately lies
outside my province. In treating of perception, Hamilton gives
the rationale of our belief in the external world; and in
treating of the 'Unconditioned' the rationale of our belief in a
deity. The results are in both cases remarkable.

 II. HAMILTON ON PERCEPTION

    What is the relation between the world of matter and the
world of mind? That had been Reid's problem, and Hamilton starts
from the acceptance of Reid's common-sense reply. We have to
steer between opposing difficulties. Give too much to the mind
and you will drift into mysticism, idealism, or ultimately to
'nihilism.' Give too much to matter and you will become a
materialist or a mere sensationalist. Common sense gives the true
answer. Reid was in the right path when he declared himself to be
on the side of the 'vulgar.'(8*) Things are just what they seem
to be. It is the philosophers who, in Berkeley's famous phrase,
have raised a dust, and complain that they cannot see. This
doctrine gives the principle of an elaborate classification of
philosophers generally, and supplies the test of their
soundness.(9*) The truth lies with the 'Natural Realists' or
'Natural Dualists,' who do justice to both sides. They believe
both in mind and matter 'in absolute co-equality'; in a 'duality'
which presents the elements of consciousness in 'equal
counterpoise and independence.'(10*) Unluckily, there is a mock
dualism which virtually makes the true position untenable. It
surrenders the real key of the position. This is the unfortunate
case of the 'Cosmothetic Idealists,' whose theory represents an
illogical compromise. They assert that the mind perceives -- not
matter but -- something which 'represents' matter. It is
conscious only of its own 'ideas.' These form the visible
imagery, an unreal screen, somehow 'representing' a real world
behind. The sceptic, then, had only to point out that the world
behind was a superfluity, and our whole world turns out to be
illusion. Reid had answered Hume by sweeping away all this
superfluous machinery, and proving (or at least asserting) that
what we see is itself real. Reid's analysis of consciousness,
when duly corrected, showing that, we have, as we believe we
have, an immediate knowledge of the material world, accomplished
everything at once.'(11*) 'Natural Realism' and 'Absolute
Idealism' are the only systems worthy of a philosopher.(12*) The
Cosmothetic Idealist occupies a position from which he can be
driven at any moment by the more thoroughgoing idealist. Yet, as
Hamilton declares, Cosmothetic Idealism has been held in various
forms by the immense majority of philosophers,(13*) indeed, by
almost all who have not been driven by its absurdity into
materialism or scepticism. A few 'stray speculators'(14*) alone
have found the narrow way. The list is apparently exhausted by
the names of Peter Poiret, Reid, and Sir William Hamilton,(15*)
and even Reid may be said with much plausibility to have held a
version of the creed which would make his whole philosophy 'one
mighty blunder.'(16*) What has caused this universal apostasy?
    The answer is remarkable. It is due to a 'crotchet of
philosophers'(17*) -- a crotchet, moreover, not only unsupported
by, but opposed to, all the evidence. It appeared first with
Empedocles; it produced the 'gnostic reasons' of the Platonists;
the 'pre-existing species' of Avicenna; the common intellect of
Themistius and Averroes; the 'intentional species' of the
schools; the 'occasional causes' of the Cartesians; the
predetermined harmony of Leibniz; the plastic medium of Cudworth
and the phenomena of Kant. When so many masters of thought have
inVented theories it is unhappily easy to believe that they have
all gone wrong; but one would at least infer that there was some
difficulty to be solved. And yet all these fabrics of sham
philosophy are founded upon a 'baseless fancy,' which Reid alone
was too independent to take for granted. That 'fancy' was that
the 'relation of knowledge inferred an analogy of
existence.'(18*) Norris of Bemerton had urged that a direct
perception of matter was impossible because 'material objects'
are removed from the mind 'by the whole diameter of Being.' Reid,
with 'an ignorance wiser than knowledge,' confessed his inability
to understand this argument. Seeing no difficulty in supposing an
immediate perception of a totally disparate thing, he did not
make an 'irrational attempt to explain what is in itself
inexplicable.'(19*) We can no more know how the mind is conscious
of itself than how it is percipient of its contrary. The whole
puzzle, then, is gratuitous; -- which is a consoling result for
ordinary common-sense.
    Philosophers had thus bewildered themselves by refusing to
admit a plain, though ultimate, fact. There is a gulf between
mind and matter over which no bridge can be thrown, but no bridge
is wanted. The attempt to construct one is superfluous. Yet in a
different form the question is still prominent, and modern
science has invested it with fresh interest. How are we to
conceive of the relation between the mental and the material
spheres? How, after all, do we draw the line between things and
thoughts, object and subject, ego and non-ego? Where do we reach
the impassable gulf, and what, therefore, is the precise sense in
which we must pronounce all attempt at bridging it to be
preposterous? Hamilton's first position is that we are bound to
stand by 'consciousness.' The 'watchword' of the Natural Realist
is 'the facts of consciousness, the whole facts and nothing but
the facts.'(20*) He constantly appeals to the 'deliverance of
consciousness,' and assures us again and again that unless we can
believe this deliverance, we must suppose man to have been formed
only to 'become the dupe and victim of a perfidious
creator.'(21*) The error of the Cosmothetic Idealists consisted
precisely in the arbitrary rejection of a truth given by the
testimony of consciousness. An original conviction is to be
distinguished from derivative knowledge, as he tells us, by
various characteristics, among which is especially its
'necessity.' We cannot really resist it.(22*) If a disbelief in
consciousness be impossible, why argue against it? If not
impossible, how can you assert that the belief is necessary? You
have only to state the belief and, on your showing, it will prove
itself. To this Hamilton answers that 'necessity' may be of two
kinds. We cannot believe a self-contradictory statement; and we
are therefore sufficiently guarded by logic against errors which
are in this sense impossible. But there are other assertions
which may be denied without self-contradiction, and of which,
notwithstanding this, the denial would lead to universal
scepticism. This corresponds apparently to the difference between
a statement of fact and a statement of judgment. A false
statement of facts may be as consistent as a true statement, and
can Only be met by somehow appealing to experience.(23*) So far,
then, as consciousness assures us of a fact, we may deny it
without contradicting ourselves; but yet, by denying it, we 'make
God a deceiver and the root of our nature a lie.'(24*) We may
thus say without self-contradiction, that memory in general is an
illusion, and the world a mere dream or bundle of baseless
appearances;(25*) but we cannot say so without denying the
primary deliverance of consciousness, and striking at the base of
all knowledge. Certain truths, though not logically
self-supporting, so run through the whole fabric of belief, as to
be essential to its existence. If I am conscious, I cannot really
doubt the fact of consciousness. The knowledge of the fact and
the fact become identical. The possibility of error begins with
judgment, or with the interpretation of the fact. It is
undeniable, again, that, in some sense or other, I believe in an
external world. Every philosopher, as Hamilton says, admits this
to be a fact, and Berkeley appeals to the common sense of mankind
when denying, as confidently as Reid when affirming, the
existence of matter. We must inquire, then, what precisely is
this ultimate deliverance. Does consciousness testify merely to
the fact of the belief, or also to the truth of the belief; and,
in either case, of what belief? This is what Hamilton has to
answer, before summoning us to admit the truth on penalty of
making God a liar.
    The highwater mark of his opinion seems to be given in a
passage of the Lectures. He there tells us that, though it is a
strange, it is a correct, expression to say, 'I am conscious' --
not merely of perceiving the inkstand but -- 'of the
inkstand.'(26*) Reid's blunder -- which, if he really made it,
would convert his whole philosophy into one mighty blunder -- lay
in misunderstanding this. Reid had been startled at his own
boldness in asserting the immediacy 'of our knowledge of external
things';(27*) and therefore weakly admitted that we are conscious
of perceiving the rose, not conscious of the rose itself. This
comes of distinguishing 'consciousness' from perception, and
would end in philosophical suicide. It would seem, then, that
according to this doctrine we are bound either to assert that the
rose -- the visible, coloured, scented object, is revealed in
consciousness as part of the 'material world' and therefore
exists independently of us, or to admit that God is a liar. It is
'palpably impossible that we can be conscious of an act without
being conscious of the object to which the act is relative.'(28*)
    To carry out this theory is the central aim of Hamilton's
'Natural Realism.' Reid's statement might seem to be not a
blunder, but a truism. 'I am conscious of the rose' means
precisely 'I have certain sensations which I regard as implying
the existence of a permanent external reality.' But this is to
interpret perception as involving an 'inference,' and therefore,
according to Hamilton, is to abandon the essential doctrine of
Natural Realism.(29*) It may seem strange, he admits, but it is
true, 'that the simple and primary act of intelligence should be
a judgment, which philosophers in general have received as a
compound and derivative operation.'(30*) 'Knowing' and 'knowing
that we know' are the same thing; as conceiving the sides and
angles of a triangle are the same process, distinguishable in
thought, but 'in nature, one and indivisible.'(31*) What, then,
is this essential judgment? In an act of sensible perception,
says Hamilton, I am conscious of myself and of something
different from myself.(32*) This might seem to define the
distinction between 'consciousness' and 'perception.' the object
of my thought may, as Hamilton remarks, be a 'mode of mind' as
well as a 'mode of matter.'(33*) Consciousness of self, we should
infer, differs from consciousness of the not-self, and it is just
the presence of the not-self which distinguishes perception from
simple consciousness. Hamilton, however, argues that perception
is simple consciousness; or that the distinction, for his
purpose, is irrelevant. There is a 'logical' but not a
'psychological' difference.(34*) Every act of consciousness
implies a conception of the ego. But 'the science of opposites is
one.' therefore consciousness of the ego involves consciousness
of the non-ego, or, in the simplest possible act of intelligence
I must be taken to affirm the existence both of an ego and a
non-ego.
    If I cannot even think about myself without affirming the
existence of an external world, it would be superfluous to look
about for further proofs of its existence. But here occurs a
singular difficulty. Hamilton has to guard against the
transcendentalist as well as against the sceptic. He is therefore
not only a 'realist,' but with equal emphasis a 'relativist.'
that our knowledge is essentially relative is one of the points
upon which he insists most emphatically, and confirms as usual by
a catena of authorities. It is, he says, the truth 'most
harmoniously re-echoed by every philosopher of every school,
except the modern Germans.'(35*) The phrase relativity has more
than one meaning; but according to Hamilton means at least this:
'our whole knowledge of mind and matter is relative --
conditioned -- relatively conditioned.' Of mind and matter 'in
themselves' we only know that they are 'incognisable.' 'All that
we know is therefore phenomenal -- phenomenal of the unknown.'
This, then, is a cardinal doctrine. How is it compatible with the
Doctrine that the ego and non-ego are given in every act of
consciousness? Mind and matter, as we have seen, are separated
'by the whole diameter of being.' they express 'two series of
phenomena, known less' (? not) 'in themselves than' (? but), in
contradistinction from each other.'(36*) What is given is not two
facts, the ego and the non-ego, but the 'relation.' Somehow, the
conscious act implies the presence of two factors, unknowable in
themselves. The 'science of opposites' may be 'the same,' but, if
I know neither opposite, there can be very little science.
Strangely, Hamilton seems to confuse the difference between
knowing a relation and knowing the two things related. He tells
us as a rough illustration, that if we consider the perception of
a book to be made up of twelve parts, four may be given by the
book, four by the sight, and four by 'all that intervenes.'(37*)
He infers, presently, that the 'great problem of philosophy' is
to 'distinguish what elements are contributed by the knowing
subject, what elements by the object known.'(38*) Between these
statements we have a renewed and emphatic assertion of the
'relativity of knowledge.' Hamilton, that is, speaks as if from
the fact that life supposes breathing we could infer how far life
depends upon the lungs and how far upon the air. From a relation
between two things, unknowable in themselves, we can surely learn
nothing as to the things separately. Equality of two quantities
is compatible with indefinite variation in the equal
quantities.(39*) The difficulty is increased when we ask how the
line is actually drawn. The distinction between subjective and
objective corresponds to the distinction between the primary and
secondary qualities of which Berkeley had denied the validity.
Both, he held, are on the same plane, and exist only 'in our
minds.' Hamilton holds that the so-called 'secondary qualities'
are only 'subjective affections.' They are not properly qualities
of Body at all, but sensations produced in the mind by the action
of bodies on the nervous system.(40*) The opinion that these
secondary qualities belong to the non-ego is the 'vulgar or
undeveloped form of natural realism.' Hence, when we say that we
are conscious of the 'rose' or the 'inkstand,' we ought to regard
the colour, fragrance, temperature, and so on, as affections of
the ego. To the non-ego belong the primary qualities alone; and
these are substantially nothing but extension and solidity.(41*)
In other words, the rose belongs to the non-ego as space-filling;
to the ego, as coloured and fragrant. Upon this, it is easy to
remark with Mill, that as the vulgar admittedly consider the
whole rose to belong to the non-ego, and the distinction to have
been first drawn by philosophers, we at once admit an illusion in
what, On Hamilton's principles, is apparently a 'deliverance of
consciousness.' Why are we forbidden to make the same hypothesis
as to the primary qualities? 'Falsus in uno,' as Hamilton
somewhere says, 'falsus in omnibus.' If my judgment of colour be
illusory, why not my judgment of extension? The veracity of the
Creator is equally concerned in both cases.
    But, in the next place, we now reach a more serious
difficulty. The non-ego, we see, corresponds simply to the
qualities fully assignable in terms of space. But Hamilton has
read Kant, and moreover been convinced by him. Kant has proved
beyond 'the possibility of doubt,'(42*) the truth that space is a
'fundamental condition' of thought, and therefore belongs to the
ego. This at once throws us back into idealism. The whole rose
has become a thought, not a thing. So long as he roundly asserts
that mind perceives matter, that matter means solid space, and
that this truth is implied by the very simplest act of
intelligence, we may wonder at his audacity, but we may admit his
consistency. But to combine this with the most positive
assertions of the 'relativity' of knowledge, that is, of our
inability to know either mind or matter, and then to accept as
conclusive Kant's theory that space is a mental form, is to land
us in a hopelessly inconsistent position. What Kant precisely
meant, or whether he had not various and inconsistent meanings,
is happily a question beyond my purpose. Hamilton's view of Kant
is clear. 'The distinctive peculiarity' of Kant's doctrine, he
says, is 'its special demonstration of the absolute subjectivity
of space, and in general of primary attributes of matter.'(43*)
He argues that if Reid virtually held the same view, he abandoned
the principle of Natural Realism.(44*) If, then, Kant's theory
was conclusively proved, was not Hamilton bound to give up his
essential principle? He tells us that the primary qualities are
'unambiguously objective (object-objects),' whereas the secondary
are 'unambiguously subjective (subject-objects).'(45*) Yet, he
admits that Kant proves the primary to be absolutely subjective,
'I have frequently asserted,' he says again, that in 'perception
we are conscious of the external object immediately and in
itself. This is the doctrine of Natural Realism.' But he explains
that by speaking of a thing 'known in itself' he does not mean
known 'out of relation to us,' but known 'as the necessary
correlative of an internal quality of which I am conscious.'(46*)
That is, apparently, knowing a thing 'in itself' is knowing it
'not in itself,' but only in its effect; which again is to
abandon 'Natural Realism.' Hamilton finds a way out of these
apparent contradictions which satisfies himself. Both theories,
he suggests, may be true. We have clearly an a priori knowledge
of space 'considered as a form or fundamental law of thought,'
but also an empirical knowledge of what, in this relation, may be
called 'extension.'(47*) He agrees, he says, with Kant that an 'a
priori imagination' of space is a 'necessary condition of the
possibility of thought'; but differs from Kant by holding that we
have an 'a posteriori percept' of space 'as contingently
apprehended in this or that actual complexus of
associations.'(48*) It is most natural to interpret this as a
virtual acceptance of Kant's doctrine. It falls in with what he
says elsewhere: 'the notion of space is a priori, the notion of
what space contains, adventitious or a posteriori. Of this latter
class is that of Body or Matter.'(49*) If I merely fill up space
by the sense of resistance, as he thinks, that is a subordinate
operation, in no way affecting the subjective character of space
generally. If, on the other hand, I can acquire an empirical
notion of space independently, it seems impossible to see why I
should admit the a priori notion. Hamilton starts from the
assertion that we actually perceive facts, and comes to admit
that we simply organise sensations.(50*)
    Finally, Hamilton turns to yet another theory. His essential
point is the necessity of believing consciousness. When we
inquire what is the sphere within which consciousness is
infallible, we have to accept something very like the condemned
'crotchet' of the Cosmothetic Idealists. The infallibility of
consciousness has, after all, to be limited. The summary
assertion that the mind can leap the gulf which separates it from
matter insists upon some explanation. Consciousness is infallible
when it is its own object. But it is plain, as Hamilton agrees,
that this primary, direct, or presentative knowledge is only, as
it were, the limiting case of knowledge. Accordingly he condemns
Reid for speaking of memory as an 'immediate knowledge of the
past.'(51*) The 'object' in this case is not the past event, but
some picture of the past event; not (in his illustration) George
IV landing at Leith, but a mental image of the landing,
'including a conviction' that it somehow represents a past
reality. It is natural, then, to inquire whether my belief in an
external world may not be a consciousness of a modification of
myself, including a conviction that it merely 'represents' an
external world,(52*) and is not in direct contact with the
'non-ego.' Immediate knowledge of the past is 'a contradiction in
terms.' And this, he adds, applies equally to an 'immediate
knowledge of the distant.'(53*) It is false to say with Reid that
ten men all see the same sun. Each sees a different object,
because each sees a different at of rays from which he infers the
object.(54*) We perceive only modifications of light, or, as he
has said before, the 'rays of light in relation to and in contact
with the retina.'(55*) There is, as he adds, no greater marvel in
our perception of the external world than in the admitted fact
that mind is connected with body. Therefore, in his final
statement,(56*) it is laid down as an essential principle that
consciousness is a 'knowledge solely of what is now and here
present to the mind.' What is meant by the 'here'? 'It is the
condition of intuitive perception,' he says, that a sensation is
actually felt 'there where it is felt to be.' To suppose that a
pain in the toe is felt really in 'the brain is conformable only
to a theory of representationism.'(57*) If the mind is not itself
extended or in any way a subject of space-relations, does this
not imply that the whole external world is somehow outside the
sphere of immediate knowledge -- a construction, not a mode of
consciousness? To this Hamilton replies that the 'nervous
organism... in contrast to all exterior to itself, appertains to
the concrete human ego, and is in this respect subjective,
internal; whereas in contrast to the abstract, immaterial ego,
the pure mind, it belongs to the non-ego, and in this respect is
objective, external.'(58*) This view leads him into pure
physiology. He asks whether the mind is conscious of sensations
at the periphery of the nerves, or at a 'central extremity in an
extended sensorium commune.' He declares, lest such language may
appear suspicious, that the question of materialism is not raised
by this assumption.(59*) Anyhow, since the body is now in some
sense part of the concrete human ego, our consciousness of the
primary qualities is in this sense part of our consciousness of
ourselves. They are given as existing in our own organism, or, in
other words, as we occupy space, we have an 'immediate' knowledge
of space.(60*) I only note the peculiar interpretation now put
upon the deliverance of consciousness. I fancy myself to perceive
the sun; what I really 'perceive' is the action of rays of light
on my retina. Yet it is obvious that I only learn of the
existence of 'rays' or 'retina' long after the perception.
Nobody's 'consciousness,' we may be sure, ever told him that he
perceived not the sun but the action of rays of light on his eye.
Hamilton has diverged from a consideration of the consciousness
itself to a consideration of the physical conditions of
consciousness. Having started with Reid, he next admits Kant to
be conclusive, and ends by escaping to what is only expressible
in terms of materialism. The deliverance of consciousness has
come to be a statement that my fingers are different from my
toes, and that, as I am fingers and toes, I am aware of the fact.
I will not ask whether it is possible by any interpretation to
put a tenable construction upon Hamilton's language. Hamilton
begins by discarding the philosopher's crotchet that the
difference between mind and matter prevents them from affecting
each other; and now he seems to admit its force so fully that he
conceives of the nervous organism as a kind of amalgam of mind
and matter.(61*)
    I have followed Hamilton so far in order to illustrate the
way in which, by superposing instead of reconciling two different
sets of dogma, he became hopelessly confused. The old Scottish
doctrine really becomes bankrupt in his version. Hamilton is
still struggling with Reid's old problem, and attacking the
'cosmothetic idealism' as Reid attacked the ideal system. How are
we to cross the gulf between mind and matter, especially when we
know nothing about either mind or matter taken apart from matter
or mind? The problem is insoluble on these terms because it is
really meaningless. The answer suggested by Kant was effective
precisely -- as I take it -- because it drew the line
differently, and therefore altered the whole question. Kant did
not provide a new bridge, but pointed out that the chasm was not
rightly conceived. To try to settle whether the 'primary
qualities' belong to 'things external to the mind' is idle. It
leads to the inevitable dilemma. If the 'primary qualities'
belong to the things or the object, geometry becomes empirical
and deducible only from particular experiments, like other
physical sciences. Then we cannot account for its unique
character and its at least apparent 'necessity.' If, on the other
hand, the primary qualities belong to the mind, we can understand
how the mind evolves or constructs, but it is at the cost of
admitting them to be after all unreal, because 'subjective,' or
deriving knowledge of fact from a simple analysis of thought. But
the dilemma is really illusory. We cannot say that the truths of
geometry refer either to things 'out of the mind' or to things
'in the mind.' They are 'subjective' in the sense that they are
constructed by the mind in the very act of experiencing. They are
not subjective in the sense of varying from one experience to
another or from one mind to another. They belong to perception as
perception, or to the perceiver as perceiving. It is, therefore,
meaningless to ask whether they are 'objective' or 'subjective,'
if that is to be answered by deciding, as Hamilton would decide,
what part is due to the subject and what part to the object. That
feat could only be performed if we could get outside of our
minds, which we always carry about with us, or outside of the
universe to which we are strictly confined. Then we might perhaps
understand what each factor is, considered apart from the other.
As it is, we can only say that the truths are universal as
belonging to experience in general, and necessary as
corresponding to identical modes of combining our experience. But
we must abandon the fruitless attempt to separate object from
subject, and then to construct a bridge to cross the gulf we have
made.

 III. MILL ON THE EXTERNAL WORLD

    Upon this I have spoken sufficiently in considering Mill's
Logic. Mill's failure to appreciate the change in the real issues
made by the Kantian doctrine in this and other questions is a
source of perplexity in his criticism of Hamilton.(62*) His
straightforward statement of his own view is a relief after
Hamilton's complex and tortuous mode of forcibly combining
inconsistent dogmas. He is able, moreover, to expose very
thoroughly some of Hamilton's inconsistencies. But though he can
hit particular errors very hard, he has not a sufficient clue to
the labyrinth. Metaphysicians for him are still divided into two
great schools -- intuitionists and empiricists, or, as he here
says, the 'introspective' and the 'psychological' school.(63*)
The Scottish and the Kantian doctrines are still lumped together,
and therefore more or less misunderstood. Hence in treating of
our belief in an external world he is still in the old position.
Kant, according to him, supposes the mind not to perceive but
itself to 'create' attributes, and then by a natural illusion to
ascribe them to outward things.(64*) The mind, on this version,
does not simply organise but adds to, or overrides, experience.
Consequently the external world would become subjective or
unreal; and unless we admit a quasi-miraculous intuition, we are
under a necessary illusion. Mill substantially starts from
Berkeley's position. The distinction between the primary and
secondary qualities is, he holds, illusory. We know nothing of
'object' or 'subject,' 'mind' or 'matter' in themselves.(65*) Our
knowledge is therefore 'subjective.' Our whole provision of
material is necessarily drawn from sensations. The problem
occurs, how from mere sensations we make an (at least) apparently
external world. Mill endeavours to show that this is possible,
though he thinks that Berkeley's attempt was inadequate.(66*) We
can leap the gulf without the help of any special machinery
invented for the purpose, such as Reid's 'intuitions' or Kant's
forms of perception. He offers his own theory as an 'antagonist
doctrine to that of Sir William Hamilton and the Scottish
school,'(67*) and it certainly has the advantage of simplicity.
    Mill lays down at starting(68*) the postulates from which he
is to reason. Here, of course, we appeal to association.
Association, he tells us, links together the thoughts of
phenomena which are like each other, or which have been
contiguous or successive; the link strengthens as the association
is repeated, and after a time becomes 'inseparable.' Now belief
in an external world means the belief that things exist when we
do not think of them; that they would exist if we were
annihilated; and further, that things exist which have never been
perceived by us or by others. This belief is explicable by the
known laws of association. For at any moment a given sensation
calls up 'a countless variety of possibilities of sensation.'
They are regarded, that is, as sensations which I might
experience if circumstances were altered. Again, these
possibilities of sensation (which, he adds, are 'conditional
certainties') are permanent, because they may be called up by any
of the fleeting sensations. This permanence is one of the
characteristics of the outside world; and we thus have always in
the background, or as a 'kind of permanent substratum,' whole
groups of 'permanent possibilities' suggested by the passing
sensations. These become further consolidated when fixed orders
of succession have suggested the ideas of cause and effect --
themselves a product of association. Hence, we get our external
world, and can define Matter to be a 'Permanent Possibility of
sensation.' The phrase became famous.
    This involves the metaphysical question which was reserved or
evaded in the Logic. His whole purpose there is to show that
thoughts should conform to things. But how things differ from
thoughts was never made clear. 'Attributes,' we were then told,
were the same as 'sensations.' The sensations somehow cohere in
clusters. But what makes them cohere in different forms? When a
sensation is not accompanied by the sensation previously
associated, why is not the association simply weakened or
destroyed instead of suggesting a 'conditional certainty'? I
learn that fire is hot because the sensations of brightness and
heat have occurred together; but when I see the brightness
without feeling the heat, why does not the association simply
become fainter? Why should I interpret the experience to mean,
'If I were nearer I should feel the heat'? Does not the
interpretation imply that I have already some system of combining
my impressions and a need of making the two experiences
consistent instead of contradictory? Upon the single assumption
of sensations occurring together or successively, and related in
time alone, there seems to be no need for any external world
whatever. The hypothesis would be exemplified in the case of an
animal which, though capable of sensations, had no capacity for
arranging them so as to represent space at all. And, again, the
statement suggests no distinct reference to any criterion of
truth or falsehood. It accounts for illusions as well as for true
beliefs. What is the difference? The fact that certain sensations
adhere in clusters is not the same thing as the belief in their
regular recurrence; and considering the vast variety and
intricacy of our sensations, the question which I have mentioned
in connection with James Mill arises again: Why should any two
people have the same clusters or (on this showing) the same
belief -- or how one association can be said to be (not real but)
true, and another (not unreal but) false?
    This difficulty shows itself when Mill proceeds to
investigate the 'primary qualities.' They are to be simply
'attributes' co-ordinate with other attributes. With the help of
Professor Bain and Mr Herbert Spencer, in whose then recent
writings he saw a most encouraging development of his father's
principles, Mill makes out a case to show how the perception of
space may be developed. The problem discussed by those
authorities and their successors is clearly a legitimate part of
psychology; their investigations, though still on the threshold
of a vast and difficult inquiry, are at least valuable
beginnings; and when the experts have all agreed, we shall be
ready to accept their conclusions. There is, however, a
difficulty which exposes Mill to another criticism.(69*) Briefly,
it is that his so-called explanation of space-conception really
presupposes space. Hamilton had pointed this out in his Kantian
moods.(70*) The difficulty is obvious. In a scientific theory a
statement in terms of space is an ultimate statement. We do not
try, nor does it appear to be possible, to get behind it. When I
have said that a body moves in an ellipse. I do not go on to
express the ellipse in terms of 'muscular sensation.' That would
be to substitute for a definite measure one essentially
fluctuating and uncertain. I can define a given muscular
sensation as that which corresponds to a certain distance; but to
reverse the definition -- to express the distance in terms of the
pure sensation, excluding all reference to distance, is surely
impossible. Now, it may seem that Mill is here attempting just
this impossible feat. Therefore he is really still on the same
side of the gulf, though he supposes himself to have crossed it.
His 'pigtail 'according to the famous apologue -- still 'hangs
behind him.' In other words, he is mistaking a psychological for
a metaphysical explanation; an account of how it is that we come
to perceive space, assuming space to exist, with an explanation
of what space is; and a resolution of the perception into a set
of sensations associated in time. Here, again, he is under the
great disadvantage of supposing the space-perception to have been
made within the limits of a lifetime. If it were possible to look
into the mind of an infant we could, he thinks, see how the idea
was formed.(71*) A modern psychologist can at least help himself
by looking indefinitely further back and tracing the whole
history of the organism to the earlier forms of life; and the
space-perception ceases to imply a preternatural or a priori
capacity. Something more is surely wanted, though I do not
venture to say precisely what. Mill's doctrine that my belief in
a external world is a belief in 'a permanent possibility of
sensation' may be accepted in some sense. When, for example, I
believe in the existence of Calcutta, I mean that I believe that
if I were transported to the banks of the Hoogly, I should have
the sensations from which Calcutta is inferrible.(72*) In other
words, in making a statement about the external world, I
construct a hypothetical and universal consciousness. When I
exchange the geocentric for the heliocentric view, I am imagining
what I should see if I were upon the sun instead of the earth.
Instead of regarding my own series of sensations as the base from
which to measure, I regard them as deducible from the series
which would be presented to a different and, of course,
incomparably more extended consciousness. I can thus fill up the
gaps in my own experience and get a regular series instead of one
full of breaches and interruptions. That I do this somehow or
other is Mill's view, and I should admit with him that I do no
more. But, then, the question remains whether Mill can account
for my doing even this. It supposes, at least, a power of forming
what Clifford called 'ejects,' as distinguished from 'objects.' I
must be able to think not of things outside consciousness but of
my own consciousness under other conditions, and of other centres
of consciousness than mine. But this ability is not explicable
from sensations, as ultimate atoms, combined in various ways by
'association'; for that process, it would seem, might take place
without in any way suggesting an external world or a different
consciousness. Here Mill, like his father, is trying to explain
thoughts by dealing with sensations as things and refusing to
admit any action of the mind in order to keep to the
unsophisticated facts. He will not allow the mind to have even an
organising power, even though it be a power which cannot be
separately revealed or give rise to independent truths, but
appears simply as implied in its products. The mind is the
cluster of atomic sensations. It must not tamper with the facts
in any way, on penalty of causing illusion. I can only associate
simple atoms, and the world remains a chaos of independent and
incoherent fragments. They stick together somehow, but the
division into the external and the internal world still remains
an unsolved problem. The 'attribute' will not distinguish itself
from the 'sensation.' We are still unable, that is, to explain
the metaphysical puzzle left unsolved in the Logic.
    Another question arises: If the world is still an incoherent
heap of 'attributes' or 'sensations,' what are we to say of the
mind? With his usual candour Mill applies his principles to the
problem. We get, as he admits, to a real difficulty. The mind, in
the phrase adopted from his father, is a 'thread of
consciousness.' It is a series of feelings with the curious
peculiarity that besides 'present sensations' it has 'memories
and expectations.' What are these? he asks. They involve beliefs
in something 'beyond themselves.' If we call the mind 'a series
of feelings,' we have to add that it is a series which is 'aware
of itself as past and future.' Is it, then, something different
from the feelings, or must we accept the paradox that something
'which in hypothesis is a series of feelings can be aware of
itself as a series?' Here is the final 'inexplicability' which
must arrive, as he admits with Hamilton, when we get to an
ultimate fact. The 'wisest thing we can do is to accept the
inexplicable fact without any theory of how it takes place.'(73*)
That what we call personal identity is 'inexplicable' will hardly
be denied. Yet Mill's position seems to make the paradox
something nearly approaching to a contradiction. If the mental
processes are to be described as feelings, separable but simply
forming clusters more or less complicated and linked to each
other, we seem to get rid not only of a something which organises
experience, but of organisation itself. It becomes difficult to
understand not merely what the mind or soul can be, but what are
the mental processes to which the conception corresponds. This,
however, leads to a different set of questions and one of far
greater interest.

 IV. THEORIES OF THE ABSOLUTE

    Discussions such as I have touched often seem to be little
more than a display of dialectical skill. Hamilton and Mill
probably believed equally and in the same sense in the reality of
Edinburgh or London. When a belief is admitted, the question why
we believe is of interest chiefly in so far as the answer may
give canons applicable to really disputable questions. Now the
application of Hamilton's theories to theology certainly involved
issues in regard to which men generally suppose themselves to be
profoundly interested. We clearly believe in an 'external world,'
whatever precisely we mean by it. But do we believe in God? or,
if we believe, what precisely is meant by believing in God? That
is a problem upon which turn all the most important controversies
which have divided men in all ages -- and the controversy which
now raged over Hamilton's theory between Mill and Mansel
corresponded to vital issues. Hamilton's essential position was
given in the famous Cousin article in 1830. He frequently
repeats, but he never much modifies or develops the argument. In
the course of lectures repeated for twenty years, he divides his
subject into three departments: 'empirical psychology' and
'rational psychology'; or the facts and laws of consciousness;
and thirdly, 'ontology,' which was to deal with the ideas of God,
the soul, and so forth.(74*) This third department was never
written; and though We may guess at its general nature, his
doctrine is chiefly indicated by his criticism of Cousin.
    One result is unfortunate. I doubt whether so many sayings
capable of different interpretations were ever brought together
in the same space. The art of writing about 'ontology' is, it
would seem, to disguise a self-evident truism by pompous phrases
till the words are vague enough to allow the introduction of
paradoxical meaning. Schelling and Cousin between them had
provided a sounding terminology; and Hamilton, though his main
purpose is to show that these fine phrases were only phrases,
takes them up, tosses them about as if they had a real meaning,
and leaves us in some doubt how far he is merely using the words
to show their emptiness, or suggesting that, when the bubbles are
burst, there is still some residuum of solid matter. 'The
unconditioned,' he says (giving his own view), 'is incognisable
and inconceivable.'(75*) What, then, is 'the unconditioned'?
'The Unconditioned is the genus of which the Infinite and the
Absolute are species.'(76*) These technical phrases are the balls
with which the metaphysical juggler plays his tricks till we are
reduced to hopeless confusion. Mill gives the straightforward
and, I think, conclusive criticism.(77*) What is the sense of
talking about 'The Absolute' or 'The Infinite' as hypostatised
abstractions? Apply the epithets to concrete things or persons
and we may understand what is really meant. A predicate going
about at large cannot be really grasped; and the discussion would
only be relevant if we were speaking of something which is
absolute and nothing but absolute. The words themselves have
meanings which become different when they are parts of different
assertions. 'Inconceivable' is a word which varies from
self-contradictory to mere difficulty of imagining. 'Absolute,'
according to Hamilton, has two chief meanings, one of which is
not opposed to the Infinite and the other contradictory of the
Infinite. Mansel takes Mill to task for not seeing that Hamilton
uses the word in two 'distinct and even contradictory senses,'
and for not perceiving which meaning is implied in which
cases.(78*) It may be very wrong of Mill, but Hamilton's practice
is certainly confusing. There is Cousin's 'Absolute' and
Hamilton's 'Absolute' and Mansel's own 'Absolute';(79*) and the
difference is to be inferred from the nature of the argument.
There is a false Infinite and a true Infinite; and this suggests
another difficulty. The obvious 'contradictory' of infinite is
finite; but words cannot be really contradictory at all till they
form part of a proposition. It is contradictory to call a thing
finite and infinite in the same sense; but, if we admit of
infinite divisibility, a thing must be at once infinite in
comparison with an infinitesimal, finite in relation to other
things, and infinitesimal in relation to those which in relation
to it are infinite. Some words, again, refer to our knowledge of
things, and are meaningless when predicated of objects. A fact
may be 'certain' to me and only 'probable' to you, simply because
the probability to each depends upon the evidence which he
possesses. When this is supposed to correspond to some difference
in the facts themselves, endless fallacies are produced. 'The
certain' is contradictory of the 'uncertain'; but a given fact
may be both 'certain' and 'uncertain.' A discussion naturally
becomes perplexed, which is really treating a question of logic
in terms appropriate to a question of fact.
    I will not attempt to follow a controversy so perplexed in
itself and in which the antagonists seem to be normally at cross
purposes. I must try to bring out the main issue which is
obscured by the singular confusions of the contest; and to this
there seems to be a simple clue. Hamilton's theory is admittedly
a 'modification of that of Kant,'(80*) and intended to eliminate
the inconsistency by which Kant had left an opening for the
systems of Schelling and Hegel. Now Kant's famous argument, given
in the Critique of Pure Reason, is a most crabbed piece of
writing. It makes an English reader long for David Hume. Still,
beneath its elaborate panoply of logical technicalities, it
contains a very clear and cogent argument, which gives the real
difficulty and which is strangely distorted by Hamilton.
    According to Kant there are three Ideas of the pure Reason --
the Soul, the World, and God. Nobody really doubts the existence
of the world; but doubts as to the existence of the soul or of
God are possible and have been met by professedly demonstrative
arguments. The 'dogmatists' whom Kant criticised had, as they
thought, proved the existence of a monad, an 'indiscerptible'
unit called the soul; and of a Supreme Being, or 'Ens
Realissimum,' who is taken to be in some sense absolute and
simple. Kant holds these arguments to be essentially a
misapplication of logical method. It is the function of the
reason to unify our knowledge. The ideal would be reached if all
knowledge could be regarded as a system of deductions from a
single principle. This, in reasoning about the soul, produces a
'paralogism.' All our thoughts and faculties are bound together
into a unity which is consistent with multiplicity. We interpret
this unjustifiably as implying the existence of an absolutely
simple unit. We hypostatise the unity and regard it as a thing
when, in truth, it represents a complex system of reciprocal
relations. The arguments upon the supposed proofs of the
existence of a supreme Being, though they are expanded and
considered in many different forms, reach a similar conclusion.
We are perfectly right in unifying as much as possible our whole
knowledge of the world, but though we may continue the process
indefinitely, we can never logically arrive at the knowledge of a
single Being existing independently as the foundation of all
other being. In this sense, Kant calls the idea 'regulative.' It
corresponds to the legitimate process of thought; we must unify,
but no reasoning can reveal an entity lying beyond all
experience. We are thus led to 'irresistible illusions,' from
which, however, we can escape, though only 'by the severest and
most subtle criticism.' Kant compares this to the illusion
produced by a mirror, which makes objects really in front appear
to be behind it, or to the apparent increase of the moon's size
when near the horizon. Still, it is impossible, as he
emphatically says, that reason should be itself undeserving of
confidence. It is only from its misuse in an inappropriate
sphere, or, in other words, from its attempt to transcend
experience, that the fallacy arises.(81*)
    It is needless to ask how this argument can be reconciled
with the theism which Kant accepts. Hamilton's criticism of
Cousin is essentially a statement of the converse argument.
Schelling and Cousin had taken up Kant's challenge, not by
inferring the simple being from the complex of experiences, but
by professing to show how multiplicity might be evolved out of
absolute simplicity. This feat, as Hamilton held, and as Mill of
course held with him, could only be accomplished by a palpable
juggle. Clearly you cannot count, if you are restricted to the
use of an absolute 'one.' The germ from which an organic system
is developed cannot be itself absolutely simple. Knowledge can
only be made out of rules; and a simple 'is' gives no rule.
Hamilton tries to express the principle implied in such instances
in the proper pomp of metaphysical language. Cousin starts by
admitting that knowledge supposes 'plurality,' that is, an object
and a subject. Now, says Hamilton,(82*) the 'absolute' must be
identified with the subject or with the object, or with the
'indifferency of both' (whatever that may be). On the first or
second hypothesis, the absolute is not, as it ought to be, a
unit, for it is one of a pair; on the other hypothesis, you
suppose that consciousness does not imply plurality. A man, let
us say in humbler language, if he thinks, must think about
something. If so, we start from a man and a something. But
suppose him to think about himself. Then there must be something
to say about himself; and he will have nothing to say if he is
absolutely simple. That seems to be true enough. Every
proposition asserts a relation of some kind, and a proposition
cannot be got at all if no relation be given. This, therefore, is
one meaning of the 'relativity' of thought. 'To think is the
condition'; that is, you cannot affirm or deny unless you deny or
affirm something. If you try then to get to the absolute by
stripping off all relations, you really get to zero. We think
only by the attribution of certain qualities, and the negation of
these qualities and of this attribution is so far a negation of
thinking at all. Kant's arguments duly carried out prove 'the
unconditioned,' says Hamilton, to be a mere 'fasciculus of
negations.'(83*) Clearly, we reply, if the unconditioned is
reached by unsaying all that we have said. A plain person is,
indeed, chiefly astonished that such arguments should be
required. Schelling's system, says Hamilton himself, is only fit
for 'Laputa on the Empire,'(84*) but Schelling at least invented
a supernatural faculty to perceive an 'incogitable' hypothesis.
Cousin's hypothesis, which tried to omit this faculty, is worse,
for it is self-contradictory.(85*) The spectacle of three of the
most distinguished men in Germany, France, and England joining in
this game, and even of Hamilton winning a 'European reputation'
by declaring that we cannot believe two contradictory
propositions at once, or make something out of nothing, is not
edifying to a believer in philosophy.

 V. ANTINOMIES

    Mill does not want all this apparatus to get rid of the
transcendental world. It is for him too obviously superfluous to
require to be exploded. How then does he come into conflict with
Hamilton? We must turn for explanation to another of Kant's
arguments. The universe must be regarded as in some sense one,
though that does not prove the existence of a simple and absolute
Being as its ground or principle. On the other hand, the universe
is an indefinitely complex multitude of reciprocally dependent
things. We can bring the 'laws' into unity and harmony; but the
things through which the laws are manifested are themselves
infinitely numerous. We may then ask whether the universe is not
only one but a whole; whether its unity entitles us to call it a
single object. This leads to the famous 'antinomies.' They have
been familiar enough in many forms since speculation began. The
universe is given in space and time. Now, we cannot think of
space and time either as finite or infinite. We cannot think of
space as finite because, however far we go, there is still space
beyond. We cannot think of space as infinite, because to imagine
infinite space would require an infinite mind and infinite time.
Space must be either infinite or finite, because one of two
contradictories must be true, and yet each is 'inconceivable.' I
must confess with due humility that I could never see any
antinomy at all. In this I agree with Mill,(86*) though I cannot
agree with his attempt to explain our beliefs in the infinity of
space by an 'inseparable association.' The apparent antinomy is
due, I fancy, to a shift in the meaning of 'infinite.' The
mathematician calls space 'infinite' because space is limited by
space, and there cannot be a 'whole' of space. If by 'infinite' I
mean the completion of a process which ex hypothesi cannot be
completed, I become self-contradictory. There is no meaning in 'a
whole' of space, though every particular space is a whole. Acuter
reasoners, however, can see the difficulty, and we will therefore
admit the 'antinomy.' Then we must observe that, according to
Kant, the antinomies apply solely to the cosmological idea. There
is nothing, he says,(87*) antinomial in the psychological and
theological ideas; for they 'contain no contradiction.' He infers
that their reality can be no more denied than affirmed. If from
the organism I infer a soul I fall into a 'paralogism,' but not
into an 'antinomy.' We do not prove that soul and no-soul are
necessary alternatives and both 'inconceivable,' but simply that
the soul, as a monad, is a superfluity which explains nothing --
a thought interpreted as a thing. The antinomy occurs only when
we deal with the perceived universe, and ask whether it has or
has not limits. It has no application to the argument about God
or the soul. Since they are not in space they have no concern
with the antinomies involved in the conception of space.
    Hamilton's misappropriation of this argument is the master
fallacy of his system. In the Cousin essay he lays down a dogma
without the slightest attempt to prove it. 'The conditioned is
the mean between two extremes -- two inconditionates -- exclusive
of each other, neither of which can be conceived as possible, but
of which, on the principles of contradiction and the excluded
middle, one must be admitted as necessary.'(88*) He adds that our
faculties are thus shown to be weak, but not deceitful. We learn,
moreover, the 'salutary lesson' that the capacity of 'thought is
not to be constituted into the measure of existence,' and we are
warned from 'recognising the domain of our knowledge as
necessarily coextensive with the horizon of our faith.' In a note
we are invited to accept as true the declaration 'of a pious
philosophy -- a God understood would be no God at all'; and we
are told that 'the last and highest consecration of all true
religion must be an altar to the unknown God,' -- which does not
appear to have been St. Paul's opinion. This doctrine was
repeated again and again in various lectures and notes. It was
applied by Mansel to defend Christianity, and was in a sense
accepted by Mr. Herbert Spencer as a support of Agnosticism.(89*)
Yet it is sprung upon us in this abrupt fashion, not only without
proof, but without any clear statement of its meaning; and, as I
think, is really the expression of a confusion of two lines of
argument. An exposition of this great axiom, he says,(90*) would
show that 'some of the most illustrious principles' are only its
'subordinate modifications applied to certain primary notions.'
Among such notions are those of 'cause and effect' and 'substance
and phenomenon.' The discussion of Cause and Effect(91*)
illustrates sufficiently the curious shifting of the argument.
Our inability to conceive a beginning either of time or of the
existence of things in time gives the apparent necessity of
causation. But as we cannot suppose an infinite regress, the
necessity corresponds only to an 'impotence' of our minds. Hence,
he argues, in the case of the human will, we must admit the
possibility, though not the conceivability, of an absolute
beginning, and therefore of freewill. The argument, if sound, is
applicable to cause in general as well as to the will. Hamilton
may mean that since an absolute beginning is possible at some
time, it is possible at any time. We might then have an antinomy.
One of the propositions, 'things are caused' and 'things are not
caused,' must be true, and both are inconceivable. But this would
be to destroy the axiom of causation. The appearance of an
antinomy is obtained by changing the question. Instead of asking
why we take things to be caused, we ask whether we can imagine an
infinite series of causes. The antinomy in this case is simply
the old formula over again. This central position of Hamilton's
philosophy is thus an illegitimate application of Kant's
argument. Kant admits an antinomy only where it is at least
plausible, namely, as applied to the universe which we clearly
have to extend indefinitely if not to absolute infinity. But no
such difficulty is involved in the problem of unity. Hamilton
seems to have been so delighted with the 'antinomy' that he
'enounces' it as a general law; applies it where it has no
meaning whatever, and invariably 'illustrates' it by repeating
the case in which it is plausible.
    Hamilton thus contrives to blend two arguments into one. His
view is the germ of inextricable confusions, and, one might have
thought, too obvious a bit of logical legerdemain to impose even
upon a metaphysician. It plays, however, a most important part in
the attempt made by Mansel to bring Hamilton to bear against the
unbeliever. Mansel's whole aim is to put his antagonists in a
dilemma. They must not be allowed to say simply that an argument
becomes meaningless; they must be taken to say that it leads to a
balance between two alternatives. We therefore get a double
result. On the one hand, we are reduced to complete scepticism --
that is, reason is made impotent in regard to a question which
necessarily arises. On the other hand, we are left with an
impression that we are compelled to take some position in this
region of inconceivables, and this is translated into the pious
assertion that 'belief' extends beyond 'knowledge.' Thus Hamilton
emphatically declares that it is the 'main scope' of his
speculation to show articulately that we 'must believe as actual
much that we are unable (positively) to conceive as actual.'(92*)
    To follow him through the maze of 'inconceivables,'
'absolutes,' 'infinites,' 'unconditioneds' and so forth would be
idle.(93*) I shall be content with one argument which in Mansel's
hands led to an important conflict with Mill. The Infinite, says
Mansel, 'if it is to be conceived at all, must be conceived as
potentially' everything and actually nothing; for if there is
anything in general which it cannot become, it is thereby
limited; and if there is anything in particular which it actually
is, it is thereby excluded from being any other thing.(94*) It
must also be conceived as 'actually everything and potentially
nothing; for an unrealised potentiality is likewise a
limitation.' Hamilton had put the same argument. 'The infinite is
conceived only by thinking away every character by which the
finite was conceived.'(95*) That is, the 'infinite' is equivalent
to the 'indeterminate,' or the result of unsaying all that you
have said. This logically leads to pure nothing, not to an
antinomy. We are told that we must believe something where we get
not to a contradiction but to an absolute vacuum. Mill makes an
obvious criticism.(96*) When I talk of infinite space, I do not
'think away' the character of space, but I only think of an
indefinite extension of space. To believe in infinite space would
otherwise be to disbelieve in geometry. We cannot think at all
about an utterly indeterminate object, but we can think of space
without asking how much space there is in the universe. 'The
Infinite' may be meaningless, but to predicate infinity of space
does not destroy the space conception. If, then, the infinity of
space does not hinder us from obtaining a perfectly accurate
knowledge of its properties, does the infinite or absolute nature
of the Deity prevent us from understanding his attributes? Here
is the real problem; and it leads to the odd spectacle of the
sceptic arguing on behalf of theology against the divine. There
is no contradiction, as Mill argues, in speaking of an infinitely
knowing or powerful or good being. A being has infinite knowledge
if nothing is unknown to him; and is infinitely powerful if
nothing is impossible to him. That gives a plain meaning on the
human side, though we are of course unable adequately to imagine
the result on the divine side. Infinite goodness is, indeed, a
less natural phrase than 'absolute,' because absolute does not
suggest a numerical measure of 'goodness.' Goodness is a quality,
not a quantity. But, understood as meaning the absence of even an
infinitesimal degree of badness, it may be called infinite, and
the 'limit' which is denied is not that implied by 'good,' but by
the degree of goodness. Infinite, if it means anything, must mean
an infinite amount or degree of something definite.
    Mill thus appears to argue that theology is not as irrational
as its defender supposes. The introduction of such predicates as
infinite and absolute do not make knowledge of their subject
impossible. It would have cleared the matter if Mill had gone on
to explain his own view of the 'Absolute.' We may guess what he
ought to have said in conformity with his principles. If all
knowing is essentially a knowledge of relations, it is idle to
seek for an 'absolute' in the sense of a thing which (on Mansel's
definition) 'exists in and by itself, having no necessary
relations to any other being.'(97*) Since, in saying anything
about it, we assert a relation, we cannot even speak of such an
'absolute' without contradiction. 'Absolute,' like certain,
necessary, and so forth, is a name referring to our knowledge. An
assertion about facts may be 'absolutely' true, however trifling
the fact. It may be as absolutely true that a sparrow fell to the
ground at 9 A.M. on the 1st of January last as that the sun
exists or that two and two make four. Knowledge implies not an
'absolute fact' but an 'absolute truth' -- a truth which requires
no qualification not explicitly given in the proposition
asserted. To say that a thing exists absolutely is to add nothing
but emphasis to the statement that it exists. Nor does the
statement that it exists 'conditionally' alter the case. It is
conditional in so far as it has a cause, or as from its existence
we may infer some previous state of things. If, however, it
exists, the conditions have ex hypothesi been fulfilled. It
exists now 'absolutely,' however it came to exist. It is a part
of the whole system of interdependent and continuous processes
which make up the universe.(98*) If we know that anything, then,
is part of the actual world, we have all 'the absolute' required;
and this is an 'absolute' which is perfectly compatible with any
complexity of relations. The clue is given by getting hold of any
bit whatever of the actual web, not by getting into some
transcendental world beyond. The error of supposing that we must
find an 'Absolute' somewhere, and that we cannot find it in any
part of our experience, is the same as would be the error of
supposing that because we cannot fix a point in absolute space,
we cannot get any valid space measures. The centre of the sun or
Greenwich observatory will do equally well, though we cannot even
speak intelligibly of their absolute position in the universe. To
give a scientific account of astronomy we do not require an
absolute centre of space. This is what I take to be implied in
Kant's argument about the idea of God. We cannot get to an
'absolute' Being outside of the universe, but the whole must be
regarded as a single and self-supporting system. This argument is
distorted in the elaborate argumentations of Hamilton and Mansel
against the attempts to get to an absolute Being outside of
things in general. Such an absolute as they attack is doubtless
an absurdity; but neither are we, as they urge, compelled to
believe in it. If we still use theological language, we must say
that God is not a Being apart from the universe, but implied in
the universe; the ground of all things, the immanent principle
whose 'living raiment is the world.' Mill of course holds that we
must abandon 'transcendentalism' or the search for 'things in
themselves' outside of the phenomenal world. Mansel often seems
to agree. Philosophers who indulge in these freaks try, he says,
to lift up the curtain of their own being to view the picture
which it conceals. 'Like the painter of old, they knew not that
the curtain is the picture.'(99*) That sounds like good
positivism or phenomenalism. It should give the death blow to all
'ontology.' He assures us over and over again that the 'Infinite'
is a 'mere negation of thought';(100*) that contradictions arise
whenever we attempt to transcend the limits of experience; that
human reason is so far from bring able to construct a 'Scientific
Theology, independent of and superior to Revelation, that it
cannot even read the alphabet out of which that Theology must be
framed.'(101*) We can know the laws of nature or the phenomena,
but we can know nothing of the substance or noumenon which lies
behind them. Then, is the natural query, why not leave it out of
account altogether? Why venture into this region, where, as
Mansel admits, we find only 'antinomies' or,'contradictory
inconceivables'? Why not, in short, be agnostics like Mr Herbert
Spencer, who based his First Principles on the Hamilton-Mansel
doctrine? This gives the secret of the whole procedure.
    'The cardinal point,' says Mansel, 'of Sir W. Hamilton's
philosophy... is the absolute necessity, under any system of
philosophy whatever, of acknowledging the existence of a sphere
of belief, beyond the limits of the sphere of thought.'(102*)
Faith, then, remains when reason disappears, though faith cannot
solve the doubts suggested by reason.(103*) What 'faith' tells
us, in fact, is that we must believe one of two propositions,
though we cannot conceive the possibility of either. Can it
possibly, we ask, much matter whether we believe that there is or
is not an X of whom nothing more can be intelligibly said? A
belief which extends beyond 'the sphere of thought' is a belief
which we can afford to leave to itself. But Mansel has to declare
that we are forced to believe where we cannot even properly
think. 'We are compelled by the constitution of our minds to
believe in the existence of an absolute and infinite
Being,'(104*) though, as we learn, to 'think of the infinite' is
really a negation of thought. A decision to accept one of the
contradictory beliefs is yet of the highest practical importance.
The schemes of Free Will and Fatalism, says Hamilton,(105*) are
'theoretically balanced,' though the fatalist inconceivability is
the 'less obtrusive'; but 'practically' we must accept free-will
on penalty of admitting the moral law to be 'a mendacious
imperative.' That is, right and wrong become meaningless unless
you accept one of two equally inconceivable doctrines. So Mansel
declares freewill to be 'certain in fact' though 'inexplicable in
theory.'(106*) Why 'certain,' if, as he also declares, it is part
of the 'fundamental mystery' of the coexistence of the Finite and
the Infinite?(107*) According to Mansel, again, the denial that
an infinite Being exists, is simply the acceptance of one of two
'equally inconceivable alternatives.'(108*) It is, he declares,
'our duty' to think of God as 'personal' and to believe that he
is 'infinite.'(109*) It is a duty, then, to accept as a certainty
what reason declares to be only one of two equally probable
alternatives.
    The general attitude is familiar enough. Pascal has put it in
his famous 'wager.' Believe a thing because it is impossible. You
must back one side; and reason is too imbecile to settle which.
Then give up reasoning. The argument is persuasive if not
logically convincing. Hamilton was too much of a philosopher and
a rationalist to accept it in that form. His application remained
ambiguous. Probably he would have approved a rather vague theism,
which might be interpreted in terms of many religious creeds.
Mansel, unluckily, had to get from his philosophy to the position
of strict Anglican orthodoxy; from the contradictory
inconceivables to the Thirty-nine Articles. His method of
performing this feat has little interest now; but I must notice
it enough to show the relation to Mill.

 VI. REVEALED RELIGION

    How is this Infinite and Absolute Being to be brought into
any relation whatever with facts? How, by accepting one of two
equally inconceivable alternatives, can we throw any light upon
the truth of a historical statement? Mansel protests that he is
not arguing as to the truth of any particular revelation. Though
he is not bound to prove the truth of the Christian revelation,
he is clearly bound to show that a revelation is probable, and to
suggest the criterions by which its reality must be tested. A
religion, as Kant had said, could not be true which conflicted
with morality.(110*) If morality binds me to be merciful, and a
god orders me to be cruel, he cannot be the true God. The deist
Tindal had argued long ago that Joshua could not be justified by
a divine command in exterminating the Canaanites.(111*) In
answering this difficulty, Mansel hit upon the unlucky phrase
'Moral Miracles.'(112*) A 'moral miracle,' a conversion of a bad
act into a good one, was, he admitted, not the kind of experiment
to be used too often. Every scoundrel can work 'miracles' of that
kind. He can break the divine law though he cannot break the 'law
of nature.' How are we to know that in a given case the divine
law has been suspended by the supreme ruler and not really broken
by the wicked subject? By what logical feat can we show the
identity of Jehovah with the Absolute and Infinite? The deity of
joshua was frankly anthropomorphic: the (generally) invisible
deity of a tribe. We can judge of his character as we can judge
of the character of joshua himself, or of the character of Baal,
or Moloch, or Zeus. If we argue that all the deities represent an
imperfect feeling after a supreme Being, our judgment would not
be affected. The deity would still be imperfect. The commands
obeyed were still cruel and immoral, as conceived at the time. To
argue that they were good because somehow or other Jehovah was
the Inconceivable seems to be too obvious a fallacy even for a
Bampton Lecturer. Mansel denounces the 'morbid horror of what
they (philosophers) are pleased to call Anthropomorphism.'
'Fools' to dream that man can escape from himself, that human
reason can draw aught but a human portrait of God.'(113*) They
really argue that the portrait has at any rate very ugly
features, and doubt whether it is possible to draw any portrait
whatever of the Inconceivable.
    Mansel makes play with this 'antinomy.' The God of his
philosophy is too inconceivable to be a moral lawgiver. But, says
Mansel, he is also jehovah. Jehovah, it is replied, is immoral.
But, says Mansel, he is also the Inconceivable. This singular
mode of eluding difficulties can of course be expressed in
edifying language. The 'caviller,' for example, had objected to
'vicarious punishment.' Mansel says(114*) that this supposes that
nothing can be compatible 'with the boundless goodness of God,
which is incompatible with the little goodness of which man may
be conscious in himself.' The ingenious argument, in spite of
this way of putting it, excited Mill's very justifiable wrath.
'I,' he said, 'will call no being good, who is not what I mean
when I apply that epithet to my fellow-creatures; and if such a
being can sentence me to hell for not so calling him, to hell I
will go.'(115*) Mansel is amazed at this 'extraordinary outburst
of rhetoric'; he will not 'pause to comment on its temper and
good taste'; but he suggests a parallel.(116*) It is that of an
'inexperienced son' taking moral advice from an 'experienced
father,' or believing that the elder man is acting rightly though
his motives are not fully intelligible to the younger. This, as
Mill replies,(117*) assumes that the father is 'good' in the
human sense, although with more wisdom or knowledge. To make the
parallel close we should have to suppose a son who only knows
that it is an equal chance whether his father exists or not, and
is told by somebody who is equally ignorant that the father
desires him to cut a man's throat and appropriate his wife. If
the morality of God be absolutely inscrutable, we must fall back
upon the conclusion that we are entitled to criticise not the
moral contents but the external evidences of a religion.(118*)
Mansel tries to compromise. We may argue from the morality of
religion within limits; the argument may prove that a religion
cannot be divine; but not that it is divine. For that we must go
to 'external facts.'(119*) Our knowledge of God, he still
asserts, is derivable from our 'moral and intellectual
consciousness'; from the 'constitution and course of nature' and
from revelation. These generally agree. When they appear to
differ, we must not settle a priori which is to give way.(120*)
Mr Herbert Spencer, as Manal thinks, went wrong because he took
only the 'negative position' of Hamilton's philosophy, and did
not see, for example, that the belief 'in a personal God is
imperatively demanded by the facts of our moral and emotional
consciousness.'(121*) Mansel was trying to escape from his own
logic under the shelter of 'vague generalities.' Mr Herbert
Spencer, I think, was perfectly right in holding that when our
Deity is the 'Unknowable,' he cannot be made to take sides even
in a moral controversy and certainly not identified with the
anthropomorphic deities of popular mythology.
    The Hamilton-Mansel controversy has become a weariness to the
flesh. The interest which it still possesses is only in the
illustration of the conflict between different lines of
development. The position of Hamilton and his disciple means a
desperate attempt to escape from a pressing dilemma. Kant's
theology represents the deistic rationalism of the eighteenth
century. The metaphysical argument necessarily tends to some form
of pantheism, such as that of which Spinoza is the most complete
representative. Carry out the logic and God is identified with
Nature, and is not a being who can be conceived as interfering
with the laws of Nature. The growth of science had made it
essential to widen the theological conceptions, and to invest the
supreme ruler with attributes commensurate with the new universe,
which had been growing both in vastness and regularity. The
result of attempting to fulfil that condition was inconsistent
with the common-sense theology of the Scottish philosophy, which
tried, by help of 'intuitions,' to preserve a 'personal deity,' a
being still individual and therefore conceivable as interfering;
and which, finding the metaphysical argument dangerous, was
inclined to fall back upon the merely empirical argument of
Paley. I have shown, at fully sufficient length, how by
substituting an antinomy for a paralogism, Hamilton manages
verbally to evade this difficulty; and by extending the sphere of
belief beyond the sphere of reason, justifies belief in a God who
is at once unknowable and yet may be an object of worship.
Mansel's audacious extension of this to the historical and
mythological creeds, and the consequent identification of Jehovah
with the Absolute and Infinite, can only be regarded as a logical
curiosity. The only results were, on the one hand, Mr Herbert
Spencer's agnosticism, and on the other, perhaps, some impulse to
the speculation of the rising generation. Hamilton and Mansel did
something, by their denunciations of German mysticism and
ontology, to call attention to the doctrines attacked. The
Germans might after all give the right clue; and it might be
possible, by substituting a new dialectic for the old logic, to
regard the universe as still woven out of reason, and to preserve
a theological or at least an idealist mode of conception. With
that, however, I have no concern.

 VII. MILL ON THEOLOGY

    Hamilton's theory at least recognised the inevitable failure
of the empirical or Paley theology which virtually makes theology
a department of science. Mill, as a thorough empiricist, might
have been expected to abandon theology along with all
transcendentalism and ontology. In fact, however, his position
was different. I have already pointed out that at one part of his
argument he appears to be defending orthodox views of theology as
against Mansel. This argument might appear to be merely ad
hominem, as intended to show the absurdity of Mansel's doctrine
of inconceivability; not to deny the inconceivability itself.
Mill, however, really goes further. He approves Hamilton's
strange assertion that 'religious disbelief and philosophical
scepticism are not merely not the same, but have no natural
connection,'(122*) and holds that all the real arguments for the
existence of God and the immortality of the soul remain
unaffected by the association theory. In his Logic Mill had
accepted Comte's 'law of the three stages'; but in his later
study of Comte he expressly declares that this doctrine is
reconcilable with the belief in a 'creator and supreme governor
of the world.' It implies a belief in a 'constant order,' but
that order may be due to a primitive creation, and even
consistent with the continual superintendence of an, intelligent
governor.'(123*) In the posthumous essays this position was
developed in such a way as to give some scandal to his
disciples.(124*) He not only leaves room for theistic beliefs,
but he seems even to sanction their acceptance.
    In the Three Essays on Religion Mill is clearly treading
unfamiliar ground. He refers to the arguments of Leibniz, Kant,
and Butler, but, as Professor Bain remarks,(125*) was a
comparative stranger to the whole sphere of speculation. He is
not so much at home with his subject as he was in the Logic or
the Political Economy; and therefore scarcely appreciates certain
conditions of successful navigation of these regions made
sufficiently obvious by the history of previous adventurers. Yet
his candour and his resolution to give fair consideration to all
difficulties are as conspicuous as his wish to appreciate the
highest motives of his antagonists. Of the three essays, the
first two, written before 1858 (On 'Nature' and the 'Utility of
Religion'), show less disposition than the last (upon 'Theism')
to compromise with orthodoxy; and yet their principles are
essentially the same. Mill, of course, is still a thorough
empiricist. One version of theology is therefore inconsistent
with his most essential tenets. The so-called a priori or
ontological argument is for him worthless. It involves, he
thinks, the unjustifiable assumption that we can infer 'objective
facts from ideas or convictions of our minds.' The 'First Cause
argument,' again, can only upon his view of causation suggest an
indefinite series of antecedents, and one in which the 'higher'
as often follows the 'lower' cause, as the lower the higher.
Matter may be the antecedent of mind, as well as mind of matter.
Moreover, no 'cause' is wanted for that which has no beginning;
and as our experience shows a beginning for mind but no beginning
for force or matter, the presumption is against mind.(126*) If,
indeed, the world be simply a series of separate phenomena,
connected solely as preceding and succeeding, there is no
possibility, it would seem, of inferring any unity or underlying
cause or ground. The very attempt to reach unity is as hopeless
as is the proverbial problem of weaving ropes from sand. The
possibility of Philosophical theism is thus destroyed; for the
God of philosophy corresponds to the endeavour to assert
precisely the unity thus denied in advance. By 'God' Mill must
really mean, not Spinoza's necessary substance nor Kant's 'Idea
of the pure Reason,' but a being who is essentially one factor of
the universe. The confusion is of critical importance. It is
constantly assumed, as Mill assumes, that the 'a priori' and the
empirical arguments are different moDes of proving the same
conclusion. The word 'God' is no doubt used in both cases; but
the word covers entirely different senses. The existence of
Jehovah might be proved or disproved like the existence of Moses.
The God of Spinoza is proved from the logical necessity of the
unity and regularity of the universe. One Being may interfere or
superintend because he is only part of a whole. The other
corresponds to the whole, and interferences or miracles become
absurd. Mill, therefore, by calmly dismissing the a priori
argument is really giving up the God of philosophy, and trying
what he can do with the particular or finite being really implied
in Paley. Theology on this showing can be only a part of natural
science, and precisely that part in which we know nothing.
    To know anything or God, in whatever sense, we must go to
'Nature.' In the first essay Mill discusses the question whether
anything can be made of the various systems which prescribe
'imitation of Nature' or obedience to the laws of Nature. If
Nature be taken in the widest sense, as including man, such
systems are migratory. Disobedience to a 'law of Nature' is not
wrong but impossible. We may, however, take Nature in the
narrower sense in which it is the antithesis of art; or, as he
puts it, as meaning 'that which takes place without human
intervention.'(127*) It is plain that, in this sense, the whole
aim of all human endeavour must be to improve. Nature. Mill
emphasises this by expanding the indictment against Nature, which
has become more familiar in discussions of the 'struggle for
existence.' The 'absolute recklessness of the great cosmic
forces,'(128*) the variety of torments, such as the worst tyrants
have hardly used, inflicted upon all living beings without the
slightest regard to justice, are amply sufficient reasons for not
'imitating Nature.' Hence Mill protests emphatically against the
notion that 'goodness is natural.'(129*) All the virtues are in
his sense 'artificial.' Sympathy begins as a form of selfishness
-- selfishness for two -- and the sentiment of justice is
developed by the necessity of external law. It is the pressure
from without, the interest of each in the goodness of others,
which has really created the moral world. The 'germs' of all
these virtues must, it is true, have been present; the species
could not have existed had it not been endowed with desire for
useful ends; but then, we must also admit the existence of bad
instincts, producing 'rankly luxuriant growths' of vice against
which a long and precarious struggle must be carried on.(130*)
    Mill is thus saying emphatically much that has been said by
later evolutionists. One remark is obvious. The distinction
between 'Natural' and 'Artificial' in this sense is clearly
arbitrary for one who, like Mill, rejects the doctrine of
Freewill. If Nature makes men with certain capacities, Nature
must also be taken to be the cause of all human 'intervention.'
The sphere of the 'artificial' is merely one part of the sphere
of the 'natural.' 'Sympathy' and 'justice' are not the less
natural because they are in this sense artificial. Mill is, of
course, fully aware of the fact that his 'nature' is here at most
department of Nature in the wider sense. Yet the illegitimate
distinction seems more or less to affect his conclusions. He
comes to speak as if the distinction corresponded to a line
between different worlds. In the non-human world we appear to
catch 'Nature' alone and unaided; we can see what it can do its
by itself, and judge, if not of its justice, at least of
benevolence. He is thus led to use language about men amending
Nature or 'co-operating with the beneficent powers,'(131*) which
would be more consistent in a thorough-going advocate of
Freewill, but which in his mouth must be taken as a metaphorical
or provisional mode of speech. To one who uses 'nature' in the
widest sense as implying a conception of the universe as a whole,
the narrower use would be meaningless. But, as we shall now see,
the unity of nature is a conception which Mill virtually rejects.
    Mill has shown conclusively that it is impossible to
interpret Nature as the work of omnipotent Benevolence. So far,
he agrees with many predecessors, including Hume and
Mansel;(132*) but he does not with Hume become simply sceptical,
nor follow Mansel in pronouncing that we must believe a doctrine
which we are unable to 'construe to the mind' as conceivable. He
suggests an alternative view. It is possible to believe in a God
who is benevolent though not omnipotent. This, he declares, is
the only 'religious explanation of the order of Nature,' which is
neither self-contradictory nor inconsistent with facts.(133*) He
'ventures to assert,' moreover, that it has been the real faith
of all who have drawn a worthy support from trust in Providence;
'they have always saved [God's] goodness at the expense of His
power.' This, for example, is the true meaning of Leibniz's 'best
of all possible worlds.'(134*) Mill declares that the doctrine of
the Manichaeans, which he knows to have been 'devoutly held by at
least one cultivated and conscientious person of our own day,' is
the only 'form of belief in the supernatural which stands wholly
clear both of intellectual contradiction and moral
obliquity.'(135*) He points out, too, that even Christianity
admits a devil, though it places upon the Creator the
responsibility of not annihilating him.(136*) Now Manichaeism is
a clear confession of philosophical bankruptcy. The whole aim of
reasoning is to reduce the universe to unity, and this is to
admit that there is an ultimate and insoluble dualism. From the
point of view of the ontologist, indeed, the moral difficulty
which Manichaeism is supposed to meet is irrelevant. God is the
ground or First Cause. Evil is caused as much as good, and if a
first cause or an absolute substance be a necessary assumption,
we must ascribe to it the whole system of things, good or bad,
painful or pleasurable, without trying to separate what is
inextricably intertwined. An argument from causation leaves no
locus standi for any moral objection. Mill, however, denies the
necessity for, or indeed the possibility of, such reasoning. He
is fully prepared to admit that in the last resort we come to
independent and equally uncaused factors. The question, then,
remains, what positive ground we can assign for a belief in any
first cause or causes or 'supernatural entities.'
    Having rejected the metaphysical arguments for a Deity, we
reach at last, says Mill, an argument of a really scientific
character -- the argument, namely, from design.(137*) That is to
say, he tries to find room for an empirical deity who must
therefore correspond to a part of nature, not to the whole. He
does not hold that the knowledge of nature anywhere involves
antinomies or contrary inconceivables. It is a coherent and
throughout intelligible system, but it would correspond to the
ideal of completed science, not to any metaphysical belief.
Within this system there is room for a being who, though he is
limited by something external to himself, may yet be an object of
worship. In fact, there can be no a priori objection to the
theory of a powerful being, who may be discovered, like any other
beings known to us, by his action in particular cases.
Metaphysicians may decline to call such a being God; but a proof
of super-human wisdom and power may be enough for practical
purposes.(138*)
    The proof, then, that such a being exists, must be made by
induction; and, as Mill explains, by the first of the famous
'four methods,' namely, by that of Agreement.(139*) This
argument, though generally the weakest, is in this case 'strong
of its kind.' He illustrates it by the familiar case. The eye is
a complex structure which, as it began in time, must have had a
cause or causes. 'Chance' is eliminated by the number of
instances, and therefore there must be some causal connection
between the 'cause' which brought the elements together and the
'fact of sight.' Mill, that is, thinks it necessary to prove what
science takes for granted. No man of science disputes that there
is some cause of eyes and of every eye. But here we have the
curious transition into another order of thought, which
corresponds to the passage from the empirical to the
transcendental meaning. It is clear that so long as we are in the
sphere of science, the only 'cause' of the existence of an eye is
the sum of the preceding organic processes. A given animal has
eyes because the processes of reproduction involve resemblance to
its parents. If we go back to eyeless ancestors, we have the
problem how eyes were developed; but the purely scientific answer
would still consist in assigning the previous conditions or the
precedent stage in the whole process of nature. How do we get out
of this series? The argument, according to Mill, would proceed by
saying that, as sight follows the eye, the cause must be a
'final' cause; or, in other words, correspond to an 'intelligent
Will.' But what is the relation of this Will to the admitted
series of events? Causation always sends me back along an
indefinitely producible series. Am I to interpret this cause as
an 'alternative' to what may be called the natural cause; or as
corresponding to a general power, which is manifested through the
whole series? In the latter case we may consider the God of
nature as an 'immanent' power. His operation is manifest in the
general wisdom of the whole system. It is not only consistent
with, but implies, the persistence of the 'laws of nature,' and
therefore the evolution of eyes, if there was a period before
eyes existed. If that view be tenable, we may save 'teleology' by
applying it to nature as a whole, but there is no intervention in
the actual series of natural events. On the view which Mill
accepts, we have an intervention, at some particular point. But
how is this to be inferred, or what can it mean? I have already
noticed the familiar difficulties in speaking of 'Philip
Beauchamp.' The philosophical objection is clear,(140*) and in
science 'creation' can be only a word; it introduces an arbitrary
and unmeaning interruption, and, under the form of explaining,
declares explanation to be impossible.
    In fact, when such conceptions are brought into the argument,
when 'creation' is used as an alternative hypothesis to a
permanent order, the answer of the evolutionist is conclusive.
Here, accordingly, Mill finds himself confronted by Darwin. He
admits that the doctrine of the 'survival of the fittest' would
'greatly attenuate,' though it would be in 'no way whatever
inconsistent with creation.'(141*) This means, apparently, that
Darwinism does not prove that there was not a 'creation' at some
indefinite time; though it does show that there is no need for
supposing a creation since the existing order began.
    I have already noticed Mill's view of this 'remarkable
speculation.' Here he virtually admits that his theology, such as
it is, and, indeed, his whole conception of nature, is virtually
opposed to evolution. Science, he says, most truly, leads us to
regard nature as 'one connected system, not a web of separate
threads in passive juxtaposition with one another, but rather,
like the human or animal frame,' in perpetual 'action and
reaction'; and the natural version of this, he adds, is theism.
The unity of nature, that is, has enabled monotheism to supersede
polytheism, because it corresponds to the scientific view.(142*)
Yet, while saying this in general terms, he cannot reconcile it
to his own theories; he still talks of 'laws of nature'
counteracting each other;(143*) he can speak of some things as
'uncaused'; and of a 'permanent' and 'a changeable' element in
nature, as though persistence was not a case of causation. He is
willing, as we have seen, to assume that anything may be the
cause of anything else. The universe is therefore ultimately a
struggle between independent forces, and God becomes a being who
has to struggle against antecedent or independent things. When
science is regarded, not as a system of interdependent truths,
where the value of every theory must be judged by the way in
which it affects and is affected by all other ascertainable
truth, but as an aggregate of purely empirical observations of
the order of succession of otherwise unrelated facts, it is easy
to introduce such conceptions as 'creation,' which virtually deny
the continuity and reasonableness of the order generally, and
tend to confuse, as his antagonists would say, Nature with a
particular element in Nature; and to make noumena take a side in
the struggle between phenomena.
    Mill is thus able to hold that the adaptations 'in nature
afford a large balance of probability in favour of creation by
intelligence.'(144*) It is, he grants, only a probability, and
not strengthened by any independent arguments. It still remains
to consider whether we can find reasons to believe that the
creator is moral. He thinks that most 'contrivances' are for the
preservation of the creatures, and that there is no reason for
attributing the destructive agencies to one Being, and the
preserving agencies to another. We may therefore give up
Manichaeism, or a conflict between good and evil powers; but we
may still have an uncreated at of things with which the good
being must struggle. We must be content to believe in a Being of
great but limited power -- how limited we cannot even conjecture;
whose intelligence may be unlimited though it may also be more
limited than his power; who desires the happiness of his
creatures but has probably other motives. If he shows
benevolence, there are no traces of justice.(145*) Of immortality
we can learn nothing, unless from revelation. He denies that a
revelation, conflicting with morality, can be divine; but this
forces him to limit the power of the Deity. His God desires
morality. How can we discover that he desires it? Can these vague
surmises be helped by any direct revelation or miraculous
intervention? Mill discusses the argument of Hume's essay and
reaches, what I take to be the true conclusion, that the real
question is whether we have independent reasons for believing in
a Deity whose intervention is conceivable.(146*) Considering that
we have some reason for believing in such a being, he at last
concludes that, in spite of most serious difficulties, historical
and philosophical, we are 'entitled to say that there is nothing
so inherently impossible or absolutely incredible in the
supposition that the "extremely precious" gift of Christianity
came from a divinely commissioned man as to preclude any one from
hoping that it may be true.' He can go no further, for he sees no
'evidentiary value' even in the testimony of Christ himself. The
best men are the readiest to ascribe their own merits to a higher
source. Mill, of course, does not believe in the divinity of
Christ; he holds that Christ himself would have regarded such a
pretension as blasphemous; but it remains possible that 'Christ
actually was what he supposed himself to be... a man charged with
a special, express, and unique commission from God to lead
mankind to truth and virtue.'(147*)
    Mill, we see, declared positivism to be reconcilable with
theism. Comte himself, who declared atheism to be the most
illogical form of theology, would have agreed that positivism
does not disprove God's existence. But Comte would have said that
an unverifiable hypothesis about an inconceivable being was
simply idle or 'otiose.' Mill seems to treat the absence of
negative proof as equivalent -- not indeed to the presence of
positive, but -- to the existence of a probability worth
entertaining. His theism, if so vague and problematical a
doctrine can be called theism, is defended as neither
self-contradictory nor inconsistent with fact. Now a theory which
is self-contradictory is really no theory at all. Nor is a theory
scientifically valuable simply because 'consistent' with facts. A
theory must have some definite support in facts. It must at
lowest be not only consistent with the known facts, but
inconsistent with some otherwise imaginable facts. If it fits
every conceivable state of things, it can throw light upon none.
But this is obviously the case with Mill's theory. He makes way
for a good being by an arbitrary division of nature into two sets
of forces. He saves the benevolence by limiting the power of the
deity; but then the limits are, by his own admission, utterly
unknowable. A power, restrained by unknowable bounds, is a power
from which nothing can be inferred. Whatever its attributes, we
do not know whether they will affect any state of things. The
goodness may be indefinitely frustrated. In fact, on Mill's
showing, a power omnipotent but not benevolent, or an indefinite
multitude of powers of varying attributes, or a good and a bad
power eternally struggling, or, in short, any religious doctrine
that has ever been held among men, would suit the facts. Mill's
'plurality of causes' might have suggested this difficulty. I see
a corpse. The death may have been due to any one of an indefinite
number of causes. What right have I to select one? I am in the
same position when I regard the whole of nature as what Hume
called a 'unique effect.' The four methods of induction become
inapplicable, for there are no other universes and I have no
compass to steer by in the region of the unverifiable.
    What, then, can be the advantage of any belief where
conflicting hypotheses must be all equally probable? The question
is partly discussed in the second essay upon the utility of
Religion. Here Mill takes up the old argument of 'Philip
Beauchamp,' the 'only direct discussion' of the point with which
he is acquainted,(148*) and endeavours to state the case more
fairly and in a less hostile spirit. His argument, however, is in
general conformity with Bentham and Grote, and is very forcibly
put. One point may be noticed. He virtually identifies 'religion'
with a belief in 'the supernatural.'(149*) He compares the
efficacy of such beliefs with the efficacy of education (which,
as he characteristically says, is 'almost boundless')(150*) and
of public opinion, and shows with 'Beauchamp' that when conflict
occurs, these influences are stronger than those derived from
supernatural sanctions. Now when we believe in a revelation it is
intelligible to ask, What is the influence of a creed? It
represents a new force influencing men's minds from without. But
when the creed is supposed to be generated from antecedent
beliefs, the argument must be altered by considering what are the
true causes of the belief. How did it come to prevail? An admirer
of Comte might have brought out more distinctly the fact that
such beliefs mark an essential stage of progress, that what are
now sporadic superstitions were once parts of a systematic
religion and represented the germs of science. They were
approximate hypotheses which had to be remodelled by extricating
or dropping the 'supernatural' element. A full recognition of
this would diminish the paradoxical appearance of the statement
from which he starts, that 'a religion may be morally useful
without being intellectually sustainable.' The truth surely is
that we cannot separate the two elements of a creed. Doubtless
there were no such beings as the Zeus or Apollo of popular
belief; but polytheism may still have provided the only form in
which certain truths could be presented; and was, as Comte would
have said, a stage in the process from fetichism towards
monotheism and positivism. A discussion of the utility of belief
in the 'supernatural' without reference to the place of the
supernatural in the whole system of belief must be necessarily
inadequate. Mill admits this in substance, and argues that the
moral truth may survive the superstitions in which it was bound
up.(151*) He goes on to argue, as Comte had argued, that the
instincts which once found their sanction in the supernatural
world might find their embodiment in the 'Religion of
Humanity.'(152*) This he holds to be not only entitled to the
name of religion, but to be 'a better religion than any of those
ordinarily called by that title.' It is disinterested and does
not tend to cramp the intellect or degenerate into a worship of
mere power. Mill says emphatically that the Bentham mode of
considering religion as a supplement to police by providing
'sanctions' is inadequate; and that religion, like poetry, is
valuable as suggesting higher ideals and gratifying the craving
for knowledge of corresponding realities. To the selfish,
supernatural religion offers heaven; and to the 'tender and
grateful' it offers the love of God. He points out that it does
not follow that we must 'travel beyond the boundaries of the
world we inhabit' in order to obtain such consolation.(153*) And
the essay concludes by saying that, though the 'supernatural
religions' have always the advantage of offering immortality, the
value set upon immortality may diminish as life becomes higher
and happier and annihilation may seem more desirable.(154*)
    Yet in the middle of this argument we have the defence of
Manichaeism as a possible creed,(155*) and in the last essay we
seem to reach the true account of his leanings to such a belief.
He still, that is, requires a breathing-space for the
imagination. 'Truth is the province of reason,' but 'in the
regulation of the imagination literal truth of facts is not the
only thing to be considered.'(156*) Reason must keep the
fortress, but the 'imagination may safely follow its own end and
do its best to make life pleasant and lovely inside the castle.'
Thus, though we are only entitled to hope as to the government of
the world and a life after death, the bare hope may have a
beneficial effect. 'It makes life and human nature a far greater
thing to the feelings, and gives greater strength and solemnity
to all the sentiments which are awakened in us by our
fellow-creatures and mankind at large.' Aspirations are no longer
checked by the disastrous feeling of 'not worth while.' Religion,
too, has at before us a 'Divine Person, as a standard of
excellence and a model for imitation.'(157*) The ideal, it is
true, would remain, even if the person were held to be imaginary;
and would not be encumbered by theological difficulties. Yet
there is an advantage in the belief that a perfect being really
exists and represents the ruler of the universe, which cannot be
shared by the rationalist.(158*) Hence as, after all, the truth
of the belief is possible, it may be combined with the Religion
of Humanity. That religion, 'with or without supernatural
sanctions,' will be the religion of the future; but it will be
strengthened by the feeling that we are 'helping God' and
supplying 'cooperation' which 'he, not being omnipotent, really
needs.'(159*) Truly, Mill was nearly qualified for a place among
the prophets.
    Mill's arbitrary assumptions, like the metaphysical wire
drawings of Mansel, are rather unprofitable in themselves: few
people will care to follow them in detail; and neither could
boast of many converts. Believers soon became aware of the real
scepticism of Mansel's position; and positivists saw that Mill
left an opening for superstition. Both Mansel and Mill were
troubled about the Religion of Nature. It is abundantly clear, as
Mill might have foreseen, that such a theology as he contemplates
could be of no real value. It depends essentially upon
compromises and arbitrary distinctions. It is still within the
sphere of science, though doomed to disappear as science
advances, and from the first is inconsistent with the very aims
which are proposed by theology. God is admittedly not omnipotent,
and his existence is no guarantee for morality or optimism. And
hence there is an odd approximation between Mill and Mansel.
    Mill observes(160*) that the moral character of an alleged
revelation cannot be of itself a proof of its divinity. The
importance of the 'internal evidence' is therefore 'principally
negative.' So says Mansel. 'The evidence derived from the
internal character of a religion, whatever may be its value
within its proper limits, is, as regards the divine origin of the
religion, purely negative.'(161*) Where is the difference? If the
morality of a revelation be bad, Mill argues that the revelation
must be at once rejected. Mansel thinks that although the
morality be not clearly good, it may in some way represent a
divine command. Immoral laws cannot be divine, says Mill, though
a good law may be human. A law apparently bad, replies Mansel,
may be divine, though, of course, the badness can only be
apparent. Here, as elsewhere, the believer in the empirical
character of morality appears to attribute most certainty to the
moral judgment. The solutions differ accordingly. Mill supposes
that God must be good, but reconciles this to facts by assuming
that God is not all-powerful. Mansel will not give up the power,
and to preserve the goodness has to assume a radical incapacity
in the intellect -- a necessity of believing where there is an
impotence of conceiving. Mill, that is, is content with the
empirical deity, who is necessarily limited; and Mansel keeps the
deity of ontology but admits that he cannot be known. Mill's
conception is purely arbitrary, though he keeps within the limits
of conceivable experience; while Mansel preserves the language
appropriate to the conception of absolute unity, and yet admits
that it can mean nothing for us. 'Agnosticism' seems to be an
easier and more rational alternative; if it means an open
admission that we know nothing, when we can only save our
appearance of knowledge by arbitrary assumptions or by the use of
meaningless words. Of Mill's position it must be frankly admitted
that his desire for a religious and even supernatural belief is a
proof of dissatisfaction with his own position. He felt here, as
elsewhere, that something was wanting in his philosophy. What
that really was may partly appear by considering other
contemporary solutions. Mansel represents a particular phase of
thought which is already extinct, and views differing both from
theirs and from Mill's had in practice a far wider influence than
either.
    The Utilitarian view naturally identifies a religious creed
with a belief in certain historical statements of fact. If the
facts be provable the religion is true; if disproved it is false.
If there was such a being as Jehovah, it was desirable to worship
him; and the creed would then be useful. If there was no such
being, worship was folly. The test of the utility of a religion
was, therefore, simply the truth or falsehood of its historical
statements. If its gods were made by the fancy, not by the
reason, the result is a condemnation of religion in general. That
is simple and logical, and recognises an indisputable truth. So
far as a religion makes false statements, they must be abandoned;
and so far as its influence depends upon the falsity, it is
pernicious.
    A religion, however, represents more than can be estimated by
this simple test. The poetical value of Homer is not destroyed by
disproving the existence of the Pagan deisms, nor the value of
the Hebrew Scriptures by disproving the existence of jehovah. The
facts alleged may be fabulous and absurd; but they are also
symbols for setting forth views of the world and of conduct, and
so giving emphatic utterance to important truths. The old
religions were attempts of men, in early stages of thought, to
embody ideals of conduct which may really have been of the
highest value to mankind. They were essential, again, to the
social bonds which have, in fact, determined the formation of
society and facilitated the growth of sympathy and philanthropy.
Therefore, if a religious creed be false when interpreted as a
simple statement of fact, we have not exhausted its significance
or even touched the really most important significance of the
religion itself. Believers felt more or less clearly that such
attacks as 'Philip Beauchamp' affected only externals, and left
the need for religion unsatisfied. Only as the actual creed was
pledged to maintain the truth of certain statements, which were
daily becoming more incredible, the necessity appeared of finding
some stronger position than the old Paley scheme, which virtually
regarded religion as a mere statement of historical fact, or as a
department of natural science. To trace the consequences would be
to write a history of modern theology. I shall try only to
indicate the relation to the Utilitarians of a few thinkers. Two
main lines of thought were conspicuous in Mill's generation, and
correspond to what Newman called 'liberalism' and 'dogmatism.'

 VIII. LIBERALISM

    A very instructive example of one phase of liberal thought
was Frederick Denison Maurice (1805-1872). Before Mill's attack
upon Mansel, Maurice had been engaged in a sharp controversy
invoked by the Bampton Lecturer. No two men could be more
thoroughly at cross-purposes. In their arguments each word bears
a different signification for the two disputants. Each, of
course, vehemently disapproved the other; and Mansel was provoked
to call Maurice a liar(162*) in direct terms. The real difficulty
is to reduce the argument to any common measure; and Maurice's
position, though not easy to define, is significant.
Maurice,(163*) as I have said, was one of Mill's friendly
adversaries in the early debating society. His references to Mill
are always respectful, little as could be their intellectual
sympathy; while Mill's judgment was that 'more intellectual power
was wasted in Maurice than in any one else of my generation.'
Deep respect for Maurice, admiration of his subtlety and power of
generalisation, only increased Mill's wonder that he could find
all truth in the Thirty-nine Articles.(164*) Maurice had been
brought up as a Unitarian, and was profoundly impressed by the
barren wrangling over the dogmatic partitions of various sects.
After long hesitation he at last found satisfaction in the Church
of England and, as he declared, by accepting the Anglican formula
in their obvious and most natural sense. To men of other
persuasions, his interpretation appeared on the contrary to
amount to a complete transformation of their natural meaning.
Maurice was therefore excluded from all the higher preferment,
and passed for an insidious heresiarch. He replied by a full and
frank, though hardly a lucid, assertion of his own convictions;
and gradually proved, even to his enemies, his entire superiority
to any worldly motives. He was expelled in 1853 from his
professorship at King's College for denying the truth of the
popular version of hell, a little before the denial had become a
commonplace. Disciples had already gathered round him and
regarded him with the reverence due to the purity and loftiness
of his character. As the head of the Christian Socialists in the
critical period of 1848, he had at least given a proof that
divines could take a genuine interest in the great social
problems of the day. Maurice himself was little qualified for
business details, and the whole movement failed for the time,
like most others which start from the sympathy of the outsiders
instead of the actual experience of the actual sufferers. It was,
however, significant of a most important change, more easily
underestimated than exaggerated. Maurice deserves all respect, as
Mill observes, for his action, of which, moreover, it is only
just to say that it was really characteristic of his whole
position.
    What, then, was Maurice's position in theology? In the first
place he recognised most fully a truth which, in various forms,
gives the real strength to all great religious teachers. He held
that the value of a religion depends upon its congeniality to the
highest parts of human nature. He is thus at the opposite pole to
the Philip Beauchamp doctrine, according to which the essence of
religion is to create a spiritual police, and to add the sanction
of hell to the sanction of the gallows. Maurice is equally
opposed to the sacerdotalism which makes the essence of religion
consist in a magical removal of penalties instead of a
'regeneration' of the nature. He takes what may be vaguely called
the 'subjective' view of religion, and sympathises with
Schleiermacher's statement that piety is 'neither a knowing nor a
doing, but an inclination and determination of the
feeling.'(165*) It is evident, again, that Maurice could as
little base his belief upon external evidence as his morality
upon external Sanctions. So far he may be said to coincide with
the philosophical view. A religion must be an expression of
general truths accessible to all men, and independent of time and
place. Maurice had been a wide reader of philosophy; he spent
much time upon a history of 'Metaphysical and Moral
philosophy'(166*) which, if vague in the statement of definite
theories, shows wide sympathy and desire to enter into the spirit
of the various schools. In the Kingdom of Christ(167*) he
declares that 'eclecticism is a necessity of the age'; meaning by
eclecticism a doctrine which shall discover what is the truth
contained in all the partial systems and creeds of all ages.
Here, again, Maurice was sharing the best liberal impulses of the
day, and sharing them because they were congenial to a generous
and tender-hearted nature. The same tendency makes him averse to
any definite system of metaphysical dogmas. The dialectical
wranglings over dogmas which disgusted him in his youth appeared
again in Mansel's metaphysics. The Bampton Lectures showed,
according to him, that we cannot leave the ground of solid fact
for the 'logical ground without being involved in a series of
hopeless quibbles which no human being ought to trouble himself
with, unless he means to abandon the business of existence and to
give himself up to feats of jugglery.'(168*) In such regions no
lasting foundation can be found. Nor, on the other hand, can we
be satisfied with the mere historical critics who, like Strauss,
pick holes in the gospels or, like Strauss's opponents, manage to
mend them; or with the philologists who argue whether 'the line
in the O can be detected with the aid of spectacles or
not.'(169*) A religion which is to move men's hearts must have
some wider and deeper basis.
    So far Maurice's teaching would command the sympathy of all
who called themselves liberal. But what becomes of Logic? Can
philosophy dispense with it altogether? Maurice professedly
appeals to the heart. The appeal is made over and over again in a
great variety of forms: to the 'great human heart,' to 'bedridden
sufferers,' to 'peasants, women, and children,'(170*) and we are
told that it is the 'office of the theologian' to appeal not to
his own judgment or that of the ages, but to the 'conscience,
heart, reason of mankind.'(171*) Nothing can be more to the
purpose if we are considering the efficacy of a religious belief;
but we must ask how this appeal is related to the question of its
truth. The emotions are not reason, though they are bound to be
reasonable. The position is that of all mysticism. The mystic is
one who virtually dethrones reason in favour of the heart.
Therefore mysticism leads to all the varying beliefs which are
suggested by our unguided feelings. When Maurice was charged with
being himself a mystic or neoplatonist, his reply was that the
error of the mystic is not in recognising an 'inner light,' but
in supposing that his intuition is something personal and
private, and not a universal faculty of the human heart.(172*) He
admits, that is, that all religion implies the direct recognition
of divine influences by the human heart, though it is terribly
apt to confound the true intuition with certain erroneous
doctrines. By what test, then, are we to separate the true light
from the misleading gleams of human passion and prejudices? How
can we know that it is the divine Logos which is speaking to us,
and not some sophist substituting a mere human theory?
    This gives Maurice's characteristic doctrine, repeated in
countless forms with most genuine fervour, and yet leaving the
painful impression that we can never get a distinct meaning. He
tells us again and again that we require not a system but a
revelation; that we are to believe in God, not in a theory about
God; not in 'notions' but in principles; that a theology is
groundless which 'accepts as a tenet what is revealed as a
truth,'(173*) and that we shall be 'driven to creeds' by
'weariness of tenets.'(174*) These, and countless variations upon
the same theme, involve a puzzling distinction. How, precisely,
does the belief in God differ from the acceptance of a theory
about God? Maurice, I may perhaps say, takes the belief in God to
be an operation, not a mere bit of logic; an act of the man's
whole nature, not a purely intellectual process such as the
deduction of the conclusion of a syllogism. It is the
apprehension of the 'inner light,' always perceptible if the eye
be opened, and which is in the same indissoluble moment not
merely enlightening but life-giving. The vision is also
'dynamical': the submission of ourselves to a force as well as
the recognition of the existence of certain outward facts. It
implies not merely the admission of a new theory about the
universe, but the bringing ourselves into harmony with the one
central force of the universe -- that is with the God who is Love
as well as power and wisdom. This is the true mystical doctrine;
and that doctrine, if not the most logical, is the most
unanswerable form of religious belief. If a man believes that he
has the 'inner light,' he is in his own court beyond appeal. But
the difficulty of making his decisions valid for others cannot be
evaded, and implies some use of logic. If the inner light implies
knowledge as well as an emotion, it should be expressible in
forms true for all men. The mere formula by itself may be barren,
or merely subordinate; but if any definite creed is to emerge, it
must include tenets capable of logical expression. This is, in
fact, the problem round which Maurice is always turning.
    The result is indicated in his little book upon the Religions
of the World.(175*) It embodies one of the most marked tendencies
of modern thought. No divine can now speak of strange religions
as simply devil-worship, or limit divine truth to his own at of
dogmas. The simple or logical rationalist had inferred that the
true creed must be that which is common to all religions. But to
reject all special doctrines was to leave a blank residuum of
mere abstract deism, if even deism could survive. It was but
another road to the 'religion of nature.' Yet that was the
tendency of most liberal divines within the church. The 'broad
church' party, as it was called, was getting rid of 'dogma' by
depriving the creed of all meaning. Maurice's method is therefore
different. The element of truth in all religions is not any
separable doctrine common to all. It is to be found by regarding
all creeds as partial or distorted expressions of the full truth
revealed in Christ. On this showing therefore Buddhism testifies
to the truth of Christianity, but Christianity does not testify
to the truth of Buddhism. Or, to take a trifling but
characteristic argument,(176*) Wilberforce and the Unitarian, W.
Smith, were colleagues in a great benevolent work. Does that show
that the doctrine of the Trinity is unimportant? No; Smith should
have seen that the zeal of Wilberforce 'manifestly flowed out of
the faith' in the divinity of Christ. Wilberforce, on the other
hand, should see that Christ might rule in the heart of the
Unitarian though the Unitarian knew it not. The divine influence
may operate upon the heart which does not recognise its true
nature. Thus Wilberforce, instead of becoming 'latitudinarian,'
could escape 'latitudinarianism.' This may be true, but it would
clearly not convince Smith. If you appeal to your heart, why may
I not appeal to mine? Is not your conviction, after all,
'subjective' -- as representing your own personal prejudices --
and would it not be just as easy, with equal skill, to invert the
argument? Or is not the real source of action in both cases the
benevolence which has nothing to do with either set of dogmas?
The unintentional shifting is implied in the process by which
Maurice manages to accept the Thirty-nine Articles. Taken as
truths, they utter the voice of the heart, or imply an
apprehension of the divine light. Taken as merely logical, they
are but tenets or 'notional' dogmas. The doctrine of the
Atonement, for example, as made into a quasi-legal theory by
Archbishop Magee, is simply horrible: it deserves all that Paine
could have said of it, and actually 'confounds the evil spirit
with God.' But take it in another sense-not as proclaiming the
supremacy of a harsh and unjust ruler, but as declaring the
process by which the love of God and of his son reconciles men to
himself -- and it becomes infinitely comforting, and expresses
the feelings of 'tens of thousands of suffering human
beings.'(177*) So the doctrine of 'endless' punishment is
horrible and revolting. But eternity has properly nothing to do
with time. 'Eternal punishment is the punishment of being without
the knowledge of God.'(178*) That knowledge does not procure but
constitutes the life. This is no metaphysical theory, but gives
the natural meaning which commends itself to 'peasants, women,
and children.'(179*) To the ordinary mind, the natural inference
would be that we should throw aside dogmas so capable of
misinterpretation, and which admittedly have, as a historical
fact, covered a confusion between God and the devil. The
Athanasian Creed appears to be at least an awkward and ambiguous
mode of expressing a universal benevolence and an aversion to
metaphysical dogma. But to reject it would be, as Maurice thinks,
to fall into mere rationalism. The formulae which are so
revolting in the mouth of the mere dogmatist are essential when
read as utterances of the deepest feelings of the human heart. We
can only hold to their true meaning and denounce their
misapplication.
    After all comes the real difficulty of fitting a 'subjective'
religion to a historical religion. The Christian creed does
assert facts, and facts to which historical evidence is
applicable. A dogma can be made into an utterance of sentiment. A
statement that there was a deluge in the year 4004 B.C. must be
decided by evidence. Maurice was painfully shocked when the
excellent and simple-minded Colenso brought up this plain
issue.(180*) Though Colenso had stood by him generously in the
king's College time, Maurice, who had fully recognised the
generosity, felt himself bound to protest. The dilemma was, in
fact, most trying. To declare that historical evidence is
irrelevant, that our faith is independent of the truth of the Old
Testament narrative, is really to give up historical
Christianity. On the other hand, to argue that the criticisms are
trifling or captious is to stake the truth of the religion upon
the issue of facts. Maurice complains of Colenso for beginning at
the wrong end.(181*) As, however, Colenso has made certain
statements, whatever his method, the truth must be either denied
or admitted. Are they true but irrelevant, or relevant but false?
Maurice cannot unequivocally take either side. He appears to hold
that we may accept the deluge because it teaches us a good lesson
(that bad people will be drowned, apparently), that is, to accept
whatever is edifying; or to think perhaps the deluge was a little
one, that is, to put himself on the ground of historical
criticism. Here, in fact, was the growing difficulty. Mansel
could still speak scornfully of the quibblings of Strauss. But
historical criticism had now to be reckoned with, and subjective
religion must consent to be merely subjective, or submit to have
its results tested by the broad daylight of common sense.
    From Maurice I turn to Carlyle, the beacon-light of the age,
according to his disciples -- the most delusive of wildfires,
according to his adversaries; but in any case the most
interesting literary figure of his time. Extraordinary force of
mind and character are manifested in the struggles with inward
difficulties and external circumstances, which made much of his
life tragic and his teaching incoherent. With the imagination of
a poet he yet cannot rise above the solid ground of prose: a
sense of pervading mystery blends with his shrewd grasp of
realities; he is religious yet sceptical; a radical and a
worshipper of sheer force; and a denouncer of cant and yet the
deviser of a jargon. Such contrasts are reflected in his work,
and are not really hard of solution. A spiritual descendant of
John Knox, he had the stern sense of duty, the hatred of
priestcraft, and the contempt for the aesthetic side of things
which had been bred in or burned into the breed. He came into the
outer world, like his hero Teufelsdröckh,(182*) as a 'Baptist
living on locusts and wild honey,' and occasionally presented
himself to others as a dyspeptic polar bear.(183*) He had imbibed
radicalism in a home of sturdy peasants, pinched by all the
sufferings of the poorer classes in the war time. When the
yeomanry was called out in 1819 he was more disposed to join the
sufferers than the guardians of order.(184*) So far, Carlyle was
in sympathy with James Mill, whose career also illustrated one
mode of passage from Puritanism to political radicalism. Nor
would Carlyle differ from Mill widely on certain religious
points. The conventional dogmatism of the kirk had lost its
savour for both, and meant a blind tradition, not a living force.
Carlyle only went with the general current of youthful intellect
in abandoning the dogmatic creed. When Irving made a painful
effort to put life into the dead bones, Carlyle recognised the
hopelessness of the enterprise. But he was no nearer to Mill.
Carlyle's 'conversion' took place in Leith Walk in June
1821.(185*) It followed three years of spiritual misery; and it
is recorded in the famous chapter in Sartor Resartus on the
'Everlasting No.'(186*) That passage is, indeed, the keynote to
Carlyle's history. Briefly, he had found himself face to face
with materialism and atheism. The weapons of defence afforded by
such teachers as Brown were futile. Carlyle felt that he too was
drifting towards the abysses whither they were being dragged by
Hume. The word duty, so sceptics would persuade him, had no
meaning, or was the name for a mere calculation of pleasure; an
exhortation to build not on morality but on cookery. The universe
seemed to be 'void of Life, of Purpose, of Volition, even of
Hostility: it was one dead, unmeasurable steam-engine, rolling on
in its dead indifference, to grind me limb from limb. O the vast
solitary Golgotha and Mill of Death!' The nightmare was broken by
an act of will. The 'Everlasting No' pealed 'authoritatively
through all recesses of my Being, of my Me; and then it was that
my whole Me stood up in native God-created majesty and with
emphasis recorded its protest.' The result is noteworthy. 'Even
from that time the temper of my misery was changed: not Fear or
whining sorrow at it, but Indignation and grim fire-eyed
Defiance.' Carlyle had won not peace but a 'change of misery.' He
could look at the enemy with 'fire-eyed defiance' but not with
the calm of settled victory. His emancipation was not won by a
reasoned answer to doubt. In the earlier essays Carlyle shows
apparent sympathy with German philosophy.(187*) He speaks with
profound admiration, though in general and popular language, of
the doctrines of Kant, Novalis, and Fichte, and seems to accept
Coleridge's theory of a Reason superior to the
Understanding.(188*) Carlyle, however, was still less of a
metaphysician proper than of a poet. He is a man of intuitions,
scorning all logical apparatus in itself, and soon afterwards
appears to regard metaphysics in general as a hopeless process of
juggling which tries to educe conviction out of negation and
necessarily ends in scepticism.(189*) To him Goethe rather than
any metaphysician presented the true solution. No two men of
genius, indeed, could be more unlike. The rugged, stormy Puritan
could hardly, one would have thought, breathe the serene
atmosphere of the prophet of culture. But the very contrast
fascinated him. Goethe had cast aside all the effete dogmas, and
had yet reached the victorious position in which symmetrical
development was possible. Carlyle remained to the end desperately
struggling, full of 'fire-eyed defiance,' but never getting
outside the chaotic elements. The metaphysical systems of Kant's
successors attracted him as protests against materialism, but he
preferred a shorter cut to the end, and his Scottish common sense
was always whispering that philosophy was apt to be mere
'transcendental moonshine.'
    Carlyle therefore was essentially protesting against the
mechanical doctrines embodied in Utilitarianism. But he saw the
hopelessness of meeting the attack in the old-fashioned armour of
theology. The dogmas of the churches were dead, beyond all hopes
of resuscitation. The verse in Past and Present gives his view:

         'The builder of the Universe was wise,
         He planned all souls, all systems, planets, particles;
         The plan He shaped all worlds and aeons by,
         Was -- Heavens! -- was thy small nine-and-thirty
Articles.'(190*)

    An earlier version of these lines speaks of the 'logic of
Maurice,' who had characteristically proved that the articles
were a charter of religious liberty.(191*) Carlyle rejected
formulas. The Maurician rehabilitation led to mere cant. Like
Maurice, he was in principle a mystic, and holds that mysticism
may be taken in a true sense,(192*) in which it seems to be much
the same with an Idealist as contrasted with a materialist
doctrine. When he first made Mill's acquaintance, it was under
the erroneous impression that Mill too was a mystic.(193*)
    I have spoken of Carlyle's personal relations to Mill. His
judgment of the Utilitarians generally is significant. Froude
publishes some entries from Carlyle's journal of 1829-30, a time
when the prophet was only preluding his fuller utterances.(194*)
The Utilitarians, he holds, exhibit tendencies spread over the
whole intellect and morals of the time. Utilitarianism must
collapse, because the reason will triumph over the senses, and
the angel at last prevail over the brute. The moral nature of man
is deeper than the intellectual; the significance of Christ, he
says, is altogether moral, and the significance of Bentham
'altogether intellectual, logical.' Where logic is the only
method, the resulting system can be only mechanical. 'Alas! poor
England! Stupid, purblind, pudding-eating England,' Bentham with
his Mills(195*) grinding 'thee out morality -- and some Macaulay,
also be-aproned and a grinder, testing and decrying it.' The
mention of Macaulay reminds him that the Utilitarians have a
relative merit. 'They have logical machinery,' and do grind
'fiercely and potently on their own foundation, whereas the Whigs
have no foundation. The Whigs are amateurs, the radicals are
guild-brethren.'(196*) The public utterances are versions of the
same doctrines. In Sartor Resartus Teufelsdröckh would consent
that the 'monster Utilitaria' should trample down palaces and
temples 'with her broad hoof,' that new and better might be
built.(197*) So in the Hero-Worship(198*) he calls 'this gross
steam-engine Utilitarianism' an approach towards a new faith. It
is at least a 'laying down of cant,' an honest acceptance of the
belief in mechanism: 'Benthamism is an eyeless heroism; the human
species, like a hapless blinded Samson, grinding in the
Philistine mill, clasps convulsively the pillars of its mill,
brings huge ruin down, but ultimately deliverance withal. Of
Bentham I meant to say no harm.' In later years Carlyle insists
more emphatically upon the bad side of Utilitarianism. He had
grown more bitter, and was more alienated personally. In the
Chartism (1839) he attacks the 'Paralytic Radicalism' --
paralytic being substituted for 'philosophical' which has sounded
statistically a 'sea of troubles' around us, and concluded that
nothing is to be done but to look on. Paralytic Radicalism,
accordingly, is 'one of the most afflictive phenomena the mind of
man can be called upon to contemplate!'(199*) The summary of his
later view is given in the famous summary of the 'Pig Philosophy'
in the Latter-day Pamphlets. The universe is regarded as an
'immeasurable swine's trough,' and the consequences deduced in a
kind of Swiftian catechism.(200*) Utilitarianism means mere
sensualism. Carlyle's interpretation, true or false, reduces the
issue to the simplest terms. Will you accept the mechanical or
the mystical view? Carlyle's metaphysical leanings were to some
forms of transcendental idealism. Time and space, as he says in
the Sartor Resartus, are the canvas on which our life-visions are
painted. They are mysterious 'world-embracing phantoms,' to be
rent asunder by the seer who would pierce to the Holy of Holies.
They are illusions, though while we are on earth we try in vain
to strip them off. Men are spirits; the earth but a vision. We
issue from and fall back into mystery. 'We are such stuff,' in
his favourite quotation,'

                 As dreams are made of, and our little Life
                 Is rounded with a sleep.'(201*)

This is poetry rather than philosophy; and though the thought is
always present to Carlyle and constitutes one secret of his most
powerful passages, it would be impossible to grasp it as a
logical theory or imprison it in any formula whatever. All
systems and formulas are suspicious to him. He is a 'seer' who
not only does not require any logical apparatus, but holds that
to require one is to give up the point. It is the sense of the
ephemeral nature of man, of his suspension in the midst of
infinities, which stimulates or overpowers him. That sentiment
lies deeper than all reasoning. The 'mechanical' view has the
advantage derived from the authority of the physical sciences;
but the sciences, he holds, lie in a superficial region; they
belong to the world of appearance, not to the world of reality.
When the mystic ventures into the ordinary daylight and fights
the man of science with his own weapons, he will get the worst of
it. Science must have its rights on its own ground; and to
suppose the supernatural intruding here and there into natural
phenomena is to court defeat. There are no 'miracles,' but the
universe is itself miraculous. His great message, given in Sartor
Resartus, is that the natural is the supernatural.(202*) We are
not to pick up 'intuitions' here and there; but we have one
intuition, that the world is not a mechanism but a revelation of
God. No set of words can hold the great mystery. They are
hopelessly inadequate, and the sooner they are swept into
oblivion the better. But the one profound mystery remains.
    Even such a vague indication of Carlyle's general meaning is
an attempt to define an imaginative tendency which shrinks from
definite formulation. The more practical application is perhaps
more definable. The 'Everlasting No' means: I will not believe
that the world is a mere dead mechanism, nor that the sole forces
by which society is moulded are the sensual appetites. Rightly or
wrongly, Carlyle attributed those views to the Utilitarians. They
had a certain negative merit, in so far as they took their own
line directly and consistently. The ordinary theology was a mass
of 'shams' and 'cants' -- a collection of subterfuges by which
men could blind themselves for the time to the necessary drift of
the current. The way to meet the Utilitarian was not to
compromise or to argue, but to leave the world of outward fact
and to plant yourself on a deeper base: the direct, imperative,
and unassailable conviction or intuition of the divine order
implied everywhere beneath the 'living raiment.' The issue then
becomes simple and absolute. No set of creeds and 'formulas' can
matter; 'evidences' are an absurdity; the one formula is the
divinity of the universe; the only evidence, the direct intuition
of the eternal verities. The religions of the world are good so
far as they recognise this truth; bad so far as they try to
imprison it in any sort of formula or make it dependent upon any
particular fact. To Maurice, as to others, this attitude seemed
to be hopeless. Does it not become mere pantheism a sentiment too
vague to be efficient?
    Pantheism is a phrase scarcely appropriate for Carlyle's
creed. If Carlyle believed in God, he also believed for practical
purposes in the devil. He might have been expected to accept some
such pessimistic scheme as Schopenhauer's. He was deterred by his
innate Puritanism. The voice of God for him, however vaguely
defined, is heard in morality. God is essentially the giver of
the supreme laws of human conduct, however much the legislator
may be wrapped in mystery. The 'simple creed,' according to his
chief disciple, which was the 'central principle' of all
Carlyle's thought, was the creed of the Jews and the Puritans,
namely, that obedience to the divine law is the one condition of
human welfare, and that nations who worship Baal even in the
guise of art or of material prosperity are on the road to
destruction.(203*)
    Carlyle, then, is so far like Coleridge and Maurice, that he
feels that a religion must find some deeper and more universal
base than can be discovered in the region of empirical fact. It
must correspond to an imperative dictate of the whole heart or
the intellect. He carries out the principle with incomparably
more vigour by rejecting all historical supports and particular
formulas. Neither the Thirty-nine Articles nor the decrees of
councils or popes can be adequate to express the mystery; nor can
the religious sentiment be dependent upon particular events and
'miracles.' It is the difficulty of all such methods that the
appeal to the heart comes to be the appeal to the prejudices of
the individual prophet. In a man of such marked idiosyncrasies as
Carlyle's this is of course conspicuous. His version of history
and of philosophy reflects his inherited prepossessions. It is
enough here to mark one or two of the main points upon which he
came into conflict with contemporaries. A characteristic result
is his theory of hero-worship. The divine element in the world
cannot be enshrined in one sacred book or a single supernatural
order. The revelation comes not only through Moses or Christ, but
through every great man. Odin, Mahomet, Dante, Shakespeare,
Luther, John Knox, Johnson, Rousseau, Burns, Cromwell, and
Napoleon are his chief instances in the 'lectures'; each, more or
less perfectly, was the vehicle of a more or less partial
revelation. But then, may we not see gleams of the same light in
all the multitudinous strugglings of the poor human beings who
have more or less consciously co-operated in the world's
progress? Here and there his shrewd common sense leads him to
recognise the value even of the stupid and the
formula-ridden.(204*) But, as a rule, he thinks of the world as a
collection of 'dull millions' who 'as a dumb flock roll hither
and thither,' led by little more than 'animal instincts.' Among
them at rare intervals are scattered men of intellect and
will.(205*) The great men, as he says elsewhere, are 'children of
the idea' -- such a one as Ram Dass, who set up for a god because
he had 'fire enough in his belly to burn up all the sins in the
world.'(206*) Inspiration belongs to the inspired few, who have
to struggle amid the vast chaotic masses incapable of originating
thought or action. To Carlyle, the essence of history was
biography; the personal influence of a small minority of great
men. The view condemns scientific modes of history. To disbelieve
in the importance of great men is supposed to show materialistic
principles. A 'law' of human development denies the importance of
individual peculiarities. To hold that Cromwell or a Napoleon was
a relatively insignificant accident, the mere fly on the wheel of
great evolutionary processes, seems to be to lead to the
exclusion of all action of the will or of thought. To Carlyle
accordingly the historical method in some of its tendencies was
profoundly antipathetic. To diminish the power of the individual
was, in his view, to deny the spiritual forces upon which society
is dependent. Inspiration, therefore, though no longer confined
to a particular church, is still confined to the elect who stand
out as burning and shining lights in the dim twilight of his
Rembrandtesque pictures.
    The great movements, then, of modern times correspond to the
blind 'animal instincts' of the 'dumb flock.' They are good as
the Utilitarians were good, or as the French revolutionists were
good, so far as their blind action leads to the deposition of the
false leaders and the destruction of their effete systems. The
French Revolution is 'the crowning phenomenon of our modern time;
the inevitable stern end of much: the fearful but also wonderful,
indispensable, and sternly beneficent beginning of much.'(207*)
This is a brief summary of the great prose epic, than which no
book, as he truly declared, had for a hundred years come more
direct and flamingly 'from the heart of a living man.'(208*) The
passage from which I have quoted, however, indicates a further
point. The French Revolution, he holds, was essentially part of
the revolt of the oppressed classes of Europe against their
oppressors. But the positive doctrine of the 'rights of man,'
theories which denied the need of government or demanded simply
to throw the reins upon the neck of the governed, could lead only
to chaos. The reconstruction must be by a new government; by a
government of wisdom or, what to him stems the same thing, a
government by the wise. The 'new Downing Street,' as he puts it,
is to be a Downing Street inhabited by the 'gifted of the
intellects of England.'(209*) Nothing therefore could seem more
contemptible.than the doctrine of laissez faire. That is simply
to leave the fools to themselves. Modern parliaments, with
twenty-seven millions mostly fools listening to them, fill him
with amazement.(210*) A definition of 'right,' then, which makes
it ultimately depend on the wishes of the fools, is simply
absurd. Not the 'animal instinct' but the conformity to the
divine law is the test of morality; and therefore not obedience
to the majority but loyalty to the 'hero.' But how is the hero to
be known? Could he tell us that, he replies, he would be a
Trismegistus. No 'able editor' can tell men how 'to know Heroism
when they see it that they might do reverence to it only, and
loyally make it ruler over them.'(211*) Here is, however, the
difficulty. Obedience to the hero is our only wisdom, and
obedience to the quack is the road to destruction. One is, it may
be said, obedience to right, and the other obedience to might.
How are we to tell right from might? The statement that Carlyle
confused the two, that he admired might in reality, while
professing to admire right simply, was the most popular and
effective criticism of his opinions. He is constantly accused of
approving mere brute-force. Nothing could less correspond to his
intention; but he is puzzled in particular cases. He declares
again and again that they coincide in a sense. 'Might and right
do differ frightfully from hour to hour; but give them centuries
to try it in, they are found to be identical.'(212*) 'That which
is just endures,' is an edifying statement, and one which he
constantly emphasises; but may we not infer that that which
endures is right, and be led to admire very questionable
proceedings? Does the success of a Cromwell for his life-time, or
the more permanent success of a Frederick, justify their
proceedings? Carlyle may have often begun at the wrong end; but
the curious point is that this part of Carlyle's teaching
approximates so closely to a doctrine which he first detested.
Froude tells us that he fought against Darwinism, but apparently
'dreaded that it might turn out true.'(213*) Yet is not the
doctrine of the 'survival of the fittest' just the scientific
version of Carlyle's theory of the 'identity of Right and Might'?
Was not evolution really in harmony with his conclusion? To him,
according to Froude, it seemed that Science led to 'Lucretian
Atheism.' He still believed in God, but when Froude once said
that he could only believe in a God who did something, Carlyle
replied, with a cry of pain which I (Froude) shall never forget,
He does nothing!' The reconstruction which was to follow the
destruction was indefinitely delayed. The hero did not come; and
Carlyle was a prophet who had led his followers into the desert,
but found that the land of promise always turned out to be a
mirage. Carlyle held that hypocrisy was still worse than
materialism; but, as he grew older and watched modern tendencies,
he became less hopeful of the 'Exodus from Houndsditch,' and
sometimes wished the old shelter to remain standing. He shrank
even from the essayists and reviewers and from Colenso, though he
had rejected historical creeds far more summarily than they had
done.
    Carlyle, then, and Maurice might both be called 'mystics' in
the sufficiently vague sense used by Carlyle himself. They object
to logic on principle. They appeal to certain primitive instincts
which can be overridden by no logical manipulations or by any
appeal to outward facts. Both, after all, are forced in the end
to consider the plain, simple, 'objective' test. Maurice finds
that he must answer the question of the historical critic: are
the statements of fact true or false? Carlyle, not seeking for a
base to support any particular creed, can throw the Thirty-nine
Articles overboard, but finally comes into conflict with
scientific conceptions in general. He finds himself opposed to
the scientific view of historical evolution, and sees in the most
conspicuous tendencies of modern thought the disappearance of all
the most ennobling beliefs. The 'supernatural' and
'transcendental' have, after all, to conform to the prosaic
matter of fact understanding. Accepting, as I do, what I suppose
to be the scientific view, I fully believe that Carlyle's method
is erroneous; that in denouncing scientific methods as simply
materialistic, he is opposing the necessary logic of intellectual
development, and that his hero-worship and theory of right really
lead to arbitrary and chaotic results.
    There is, however, another remark to be made. If Carlyle's
view of a scientific doctrine be correct; if its legitimate
result be the destruction of morality, of all our highest
aspirations, even of any belief in the reality of the mind or the
emotions; if the universe is to be made into a dead mechanism or
a huge swine's trough, we are certainly reduced to a most
terrible dilemma. It was really the dilemma from which Carlyle
could never escape, and the consciousness of which tormented him
to the last. He had to choose between allegiance to morality and
allegiance to truth. Scientific tendencies, especially as
embodied in Utilitarianism, seemed to many men, and, as Carlyle's
case shows, to the men of the highest abilities, to have that
tendency. The absolute sincerity of that conviction is
unmistakable. I do not doubt that men, holding the conviction
sincerely, were bound to seek some escape; nor could I condemn
them if under so terrible a dilemma they allowed their love of
truth to be partly obscured. In fact, too, I think that it cannot
be denied that many of the men to whom we owe most, whose
morality was the highest and most stimulating, and who, moreover,
were most hostile to the lower forms of superstition, did in fact
take this position. Though Maurice was far from clear-headed, I
fully believe that his liberal and humane spirit was of the
greatest value, and that he did more than most men to raise the
social tone in regard to the greatest problems. Carlyle's
doctrine is, I equally believe, radically incoherent; but I am
also convinced that Carlyle's impetuous and vehement assertion of
certain great social, ethical, and political principles was of
the highest value. It must be allowed, I think, that such men as
Carlyle and Emerson, for example, vague and even contradictory as
was their teaching, did more to rouse lofty aspirations and to
moralise political creeds, though less for the advancement of
sound methods of inquiry, than the teaching of the Utilitarians.
There was somewhere a gap in the Utilitarian system. Its attack
upon the mythological statements of fact might be victorious; but
it could not supply the place of religion either to the vulgar or
to the loftiest minds. Then the problem arises whether the
acceptance of scientific method, and of an empirical basis for
all knowledge, involves the acceptance of a lower moral standard,
and of a materialism which denies the existence or the value of
all the unselfish and loftier elements of human nature? Can we
adhere to facts without abandoning philosophy; or adopt a lofty
code of ethics without losing ourselves in dream-land? Some
thinkers sought a different line of escape.

 IX. DOGMATISM

    The 'Oxford Movement,' according to Newman, was really
started on the 14th July 1833 by Keble's sermon on 'National
Apostasy.' The 'movement' has become the subject-matter of vast
masses of literature, as becomes a movement among a cultivated
class. While Mill and his friends were under the impression that
reason was triumphant and theology effete, the ghost of the old
doctrinal disputes suddenly came abroad. Learned scholars once
more plunged into dogmatic theology, renewed the old claims of
the church, and seriously argued as to what precise charm would
save an infant from the wrath of a righteous God. What
explanation can be given of this singular phenomenon? There was
clearly a 'reaction,' but why should there be a reaction? The
Evangelical movement had been mainly ethical or philanthropical.
It protested against evils when the national conscience was
already in advance of the actual practice. That was its strength;
its weakness was that it accepted, without examination, the
current beliefs of the day, and simply did without philosophy.
The Oxford movement, though many of its leaders were keenly awake
to social evils, did not start primarily from a desire for social
reform. Nor can its origin be traced directly to a philosophical
development. Its leaders had, of course, been influenced by
literary and speculative developments. They had, as Newman tells
us, been stirred by Scott and Wordsworth and by Coleridge's
philosophy. And yet it is plain enough that the impulse did not
start from philosophical speculation. The movement corresponded
to changes which would be part of the whole history of European
thought. I have said enough of the Utilitarians to indicate the
special English conditions. The Utilitarians saw in the
established church the most palpable illustration of a 'sinister
interest.' Bentham was attacking 'Church of Englandism'; James
Mill was proposing to apply Bentham's principles by substituting
an ethical department of the State for a church, and replacing
the sacrament by tea-parties; the radicals of all varieties
regarded disestablishment and disendowment as the natural
corollary from the Reform Bill, and a Whig statesman
significantly advised the prelates to put their house in order.
It was taken as a hint to prepare for confiscation.
    Yet the Church was enormously strong; it was interwoven with
the whole political and social organisation, and the genuine
radical represented only a fraction of the population. Oxford in
particular, the very focus of conservative and aristocratic
interests, the favourite place for such culture as was popular
with the landowners, the clergy, and all the associated classes,
was startled and alarmed, and began to rouse its latent energy.
Into Oxford no serious philosophical movement had penetrated. It
had been slowly amending its system, but it still adhered in
substance to the ancient traditions. Dimly it knew that infidels
and rationalisers were preaching dangerous theories. Pusey had
visited Germany in 1825-27, and had come back with some knowledge
of German thought. He was even accused, very superfluously, of
rationalism. Of that there was no real danger(214*) for a man
thoroughly steeped in the Oxford spirit. A sufficient
illustration of Oxford education may be found in the curious
controversy between Copleston, who had done much to rouse his
University, and the Edinburgh Reviewers. Copleston replied
vigorously, and yet his boast is a tacit confession. He declares
that Oxford possesses good classical scholars, and we need not
inquire how far they were really abreast of the day. Oxford men
had to get up logic in Aldrich and make some acquaintance with
Aristotle; and he argues that the mathematical studies of the
place were more than 'elementary.' They were even beginning to
include 'fluxions.' If this were a matter for boasting, it could
not be seriously held that Oxford was doing anything comparable
to the German universities as an adequate organ of the national
intellect.(215*) In point of fact, the system allowed the great
majority to remain in complete ignorance of any recent movements
of living speculation, a century or two behind-hand in philology,
and absolutely indifferent to science. Naturally, when the
champions of the Church came out to fight, they were armed with
antiquated weapons. Yet many of them were men of great ability,
and one at least a man of most indisputable genius.
    The alarm spread by radical assaults upon the Church was
equally felt by the liberal divines. No one, for example, was
more alarmed than Dr Arnold. But Arnold, a man of lofty and
generous instincts and strong political interests, took the
essentially liberal view. The Church, as all active-minded men
agreed, was in danger. It was threatened by 'the godless party,'
the radicals and revolutionists who were the heirs of jacobinism,
and were as hateful to him as to the high-churchmen. But here his
diagnosis becomes essentially different. Arnold thought that the
Church had become a separate sect because it adhered to old
prejudices and to sacerdotalism. His remedy was to make it truly
national, by widening its borders, admitting dissenters, and
encouraging philosophic thought. The Church should be, as
Coleridge urged, an essential part of the State organism; not a
close corporation belonging to a priestly order. It was properly
identical with the State. It must be liberalised that the State
might be made religious, and drop the antiquated claims to
magical authority which opposed it to the common sense of the
masses and the reason of the thinkers.(216*) This was precisely
the antithesis to the view taken by the leaders of the
'movement.' They held that the Church was weak, precisely because
it had been unfaithful to its higher claims and made an alliance
with the State, which had passed into a bondage. This, then, is
one aspect of the division between the liberals and the
dogmatists; and what I have now to do is to endeavour to indicate
the dogmatical view.
    I confine myself to two representatives of the movement:
Newman, whose literary genius needs no emphasis; and W. G. Ward,
conspicuous as one who never shrank from an inference, and who,
to do him bare justice, was incapable of supporting logic by
misrepresenting his opponents. He represents the forlorn Hope,
and reveals the tendencies which frightened his less daring
comrades.
    The true starting-point of the 'movement' can hardly be given
more distinctly than in Ward's Ideal of a Christian Church.(217*)
It represents the stage at which Ward was becoming fully aware of
the consequences of his own logical position. The Ideal has
ceased to be lively reading; it is like an echo from old
common-room disputations of young men intensely interested in the
ecclesiastical movements of the day. Ward contrasts the actual
Church of England with the ideal Church of Christ, and already
finds in the Church of Rome a more promising embodiment of the
true spirit. The true Church is of divine institution, the
channel of supernatural graces, and independent of all human
authority. The Church of England, if not the creature, has become
in fact the slave, of the State. It claims a parliamentary title,
and in return for privileges has abandoned its rightful
authority. Above all, a true church is known by its discipline.
It should be the incarnate conscience of the society, and should
superintend, enforce by its sanctions and stimulate by its
example, the spiritual nature of its members. A true church
should exercise an omnipresent spiritual authority, reaching
every detail of life and organising the perpetual warfare against
the world, the flesh, and the devil. The utter decay of any such
power is the most fatal symptom of the Anglican body. From a
contemporary book, Ward extracts a ghastly account of the misery,
vice, and spiritual degradation of the mass of the
population.(218*) To remedy such evils, he declares, the 'science
of dogmatic theology' is more essential than the science of
political economy.(219*) Dogmatic theology is in fact the basis
of 'ascetic theology,' or of the whole theory of religious
discipline. If, indeed, the Christian theology be taken
seriously, if spiritual degeneration has an importance altogether
out of proportion to material progress, and the salvation of
souls be the one thing necessary, the conclusion is inevitable.
To enforce those truths upon the reason, to impress them upon the
imagination, and to ensure a constant reference to them in all
our conduct, must be the essential work of an authoritative
church. Ward expatiates enthusiastically upon the ceaseless
activity of the Church of Rome; upon the elaborate training of
the priesthood; upon the catechising of children, the daily
meditations, the constant practice of confession, and the various
methods by which the church fixes the eyes of believers steadily
upon spiritual realities. A church incapable of this can no
longer be the salt of the earth, and, in fact, the Church of
England, though it has boasted of being 'the poor man's church,'
has been utterly blind to the 'accumulated mass of misery which
has been gradually growing to a head for the last sixty years.'
'Through no agency of hers,' attention has been roused by such
men as Lord Ashley; and yet the church has shown no symptoms of
shame at such important neglect.(220*) What else can you expect
from the organ of the comfortable classes?
    The social evils were serious enough. Dogmatic theology may
not seem at first sight to be the most appropriate remedy; but,
if it were, it certainly needed a better army of defenders. The
ideal church must have a theological school, a body of trained
teachers capable of meeting the assaults of unbelievers, of
pointing out the true results of biblical criticism, of
scientific and historical inquiries, and of defining the attitude
of the church in regard to them.(221*) Ward is awake to the
growth of a new infidelity, more dangerous than that of the last
century. Carlyle, Kant, Michelet, and Milman are mentioned as
representing different manifestations of this evil spirit.
Strauss, too, is selling more rapidly than any foreign
work.(222*) Moreover, 'Protestantism,' as he maintains, is
utterly effete and unable to cope with the antagonist. The
'theory of private judgment' involves doubt, and will tend
inevitably to 'Comte's philosophy.'(223*) Comte was represented
in England by Mill, who was accordingly the butt of Ward's
sharpest attacks.
    If Ward thus expresses the seminal principle of the movement,
Newman was the most efficient leader. Newman, as he tells us in
the Apologia, held three doctrines: first, the 'principle of
dogma,' which was the ' fundamental principle' of the movement of
1833, and was the antithesis of 'liberalism'; secondly, the
principle, implied by this, of a 'visible church'; and thirdly,
the doctrine that the Pope was antichrist.(224*) The last, of
course, vanished; but the two others remained and only took a
sharper form in his mind. The history of his thought is simply
the history of his growing conviction that the true authority was
that of Rome, not of the Anglican Church.(225*) The 'principle of
dogma' is equivalent to the statement that 'religion as an ere
sentiment' was to him 'a dream and a mockery.' The liberal
principle applied to theology means the substitution of vague
feeling for definite truth. But to speak absolutely of a
'principle of authority' is to raise a difficulty. To believe in
authority is to ground my belief on the belief of some one else.
Therefore the questions remain: why does the authority believe,
and why should I accept its belief as authoritative? The Church
must be competent to judge, and I must be able to judge of its
competence.
    The special answer given by Ward and Newman to these points
gives their true position. First of all the dogmatists, agreeing
so far with the liberals, were convinced that the ordinary
opinions of the day led to infidelity or to complete scepticism.
A perfectly consistent mind must, as Newman declared, accept
Catholicism or Atheism. Anglicanism is 'the half-way house to
Rome, and Liberalism is the half-way house' to Atheism.(226*)
Protestantism, again, as involving the right of private judgment,
must lead, as Ward agreed, to Comte. Taken simply, such sayings
amount to pure scepticism. To admit the consistency of Atheism is
to admit that you have no grounds of confuting the Atheist. Upon
the assumptions common to both, the sceptic would get the better
of the Protestant. The rationalised theology of Paley had really
given away the key of the position. It could not permanently hold
out against the legitimate development of the eighteenth century
infidelity. 'As a sufficient basis for theism,' says Ward, the
argument from final causes is 'absolutely and completely
worthless'.(227*) and he declares that Paley's argument is quite
unable to prove God's love, or goodness, or justice, or
personality.(228*) But Paley and his contemporaries had
explicitly given up any other argument. A Protestant, then, was
logically bound to Atheism. Newman agrees. 'I have ever viewed
this argument with the greatest suspicion,' he says, and for good
reasons. It may prove the power and, in lower degrees, the wisdom
and the goodness of God; but it does not prove his attributes as
judge and moral legislator.(229*) So again, Newman declared(230*)
that it was 'a great question whether atheism is not as
philosophically consistent with the phenomena of the physical
world, taken by themselves, as the doctrine of a creative and
governing power.' Paley's proof of Christianity is naturally as
unsatisfactory as his proof of theology. In one of the Tracts for
the Times,(231*) Newman applied what he called a 'kill-or-cure'
remedy. He argued, that is, that if his antagonists rejected his
doctrines for want of Scripture proof, they would have to abandon
their own for the same reason. After recalling and enforcing a
number of the objections made by sceptics to the historical
evidence, he concludes that the evidence is by itself
insufficient. Shall we for that reason refuse to believe? No, we
must begin by believing. If we refuse 'to go by evidence in which
there are (so to say) three chances for revelation and only two
against it, we cannot be Christians.'(232*)
    Hume, then, or Mill or Comte, can at least hold his own upon
empirical ground. Unaided reason, as Newman says in the
Apologia,(233*) can indeed discover sound arguments for theology,
but historically and in practice it will tend towards simple
unbelief. The 'liberals' endeavoured to meet the enemy by
appealing to some philosophical or quasi-mystical doctrine; but
in so doing they either dropped dogmatic and historical creeds
altogether, or saved them by non-natural interpretations.
Religion sublimated into philosophy becomes a mere sentiment, or
a system of subtle metaphysics. It cannot effectively discipline
the ordinary mind or inspire a church to meet the world. Yet some
philosophical principle is necessary. To the Oxford men
philosophy meant chiefly some modification of Aristotle. They
held, of course, that the necessity of a first cause was
demonstrable, and that a theology could be constructed by the
pure reason.
    This, however, leads to the old difficulty, the perplexity
which runs through Christian theology in general. It is forced to
combine heterogeneous elements. Philosophy must be combined with
mythology; and the first cause identified with the
anthropomorphic deity. Your metaphysic proves the existence of
God in one sense, and your concrete creed assumes the existence
to be proved in a sense quite inconsistent. By calling
inconsistency mystery, you verbally force contradictions into a
formula, and speak of a God-man; but the difficulty of getting
from the metaphysical to the historical theology is thus only
masked. How is it to be overcome?
    Ward, laying the greatest stress upon the metaphysical
argument, came into conflict with Mill. Ward and Mill always
spoke of each other with marked respect. They communicated their
writings to each other before publication. Ward reviewed Mill's
Logic in the British Critic in the most complimentary terms. Mill
wrote to Comte in hopeful terms of the services to be rendered to
speculation by the new school of divines. Ward thought Mill by
far the most eminent representative of the 'antitheistic school,'
and spoke with generous warmth of his high moral qualities.(234*)
The point, however, upon which Mill specially valued himself was
just the point upon which Ward took him to be utterly in the
wrong. Mill denied the existence of 'necessary truths.' Ward
believed in the existence of a great body of 'necessary truth.'
Ward argues forcibly for the 'necessity' of mathematical truths,
and denies the power of association. Ward, in short, is Mill's
typical 'intuitionist.' Intuitions, he says, are truths which,
'though not parts of present consciousness, are immediately and
"primarily" known with certitude.'(235*) He adopts from Lewes the
word 'metempirical,' as expressive of what lies beyond the sphere
of phenomena.(236*) and holds that all 'intuitions' give us
'metempirical' knowledge. Lewes invented the phrase to express
the difference between the legitimate 'intuitions' implied in
experience and the illegitimate, which are 'metempirical' as
professing to transcend experience. Ward holds that
'metempirical' truths are valid and essential to reason.
    Morals, again, says Ward, are as certain as mathematical
intuitions; the truth that 'malice and mendacity are evil habits'
is as necessary as the truth that 'all trilateral figures are
triangular.'(237*) Further, I 'intue' that 'all morally evil acts
are prohibited by some living Personal Being'; and from this
axiom it follows, as an obvious inference, 'that this Person is
the supreme Legislator of the Universe.'(238*) The obvious
difficulty is that Ward proves too much. His argument is leading
to an independent theism, not a theism reconcilable with an
historical creed. Accordingly he has to limit or resist his own
logic. He admits the uniformity of nature as 'generally true,'
but makes two exceptions, in favour, first, of 'an indefinite
frequency' of miracles, and secondly of the freedom of 'human
volitions.'(239*) The Freewill doctrine leads to an elaborate and
dexterous display of dialectic, though he must be a very feeble
determinist who could not translate Ward's arguments into his own
language. Beyond this we have further difficulties. If the creed
be as demonstrable as Euclid, how can anybody deny it? Ward has
to account for the refusal of those who do not accept his
intuitions by some moral defect; they are like blind men
reasoning upon colours. Mill's 'antitheism' shows that he was
guilty of 'grave sin'; for, on the Catholic doctrine, there can
be no 'invincible ignorance of the one true God.'(240*) Many men,
however, condemn the creed of revelation precisely upon the moral
ground. The Utilitarians denounced the profound immorality of the
doctrine of hell and of vicarious punishment. Ward's argument
requires such a conscience as will recognise the morality of a
system which to others seems radically immoral, The giver of the
moral law is also the giver of the natural law. But it seems to
be as hard to show that Nature is moral in this sense as to show
that the moral legislator, if omnipotent, can also be benevolent.
The one great religious difficulty, as Ward allows, is the
existence of evil. He quotes Newman's statement that it is a
'vision to dizzy and appal; and inflicts upon the mind a sense of
a profound mystery, which is absolutely beyond human
solution.'(241*) Plainly, it comes to this: the 'intuitions' are
in conflict with experience. They assert that the creator is
omnipotent and infinitely just and benevolent. The admitted facts
are incompatible with the theory, and are therefore declared to
imply an 'insoluble mystery.' Ward intimates that he can show the
true place of this difficulty after setting forth the
'impregnable basis on which Theism reposes.' But he does not
appear to have found time for this ambitious enterprise.
    This introduces the more special problem. How from your
purely metaphysical position do you get to the historical
position? What is the relation between the authority of the
Church and the authority of the pure reason? Though Ward was
perfectly satisfied with his own metaphysics, it was of course
evident to him that such reasoning was altogether beyond the
reach of the mass of mankind. If you are to prove your creed by
putting people right about Freewill and the uniformity of nature,
you will adjourn the solution till the day of judgment. An
essential point of his whole argument is the utter incapacity of
mankind at large to form any judgment upon such matters. The
Protestant 'right of private judgment' means scepticism.
Everybody will have his own opinion if nobody trusts any one
else. If the truth of Christianity is to be proved by the
evidences after Paley's fashion, nobody has a right to believe
who has not swallowed whole libraries and formed elaborate canons
of criticism. The peasant who holds opinions about history, to
say nothing of science and philosophy, must obviously take them
on trust. Hence we must either give up the doctrine that
'certitude' is necessary, or we must find some proof accessible
to the uneducated mind. But it is an essential point of
Catholicism, if not of Christianity, that faith is necessary to
salvation. If wrong belief be sinful, right belief must be
attainable. But men by themselves are utterly impenetrable to
right reason. We have, then, to combine scepticism as to the
actual working of the human intellect with dogmatism as to the
faith. How is that feat to be accomplished?
    Ward replies, by the doctrine of 'implicit reasoning.'
Acceptance of the intuitions implies acceptance of all legitimate
deductions. But this position is more fully 'drawn out' (in his
favourite phrase) by Newman. It runs through a whole series of
the writings in which the delicacy and subtlety of his style are
most fully displayed,(242*) and the difficulty of the position
most fully exhibited. Chillingworth had stated the Protestant
argument. To admit the infallibility of the Church, he had said,
takes the individual no further, unless he is infallibly certain
of the infallibility. To this Newman replies(243*) that I may be
certain without claiming infallibility. Certainty that two and
two make four is quite consistent with a power of mathematical
blundering. Perhaps it should rather be said that, if there be
necessary truths, every one must, within their sphere, be
infallible. But no one asserts that the infallibility of the
Church is a necessary truth. If real, it is a concrete fact to be
proved by appropriate evidence. After exhausting your eloquence
in proving the fallibility, and indeed the inevitably sceptical
result of 'private judgment,' you are bound to show how, in this
case, the individual can attain certitude. The judgment that 'the
Church is infallible' has been disputed by reasonable people. How
are we to show that, in this case, their doubts are unreasonable,
if not wicked? Why do not the proofs of the weakness of private
judgment apply to this as to every other judgment? Have you not
really cut away the foundation on which sooner or later your
argument must be based? Yet certitude is made out to be a moral
duty even for the average believer.
    The theory is most explicitly worked out in the Grammar of
Assent. Newman exerts all his skill in expounding a very sound
doctrine. As a matter of fact, we form innumerable judgments by
what he calls the 'illative sense'; that is to say, not by formal
argument, but by a complex system of 'implicit' reasonings.
'Logic,' as he says, 'does not really prove. It enables us to
join issue with others... it verifies negatively'; and for
'genuine proof in concrete matter we require an organism more
delicate, versatile, and elastic, than verbal
argumentation.'(244*) Logic is a chain which 'hangs loose at both
ends,'(245*) for the first principles must be assumed, and the
abstract concept never fits the actual complexity of concrete
fact. By the 'illative sense,' again, we reach innumerable
truths. We hold that England is an island, or that the man whom
we see is our brother, with a faith indistinguishable from
absolute conviction. We go further; we believe that a friend is
honest, or, say, that Caesar crossed the Rubicon, without
admitting the slightest scruple of doubt. All knowledge whatever
of fact plainly implies something different from formal logic;
and, so far, the only question seems to be why so palpable a
truth needs so elaborate and graceful an exposition. The answer
is indicated by the polemic against Locke. Locke had proposed, as
a test of a love of truth, the refusal to hold any proposition,
with a greater assurance than the proofs it is built on will
warrant.'(246*) The statement seems to be not only unassailable
but in conformity with Newman's doctrine. Should we believe
England to be an island? When Julius Caesar landed, it was not
proved; and he would have been wrong to be certain. When did it
become right to be certain? Surely at whatever moment it was
adequately proved. It is never so proved that to deny it would be
self-contradictory, but by this time it is as much proved as any
fact can be proved. Locke would simply justify himself by saying
that in this case our 'assurance' does not exceed the 'proofs on
which it is built.' The approximation to demonstration is
indefinitely close, though never absolute, and the difference
becomes too small to be perceptible. A difficulty emerges only if
we at once admit the rightness of belief and deny the sufficiency
of the evidence.
    Newman, having shown that we believe in concrete truths not
proved by abstract logic, argues that we also assume many truths
not proved even by sufficient empirical evidence. We have what
Locke called a 'surplusage of assurance.' The fact, again, is
undeniable. We believe implicitly in countless things upon
insufficient evidence. This, as Locke would add, is one main
explanation of the prevalence of error, and also a proof that
error may be innocent. It is a duty to be candid; it cannot be a
duty to be right. We must listen to reason; but the effect of
reasoning must depend upon the constitution of our minds, and the
various beliefs with which they are already stored. Now to Newman
this doctrine always seems to be sceptical. It amounts to the
'liberalising' view that all creeds are equally good if only they
be equally sincere. Hence he lays stress upon the doctrine that
'assent' is a volitional as well as an 'intellectual act.' It is
our duty to obey the reason; and when the 'illative sense'
declares the truth of a proposition, we are bound to an 'active
recognition' of the truth.(247*) Locke, on the contrary, holds
that if we listen to reason, the assent follows automatically by
a non-voluntary act.
    On Newman's showing, an element of volition intrudes into
logic. Belief belongs to action as well as to pure speculation.
'To act you must assume,' he says, 'and that assumption is
faith.'(248*) If acting upon an hypothesis is the same thing as
believing the truth to be demonstrated, this leads to a singular
result. A judge, says Newman, acts upon the assumption that a
criminal's guilt is proved.(249*) Yet, as it is never
mathematically demonstrated, he has a 'surplusage of assurance.'
The judge may be of opinion that the prisoner's guilt is highly
probable and yet be bound to acquit. Is he to believe that the
prisoner's innocence is demonstrated? The case really shows the
opposite: simply that as we have to act upon probabilities, we
are not the less, but the more, bound to guard against the
illusion that they are certainties. At every moment and in every
relation of our lives, we are forced to act upon imperfect
knowledge. The obvious inference is that we are bound to keep in
mind that it is imperfect; or otherwise we shall be morally bound
to commit intellectually error. If, therefore, a creed be not
demonstrably true, we may wisely act as if it were true, but have
no right to deny that we are acting upon probability. Butler's
famous doctrine that 'probability must be the guide of life,' is
true if 'properly explained.' But the difficulty is that, in
religious questions, 'certitude' is declared to be essential; it
must correspond to something more than a 'balance of
arguments';(250*) and yet the certitude rests upon faith, and
faith is 'assumption.' The probability must be somehow converted
into certainty. In the Essay on Development, Newman meets Locke
by declaring that 'calculation never made a hero,' and praising
the Fathers for 'believing first and proving afterwards.'(251*)
Though calculation does not make a hero, it is essential to
making heroism useful. The true hero is the man who is ready to
act, though he fairly estimates the chances and knows perhaps
that they mean a probability of death.
    This gives the real dilemma. Allow conviction to be
influenced by the will, and you must admit that a belief morally
right may be intellectually wrong. You justify the judge for
mistaking presumption for demonstration, and the child for
believing that a drunken parent is strictly sober. If so, you
sanction erroneous beliefs. And this admittedly applies in
particular to religious beliefs. The world, it is granted, is
full of false beliefs, attained precisely by your method. Not one
man in ten of all that have lived has belonged to the true
Church. Newman, in fact, admits that his ultimate proof is
'subjective.' There is no ultimate test of truth beside 'the
testimony borne to truth by the mind itself.'(252*) He does not,
indeed, deny the possibility of demonstration: he often asserts
it; but he holds that the demonstration will not in fact
convince. Men differ in their first principles, and he cannot
change a man's principles more than he can make a crooked man
straight or a blind man see.(253*) Hence we have the final
answer. We have really to desert a logical ground and to take our
stand upon instinct. Our instincts are in one respect infallible.
Belief in revealed religion depends upon belief in natural
religion. Natural religion is founded on the conscience. The
conscience means the sense of sin, and therefore the desire for
intercession which is satisfied by the priesthood. The religion
of philosophy ignores the conscience, though it recognises the
moral sense.(254*) The order of the world, indeed, seems to
contradict this. What strikes the mind 'so forcibly and so
painfully' is God's absence from His own world. He has left men
in ignorance, and is a 'hidden God.' We are forced to the
conclusion that 'either there is no Creator or He has disowned
His creatures.'(255*) Such doubts 'call for the exercise of good
sense and for strength of will to put them down with a high hand
as irrational or preposterous.'(256*) Why 'irrational,' if they
cannot be answered? Newman, indeed, declares that he is as
certain of the existence of God as of his own, although he has a
difficulty in putting the grounds of his certitude into 'mood and
figure.'(257*) The position is illustrated by a remarkable
sermon(258*) in which, after his conversion, he again applies the
old 'kill-or-cure' remedy. He puts the various difficulties of
theistic belief with his usual force. He declares that there are
'irrefragable' demonstrations of the doctrine; but he admits the
difficulties.(259*) They are so great, indeed, that if you once
believe in God you need not shrink from accepting any of the
mysteries of the Catholic creed. The result seems to be that
while Newman declares that 'demonstrations' exist, he also
emphatically declares that they will not practically convince.
The proof for the ordinary mind must depend upon the 'illative
sense'; and the illative sense implies the existence of the
conscience, and, moreover, of the conscience as distinguished
from the 'moral sense.' The 'moral sense' leads only to the
hollow morality of 'so-called civilisation' and of superficial
philosophy. To convince men we must appeal to their conscience.
But for the conscience he would be 'an atheist, a pantheist, or a
polytheist when he looked into the world,' that is, if guided by
experience alone.(260*)
    What, then, is, as he puts it, the 'burdened conscience'
which is my true informant?(261*) The conscience is the sense of
sin. It tells us of a judge; of one who is 'angry with us and
threatens evil.' It tells us of the need of atonement, and yet of
the absence of God from the world. Natural religion, the
foundation of revealed religion, is therefore, as Lucretius said,
a yoke; it 'burdens and saddens the religious mind.' It proves,
too, the doctrine of which Butler was the 'great master,' the
absolute necessity of 'vicarious punishment.'(262*) Thus, as he
says, in another famous passage, natural religion teaches gloom
and horror of ourselves. To be 'superstitious... is nature's best
offering, her most acceptable service, her most mature and
enlarged wisdom, in the presence of a holy and offended God. They
who are not superstitious without the gospel, will not be
religious with it.'(263*)
    This is, indeed, the real pith of the doctrine. Without
asking what may be the logical demonstration, the actual
persuasive force is the appeal to the conscience as a 'sense of
sin.' Starting from the conception of the Church implied in
Ward's Ideal, that is the foregone conclusion. We accept the
Church theology, because we feel the terror which the Church
soothes. Newman, as was inevitable from the confusion between
rules of conduct and canons of logic, has given us the real cause
of belief, but not a good reason for believing. And here the
apologists are precisely at one with the ordinary deist of the
eighteenth century. They agree that the doctrine was accepted
because it fell in with 'natural religion' in 'superstition.' The
power of the Church, or the power of priest-craft, depends
essentially upon the belief in its power of pardoning sin and
reconciling man to God. The difference is that the deist asserted
the superstition to be false, and pardon a quack remedy; whereas
Newman sees a fundamental truth in the superstition, and the full
explanation in the revelation committed to the Church. How, then,
is the issue to be decided? You are wrong, says Newman, as a
blind man judging of colours is wrong. You have quenched the
conscience, and therefore have no guide. Yet, if a blind man can
never realise what sight is, no blind man ever doubts that sight
exists. Nothing is easier than to prove to him that I have means
of knowledge which he does not possess. Why, if conscience
reveals truths, cannot the truths be impressed even upon those
who have no conscience? Why should I believe that your theory is
right, when the ultimate test is one which, by its nature, can
appeal only to its own authority? If men have radically different
instincts which can be brought to no common measure, scepticism
is the inevitable result, unless a supernatural authority can be
applied. That is precisely Newman's conclusion; leave men to
themselves, he says, and they will have no 'common measure,'
unless controlled by a supreme power. The 'absolute need of a
spiritual supremacy' is the 'strongest argument in its
favour.'(264*)
    This gives Newman's relation to the philosophy of the time.
The 'irrefragable demonstrations' of the schools are left in the
background. Granting them to be irrefragable, do they prove or
disprove his point? Does the 'first cause' argument properly lead
to Nature or to the God of Catholicism? To overlook this is to
assume that your reasoning is confirmed by the very logic to
which it is radically opposed. Is Newman really sceptical when he
denies the validity of the scientific view, or the man of science
when he denies the validity of Newman's? What is the relation of
'science' to philosophy? Private judgment is said to lead, in
religion, to scepticism. The obvious reply is that in the
physical sciences it has led to indisputable truths. Whence the
difference? Newman speaks as though the proofs of scientific
truths rested exclusively upon the arguments for each proposition
separately. Men of science accept Newton's theory, he says,
without rigidly testing it each for himself, and assume that it
conforms to the facts, even if the conformity be not
obvious.(265*) Believers in theology should make similar
assumptions. But this omits the real ground of conviction. We
believe in Newton's theory of gravitation, not simply because we
have read the Principia; not even simply because the argument is
part of a whole system of consistent and independent truths; but
also because it can be verified by proofs intelligible to all,
and because it can predict facts open to the severest tests. The
enormous authority of science is not due to the fact that it is
believed by this or that expert or body of experts, but because
it manifests its power by working wonders which are not miracles.
It can appeal to a criterion which is not supernatural, and is as
valid for the sinner as for the saint.
    Here is one result of the Oxford indifference to science.
When Newman was invited by innocent people to appear as the
champion of faith against science, he refused, for the reason
(among others) that he could not tell what was the position to be
assailed. He would not deny that 'science grew, but it grew by
fits and Starts,' and threw out hypotheses which 'rose and
fell.'(266*) He supposes science to represent a fluctuating set
of guesses. Even if it appeared to contradict revelation, the
contradiction could be evaded by an easy device. Science and
Scripture contradict each other as to the motion of the earth. We
cannot decide till we know what motion is, and then it may turn
out that science is false or reconcilable to Scripture.(267*)
This saying alienated Froude and Kingsley, and, I fancy, with
good reason; but we can see how Newman came to it. Theology, he
thought, rested on a deeper foundation than science. It
represented a single body of deductive truth; while science
represented a set of detached conclusions formed upon particular
facts.
    This appears to reverse the truth. 'The scientific principle,
in the first place, is at issue with the theology not upon this
or that point, not on the conflict between particular statements,
but all along the line. Two differing conceptions of the universe
are at issue, and one must be accepted. Newman substantially
replies that science has its own -- a lower -- sphere.(268*) In
the Idea of a University he argues that theology must be admitted
into the course, because it deals with the realities underlying
phenomena, and is therefore the rightful queen of sciences. The
history of the actual relations of science and theology would
supply a curious commentary upon this opinion. Newman meanwhile
holds that the conflict arises from a scientific misconception.
The latest infidel device, he says, is to leave theology alone.
The man of science trusts to the interest of his own pursuits to
distract the mind from theology, which then perishes by
inanition.(269*) His error consists in leaving the higher study
out of sight, or applying methods legitimate in one sphere to
those of the other sphere. Science, then, does not give
certainty, or gives certainty which has no bearing upon the
higher orders of truth.
    The reply is obvious. The physical sciences, in the first
place, give a body of consistent and verifiable truth, and the
only such body of truth. In the next place, it is impossible to
assign science and philosophy to two different provinces. The
scientific doctrines must lay down the base to which all other
truth, so far as it is discoverable, must conform. The essential
feature of contemporary thought was just this: that science was
passing from purely physical questions to historical, ethical,
and social problems. The dogmatist objects to private judgment or
free thought on the ground that, as it gives no criterion, it
cannot lead to certainty. His real danger was precisely that it
leads irresistibly to certainty. The scientific method shows how
such certainty as is possible must be obtained. The man of
science advocates free inquiry precisely because it is the way to
truth, and the only way, though a way which leads through many
errors. His test is that which so impressed Newman himself,
Securus judicat orbis terrarum; only orbis terrarum must not be
translated one European Church during a few centuries. The man of
science fully agrees with Newman that there is a true 'illative
sense'; that men can reason implicitly before they can reason in
logical form, and make approximately true formulae though
involved in innumerable superstitions and errors. The ultimate
criterion is the power of verifying conclusions, of testing truth
by its capacity to explain phenomena, and by its conformity to
the scientific truth already established beyond dispute. But
there is no royal road to truth in philosophy any more than in
science; or, rather, it must be far longer and more difficult to
reach it. Therefore we must not lay down rules as absolutely
certain, but subject them to perpetual examination, to what
Newman calls 'the all-corroding force' of the intellect, in the
conviction that by that process we are slowly approximating to
sounder belief. The errors have to be 'corroded.' This is
admittedly true of all the natural sciences; we have to puzzle
out the truth in every development of thought, from astronomy to
physiology, by a slow and painful process. Moreover, it is true
of all the religions of the world except, as Newman would say,
the Catholic. Why is that to be an exception? Newman candidly
admits a difficulty. The suggestion that a religion to be
universally accepted should be universally revealed, as though
written 'on the sun,' is, he admits, plausible.(270*) He urges
that there always was a revelation somewhere, though a revelation
in Jerusalem was not of much use in Peking. Yet the admitted fact
seems to be a fatal objection to the a priori probability which
he assumes of a revelation. To nine-tenths of the world there has
been only a 'virtual,' that is to say, no revelation. How, then,
does he try to make room for the one exceptional case? The secret
is to keep to the geocentric point of view. Shut yourself up
within the Church, interpret the world by reference to it,
instead of interpreting it by its place in the world; pronounce
the instincts by which it has been supported to be ultimate and
infallible, instead of listening to the obvious explanation, and
you can certainly escape self-contradiction -- as it is still
always possible on the same terms to hold to the Ptolemaic
astronomy. You have only to assume as a first principle that the
earth does not move, and the facts can always be forced into
conformity. To outsiders this is to confuse the causes with the
reasons of belief. So Newman in his famous development theory
provides a kind of parallel to the scientific theory. He shows
with the greatest clearness how a certain body works out the
properties implied in the type, and so obeys an implicit logic.
He illustrates the case by analogies with other bodies, such as
the Anglican Church.(271*) But why stop there? How did the first
beliefs aria from which the full theological doctrine expanded?
Newman again suggests the answer. They arise from the 'natural
religions' or superstitions, many of which were admittedly
embodied in the Church.(272*) We have only to carry out his view
logically, and the 'supernatural' element becomes needless.
Christian and Hebrew legends take their place in the general
process of human thought, and the assertion of the ultimate
authority of one particular body is simply the description of the
arbitrary claims which it developed under natural conditions. If
we keep the earth in the centre of our system, we require a
supernatural force to make the sun revolve. Let things fall into
their right order and all becomes harmonious.
    The positions thus occupied by the leading writers of the
time indicate the true issues. The 'dogmatists,' the 'liberals,'
and the 'Utilitarians' are virtually agreed upon one point. The
Paley theology was in a hopeless position. Protestantism could
only lead to infidelity. The arguments from design and from
miracles are radically incoherent. They confuse a scientific with
a philosophical argument, and cannot lead legitimately to proving
the existence of a supreme or moral ruler of the universe. While
accepting scientific methods they are radically opposed to
scientific results, because they tend to prove intervention
instead of order, and disappear as scientific knowledge extends.
Mill's attempt to suggest some kind of tentative and conjectural
theology was obviously hopeless, and interesting only as showing
his sense of the need of some kind of religion which would embody
high ethical ideals and stimulate the purest emotions. Empiricism
was destructive of the historical creeds, but could not of itself
supply the place of the old faiths.
    Here then we come to the great problems by which men are
still perplexed. The Utilitarian, which is the scientific view,
lays down an unassailable truth. A religious creed, so far as it
is a statement of fact, must state facts truly, and be in
conformity with the results of scientific teaching. Moreover, no
theology can be legitimately constructed upon this basis. The
gods become figments; and theology is relegated to the region of
the unknowable. If that be the whole truth, religious creeds are
destined to disappear as knowledge is extended and organised
systematically. 'Philip Beauchamp, gives the true Utilitarian
position. Religion, however, as J.S. Mill felt, is a name for
something far wider. It means a philosophy and a poetry; a
statement of the conceptions which men have formed of the
universe, of the emotions with which they regard it, and of the
ethical conceptions which emerge. It has played, as it still
continues to play, a vitally important function in human life,
which is independent of the particular statements of fact
embodied in the historical creed. The 'mystical' doctrine,
represented by Carlyle, corresponds to this element of religion.
Men will always require some religion if religion corresponds not
simply to their knowledge, but to the whole impression made upon
feeling and thinking beings by the world in which they live. The
condition remains that the conceptions must conform to the facts;
our imagination and our desires must not be allowed to override
our experience; or our philosophy to construct the universe out
of a priori guesses. What doctrine can be developed upon those
terms, whether a 'religion of humanity' in some shape be
possible, is still an open question. To the dogmatist this view
seemed to be equivalent to the simple evaporation of all religion
into mere vague emotional mist. To him a religion appeared
essentially as a system of discipline or a great social organism,
governing men's passions and providing them with a cult and a
concrete vision of the universe. The difficulty is that such a
creed cannot be really deduced from a general philosophy. The
dogma has to be based upon 'authority,' instead of basing the
authority upon proof That is a radically incoherent position, and
leads to the acceptance of the dogmas and traditions which have
become essentially incredible, and to a hopeless conflict with
science. To found a religion which shall be compatible with all
known truth, which shall satisfy the imagination and the
emotions, and which shall discharge the functions hitherto
assigned to the churches, is a problem for the future. I must be
content with this attempt to indicate what was the relation to it
of the Utilitarian position.

NOTES:

1. Mill's Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy and of
the Principal Philosophical Questions discussed in his Writings
was first published in 1865. I refer to the fourth edition
(1872). The book was more changed than any of Mill's other
writings in consequence of the insertion of replies to various
criticisms. A list of those replies is given in the preface to
the third and fourth editions. The essays on 'Religion' appeared
in 1874.

2. See Veitch's Life of Hamilton (1869), and an article by
Hamilton's daughter in the Encyclopaedia Britannica.

3. A letter from Hamilton to Dr Parr in 1820 (Parr's Works, vii,
194-202), on occasion of the contest at Edinburgh, gives an
account of his studies. He was personally unknown to Dugald
Stewart, to whom he desires Parr to write a letter upon the
advantages of studying ancient philosophy, to be shown to the
Town Council (who then elected the professor). Hamilton says that
he took up nearly all Aristotle, most of Plato, and of Cicero's
philosophical works; that he had read many Greek commentators
upon Plato and Aristotle and that many of his books were declared
to be too metaphysical for the schools and were forbidden to be
taken up again. Veitch gives a similar account.

4. Napier's Correspondence, p. 70.

5. Notice by Lord Canarvon prefixed to Gnostic Heresies (1875),
and Burgon's Twelve Good Men.

6. See Mill's Examination of Hamilton, p. 496.

7. Reprinted as the first two chapters in the Discussions on the
'Philosophy of the Unconditioned' and the 'Philosophy of
Perception'.

8. Reid's Works, p. 823.

9. See in Discussions, p. 55; Lectures, i. 295, etc.; Reid's
Works, p. 817 (the most elaborate).

10. Lectures, i. 292.

11. Discussions, p. 93.

12. Reid's Works, p. 817 n.

13. Discussions, p. 56.

14. Ibid., p. 192.

15. Lectures, i, 230, 293. Peter Poiret corresponds to 'Johnny
Dodds of Farthinsacre,' the one orthodox friend of Davie Deans.

16. Lectures, i. 331.

17. Discussions, p. 61.

18. Discussions, p. 61; Lectures, i. 225.

19. Discussions, i. 62.

20. Discussions, p. 64.

21. Reid's Works, p. 745.

22. Ibid. p. 754.

23. Hamilton admits the distinction between 'primary truths of
fact' and 'primary truths of intelligence,' but says that as
their sources are not different, he will not give them different
names. -- Reid's Works, p. 743 n.

24. Reid's Works, p. 743.

25. Lectures, i. 294.

26. Lectures, i. 228.

27. Ibid. i. 224.

28. Ibid. i. 212.

29. Reid's Works, p. 822.

30. Lectures, i. 204.

31. Ibid. i. 194.

32. Reid's Works, p. 744.

33. Ibid. p. 806.

34  Discussions, p. 50, etc.; Lectures, i, 225, etc.

35. Discussions, p. 639. This is the passage welcomed by Mill.
Hamilton, as Mr Stirling notices, applies to the Cosmothetical
Idealist Virgil's Rerumque ignarus, imagine gaudet, and elsewhere
uses the same words to give the position of the true philosopher
(Discussions, pp. 57, 640; Lectures, i. 138). The inability to
get beyond the phenomenon is ridiculed in one case and accepted
in the other.

36. Lectures, i. 225.

37. Ibid. i. 147; ii. 129.

38. Ibid. i. 160.

39. Mill puts this in Examination, p. 35.

40. Reid's Works, pp. 854, 857.

41. Lectures, ii. 112. In the more elaborate discussion in Reid's
Works. Note D, he concludes (p. 857) that the primary 'may be
roundly characterised as mathematical, the secundo primary as
mechanical, the secondary as physiological.'

42. Lectures, ii. 113, 114.

43. Reid's Works, p. 845.

44. Ibid. p. 820.

45. Ibid. p. 858.

46. Reid's Works, p. 866 n.

47. Lectures, ii. 114.

48. Reid's Works, p. 882.

49. Ibid. p. 846.

50. Mr Hutchison Stirling, in a severe examination of Hamilton's
Philosophy of Perception (1865, p. 79 n.) thinks that Hamilton
never understood that, according to Kant, space was a
'perception', not a 'conception'; and infers that he knew little
of Kant except from the 'literature of the subject.'

51. Lectures, i. 218.

52. Mill's argument about this in the Examination (ch. x.) is
entangled in the question about the opinions of  Thomas Brown and
'Cosmothetic Idealists,' which perhaps lays him open to a reply
made by Veitch. I cannot go into this, which illustrates one
confusion in the controversy.

53. Lectures, i. 218 and 221 n.

54. Ibid. ii. 153.

55. Ibid. ii. 130.

56. Reid's Works, Note B, p. 810.

57. Reid's Works, p. 821.

58. Reid's Works, p. 858 n.; cf. p. 880 n. The 'organism' is 'at
once objective and subjective', 'at once ego and non-ego.' Unless
we admit this we must be materialists or idealists.

59. Reid's Works, p. 862.

60. Mr Stirling (pp. 80-110) thinks this 'exceedingly ingenious',
though really fallacious. Mansel accepts it in his Metaphysics
(1860), p. 114; and in the Philosophy of the Conditioned (pp. 72,
75, 83) tries to reconcile it with other phrases. He talks of
matter being 'in contact with mind,' and the object of perception
being 'partly mental and partly material.' The composition is
like the chemical fusion of an acid and an alkali.

61. Veitch tries to make a coherent doctrine from these
utterances. All that Hamilton requires, he thinks, is that the
object perceived his the 'quality of a non-ego.' -- Veitch's
Hamilton, p. 191. As the non-ego is a merely negative conception,
this tends to coincide with the doctrines of Tracy and Brown.

62. Mill had by this time read Kant, and makes frequent
references to him. He may perhaps be excused for not appreciating
the Kantian view by Kant's own inconsistencies and obscurities.
This is a very ticklish point, which I cannot discuss, but which,
as I think, does not really affect the argument.

63. Examination, etc., p. 176. Mill here uses 'introspective,'
which might be applied to psychology, as equivalent rather than
to logical; or to the a priori method which attempts to discover
fact by analysis of pure reasoning.

64. Examination, etc., p. 456; cf. p. 194.

65. Examination, etc., p. 266.

66. Cf. Mill's interesting article upon Berkeley. --
Dissertations, vol. iv. pp. 154-87.

67. Examination, p. 248.

68. Ibid. p. 225.

69. Made especially familiar in recent English speculation by
T.H. Green's criticism of Hume.

70. e.g. Reid's Works, p. 869.

71. Examination, pp. 146-47.

72. Ibid. p. 235.

73. Examination, p. 248.

74. Lectures (Preface).

75. Discussions, p. 12.

76. Ibid. p. 13.

77. Examination, pp. 58, 73.

78. Philosophy of the Conditioned, p . 95.

79. Philosophy of the Conditioned, pp. 108, 147.

80. Ibid. p. 67.

81. Hamilton strangely declares that Kant makes the speculative
reason an 'organ of mere delusion' (Discussions, p. 18, Lectures,
i. 402), and Mansel says that if we accept Kant's doctrine we
must believe 'in a special faculty of lies, created for the
express purpose of deceiving those who believe in it.' For Kant's
statement that the reason cannot be itself untrustworthy, see
Appendix to Transcendental Dialectic (section on 'the ultimate
end of the natural dialectic of human reason,' and for the
comparisons above quoted the same Appendix (section of 'the
regulative employment of the 'ideas of pure reason') and the
Introduction to the Transcendental Dialectic.  Bolton (Inquisitio
Philosophica, ch. iv) quotes many passages from Kant to
illustrate this point, which seems to confirm Stirling's opinion
of the superficiality of Hamilton's knowledge of his author.

82. Discussions, p. 33.

83. Discussions, p. 17.

84. Ibid. p. 20.

85. Ibid. p. 32.

86. Examination, p. 103.

87. 'An ultimate end of the natural dialectic,' etc.

88. Discussions, p. 14.

89. I may say that although I am an 'Agnostic' I cannot accept Mr
Spencer's version of Hamilton's doctrine. But I must not attempt
here to estimate the value of Mr Spencer's theory.

90. Reid's Works, p. 743 n.

91. Lectures, ii. 376-413; Discussions, pp. 604-28.

92. Letters to Calderwood in Lectures, ii. 530-35.

93. One specimen of Hamilton's method may be given for those who
care for such things. In the essay on Cousin he opposes 'the
Infinite' as the 'unconditionally unlimited' to the 'Absolute' as
the 'unconditionally limited'. In both cases we have simple
negations of thought, and therefore reach the inconceivable. If I
say a thing and then unsay it, I get simple zero. That is
obvious. If, again, the absolute asserts the same limit which is
denied by the 'infinite,' they are of course contradictory. And,
in this case, we get the old antinomy, which he accordingly
introduces in the next sentence about the impossibility of
conceiving space either as infinite or finite. But here the
contradictory of infinite ought to be -- not 'absolute' but
'finite'. Having thus got an 'antimony' by making 'the absolute'
equivalent to 'the finite', Hamilton apparently assumes an
antinomy between absolute and its contradictory everywhere. But I
am not compelled to think of a thing either as being some quality
and so far 'conditioned,' or as being no quality at all. The
alternative is either to think of it or not think of  it and that
leads to no antimony. So again (pp. 29, 30) infinite time is
identified with endless time, and absolute with ended time.

94. Bampton Lectures, (3rd edition, 1859), p. 71.

95. Lectures, iii. 103.

96. Examination, p. 105.

97. Bampton Lectures, p. 45.

98. Cf. Tennyson's 'Flower in the Crannied Wall' -- 
        '...... If I could understand
        What you are, root and all, and all in all,
        I should know what God and man is.'

99. Bampton Lectures, p. 89.

100. Ibid. p. 72.

101. Ibid. p. 61.

102. Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 51.

103. Bampton Lectures, p. 8.

104. Ibid. pp. 67, 68.

105. Reid's Works, p. 974.

106. Bampton Lectures, p. 228. Yet he positively asserts (e.g. p.
220) that free-will is a 'fact of consciousness.'

107. Ibid. p. 217.

108. Ibid. p. 121. Though, as he adds, of that alternative which
renders that very inconceivability 'itself inexplicable'.

109. Ibid. p. 89.

110. Bampton Lectures, p. 202.

111. Ibid. p. 12.

112. Ibid. p. 244.

113. Bampton Lectures, pp. 17, 18.

114. Ibid. p. 212.

115. Examination, p. 129.

116. Philosophy of the Unconditioned, p. 167 (also quoted in
Mill's not to above)

117. Examination, p. 123 n.

118. Bampton Lectures, p. 234.

119. Ibid. p. 239.

120. Philosophy of the Conditioned, p. 245.

121. Ibid. p. 39 n.

122. Examination, pp. 170, 240; Hamilton's Lectures, i. 394. I do
not try to reconcile Hamilton's 'Obiter dictum' in this passage
with his assertion in his second lecture that 'philosophy' and
'psychology' give the only possible proofs of theology; or with
his claim to have met Kant's scepticism.

123. Auguste Comte, (1865) pp. 14, 15.

124. See Mr John Morley's article in Critical Miscellanies
(second edition).

125. Bain's J.S. Mill, p. 139.

126. Three Essays, pp. 142-54.

127. Three Essays, p. 19.

128. Ibid. p. 28.

129. Ibid. p. 46.

130. Ibid. p. 53.

131. Three Essays, p. 65.

132. 'Why' asks Hume, 'is there any misery in the world? Not by
chance, surely. From some cause, then? Is it by the intervention
of the Deity? but he is perfectly benevolent. Is it contrary to
his intentions? But he is Almighty. Epicurus's old questions,' he
says, 'are yet unanswered.' 'If,' says Mansel, 'an infinitely
powerful Being wills evil, he is not perfectly good. If he wills
it not, his will is thwarted and his sphere of action limited.'
-- Hume's Works (1874), ii. 440, 442; Bampton Lectures, p. 51.

133. Three Essays, p. 39.

134. Ibid. p. 40.

135. Ibid. p. 116.

136. Ibid. p. 184. Friday asks Robinson Crusoe why God did not
kill the devil.

137. So in the Examination of Hamilton (p. 567) he says that this
is 'by far the best' and 'by far the most persuasive argument.'

138. Examination, p. 246.

139. Three Essays, p. 170.

140. The 'ingenious simile,' says Mansel, 'by which God is
compared to a mechanic fails only in this particular, that both
its terms are utterly unlike the objects which they profess to
represent.' -- Bampton Lectures, p. 188.

141. Three Essays, p. 174.

142. Three Essays, p. 133.

143. Ibid. pp. 16, 17, Observe the language about 'conforming to
the laws of equilibrium among bodies,' instead of 'conforming
only to the law of gravitation,' as though we did not necessarily
'conform' to all 'laws of nature' in all cases.

144. Three Essays, p. 174.

145. Mill has here come to speak of 'Nature' in the narrower
sense, as opposed to art or to nature working through man.

146. Three Essays, p. 232.

147. Ibid. p. 255.

148. Three Essays, p. 76.

149. Ibid. p. 100.

150. Ibid. p. 82.

151. Three Essays, p. 97.

152. Ibid. p. 111.

153. Ibid. p. 104.

154. Three Essays, p. 122.

155. Ibid. p. 116.

156. Ibid. pp. 248-49.

157. Ibid. p. 253.

158. Ibid. p. 252.

159. Three Essays, pp. 256-57.

160. Ibid. p. 216.

161. Bampton Lectures, p. 238.

162. Examination of the Reverend F.D. Maurice's 'Strictures'
(1859) p. 80. This is a reply to Maurice's What is Revelation?
(1859). Maurice in a Sequel (1860) answers this and other
accusation with dignity; though his remarks upon Mansel were
certainly sharp enough.

163. Maurice's most complete book, the Kingdom of Christ (1838,
enlarged 1842), is less rhetorical and more logical than its
successors. The Theological Essays (1853) gives his teaching in
the shortest compass.

164. Mill's Autobiography, p. 153.

165. i.e. eine Neigung und Bestimmtheit des Gefuhls, quoted in
What is Revelation? p. 316. Maurice defends this against Mansel.

166. Begun about 1835 for the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana. The
whole collected in an edition of 1871-72.

167. Kingdom of Christ (1842) p. 253.

168. What is Revelation? (1819) p. 275.

169. Theological Essays, pp. 65, 119.

170. Ibid, pp. 113, 338, 465.

171. What is Revelation? p. 232.

172. Kingdom of Christ, i. (1842) 41. This book, first published
as a series of letters to a Quaker, is an exposition of the way
in which the mystical doctrine of Fox and Barclay degenerated
from the confusion between a valid, because universal, principle
and a claim to a private or individual application.

173. What is Revelation? p. 228.

174. Theological Essays, p. 316.

175. Originally the Boyle Lectures for 1846. Fourth edition in 1861.

176. Theological Essays, p. 211.

177. Theological Essays, p. 145.

178. Maurice, as I remember Carlyle saying, thought that 
you might be eternally damned for five minutes.

179. Theological Essays, pp. 430, 450, 480.

180. Maurice's criticism is in a little book called the 
Claims of the Bible and of Science (1863).

181. Claims of Science, etc. pp. 76, 125.

182. Sartor Resartus, ch. iv.; cf. Froude, i. 334.

183. Froude, iii. 67.

184. Froude, i. 73.

185. Ibid. i. 101.

186. Sartor Resartus, ch. vii.

187. Essays on 'State of German Literature' (1827); 'Novalis' 
(1829); 'Signs of the Times' (1829).

188. Novalis, Essays, ii. 76.

189. 'Characteristics' 91831); Essays, iii. 20.

190. Past and Present, ch. xv.

191. Froude, iii, 40.

192. 'Novalis' in Essays, ii, 72, etc.

193. Mill's Autobiography, p. 175, etc.

194. The journals have been separately printed in America 
for the Grolier Club (edited by Prof. Norton).

195. Carlyle, I fear, is punning.

196. Froude, ii, 79, 90.

197. Sartor Resartus, bk. iii. ch. iv.

198. Lecture v.

199. Chartism, ch. x.

200. Latter-day Pamphlets, 'Jesuitism'.

201. Sartor Resartus, bk. i. ch. viii.; bk. iii. ch. viii.

202. Froude, ii, 345.

203. Froude, iii. 12.

204. e.g. Past and Present, bk. ii. ch. xvii.,
 and bk. iii. ch. v., with the humorous description of John Bull, 
who manages to settle down with his centre of gravity lowest.

205. Essays, iii. 69 (Boswell).

206. Essays, iv. 146. (Scott).

207. Chartism, ch. v.

208. Froude, iii. 84.

209. Latter-day Pamphlets, 'The new Downing Street.'

210. Ibid., 'Stump Orators'.

211. Past and Present, bk. i. ch. 19.

212. Chartism, ch. viii.

213. Froude, iv. 259.

214. See Pusey's (afterwards suppressed) Historical Inquiry 
into German rationalism (1828). H.J.  Rose had attributed 
the evil to want of  bishops. Pusey thought it was due to
 'dead orthodoxism'. He looked leniently for the moment upon 
the attempt to infuse a little philosophy into the creed, 
but soon perceived that the Thirty-nine Articles would be 
more to the purpose.

215. Oxford had been incidentally attacked in the Edinburgh 
Review in an article upon 'Laplace' by Playfair; in a review 
by R. Payne Knight of an Oxford edition of Strabo; and by 
Syndey Smith in a very amusing review of a book upon education by
 Edgeworth. Copleston replied, and was answered by the three conjointly.
 The controversy wandered into various small points. Newman, in his Idea
 of a University, quotes Copleston with deserved respect for his 
general principle. But the application to the Oxford system is less cogent.

216. See especially Arnold's pamphlet on Principles of Church Reform (1833), 
reprinted in Miscellaneous Works (1845), pp. 257-359. Arnold's aversion to 
sacerdotalism was vigorously expressed in an article in the Edinburgh for
 April 1836, entitled (by the Edinburgh) 'The Oxford Malignants and 
Dr Hampton.' It was reprinted in his works. See Stanley's Life of Arnold, ii. 9.

217. The Ideal 91844) was a defence of articles contributed by Ward 
to the British Critic against the 'Narrative' of  William Palmer (1803-1885).
 It led to the final catastrophe, and was soon followed by the conversions
 to Catholicism of Ward and Newman.


218. Ideal, p. 27. The Perils of the Nation (1843) is the book quoted.

219. Ibid. p. 416.

220. Ibid. p. 420.

221. Ideal, pp. 34-44.

222. Ibid. pp. 266.

223. Ibid. p. 504.

224. Apologia, p. 121.

225. Apologia, p. 205.

226. Ibid. pp. 322, 329.

227. Ideal, p. 277.

228. Ibid. p. 499. Ward would apparently have modified 
these statements at a later period.

229. Idea of a University (1875) p. 453.

230. University Sermons (1843), p. 186. In the later edition 
this phrase is carefully qualified as referring only to 
an illegitimate use of reason.

231. No. 85 (1838), reprinted in Discussions and Arguments, 1872.

232. In Discussions and Arguments, p. 249, the curious 
correction is made of substituting twelve for three. That marks without mending the blot.

233. Apologia (1864), p. 380.

234. Ward's Essays on the Philosophy of Theism (1884), pp. 120-125.

235. Philosophy of Theism, pp. 143 n, 304.

236. Ibid. ii. 87.

237. Philosophy of Theism, i, 50.

238. Ibid. i. 90, 94.

239. Ibid. i, 325.

240. Philosophy of Theism, i. 121. Ward, we are told subsequently 
ceased to hold this opinion 'with any confidence,' or abandoned it
 altogether. Ibid. ii. 132.

241. Ibid. ii. 359.

242. Especially the University Sermons, the Essay upon Miracles, 
the Essay upon Development, and the Grammar of Assent.

243. Grammar of Assent (1870), p. 219.

244. Grammar of Assent (1870), p. 264.

245. Ibid. p. 277.

246. Ibid. p. 155. See also Essay on Development, p. 328.

247. Grammar of Assent, p. 337.

248. Grammar of Assent, p. 92.

249. Ibid. p. 320.

250. Ibid. p. 231.

251. Development, pp. 328, 331.

252. Grammar of Assent, p. 343.

253. Ibid.  pp. 405, 408.

254. Grammar of Assent, p. 391.

255. Ibid. p. 392.

256. Ibid. p. 211.

257. Apologia, p. 377.

258. Sermons to Mixed Congregations, No. xiii.

259. In one of his famous phrases, Newman says that ten 
thousand difficulties do not make one objection (Apologia, p. 374). 
This is clearly true in a sense. I may find it impossible to solve 
a mathematical problem without doubting that a solution exists. 
But it suggests a very convenient logical device. An unanswerable 
objection can always be met by calling it a difficulty.

260. Apologia, p. 377.

261. Grammar of Assent, p. 392.

262. Ibid. p. 401.

263. University Sermons (1872) p. 118.

264. Development, pp. 127, 128.

265. Essays on Development, p. 129. Laplace and Lagrange had a different opinion.

266. Apologia, p. 404.

267. University Sermons (1872) p. 348.

268. Idea of a University (1875) pp. 428-455.

269. Ibid. pp. 401, 402.

270. Grammar of Assent, pp. 372, 426.

271. Essay on Development, pp. 102, 108, 170.

272. Essay on Development, pp. 358-365.


