



Part III





Of the Foundation of our Judgments concerning our own Sentiments


and Conduct, and of the Sense of Duty


Consisting of One Section





Chap. I





Of the Principle of Self-approbation and of Self-disapprobation





    In the two foregoing parts of this discourse, I have chiefly


considered the origin and foundation of our judgments concerning


the sentiments and conduct of others. I come now to consider more


particularly the origin of those concerning our own.


    The principle by which we naturally either approve or


disapprove of our own conduct, seems to be altogether the same


with that by which we exercise the like judgments concerning the


conduct of other people. We either approve or disapprove of the


conduct of another man according as we feel that, when we bring


his case home to ourselves, we either can or cannot entirely


sympathize with the sentiments and motives which directed it.


And, in the same manner, we either approve or disapprove of our


own conduct, according as we feel that, when we place ourselves


in the situation of another man, and view it, as it were, with


his eyes and from his station, we either can or cannot entirely


enter into and sympathize with the sentiments and motives which


influenced it. We can never survey our own sentiments and


motives, we can never form any judgment concerning them; unless


we remove ourselves, as it were, from our own natural station,


and endeavour to view them as at a certain distance from us. But


we can do this in no other way than by endeavouring to view them


with the eyes of other people, or as other people are likely to


view them. Whatever judgment we can form concerning them,


accordingly, must always bear some secret reference, either to


what are, or to what, upon a certain condition, would be, or to


what, we imagine, ought to be the judgment of others. We


endeavour to examine our own conduct as we imagine any other fair


and impartial spectator would examine it. If, upon placing


ourselves in his situation, we thoroughly enter into all the


passions and motives which influenced it, we approve of it, by


sympathy with the approbation of this supposed equitable judge.


If otherwise, we enter into his disapprobation, and condemn it.


    Were it possible that a human creature could grow up to


manhood in some solitary place, without any communication with


his own species, he could no more think of his own character, of


the propriety or demerit of his own sentiments and conduct, of


the beauty or deformity of his own mind, than of the beauty or


deformity of his own face. All these are objects which he cannot


easily see, which naturally he does not look at, and with regard


to which he is provided with no mirror which can present them to


his view. Bring him into society, and he is immediately provided


with the mirror which he wanted before. It is placed in the


countenance and behaviour of those he lives with, which always


mark when they enter into, and when they disapprove of his


sentiments; and it is here that he first views the propriety and


impropriety of his own passions, the beauty and deformity of his


own mind. To a man who from his birth was a stranger to society,


the objects of his passions, the external bodies which either


pleased or hurt him, would occupy his whole attention. The


passions themselves, the desires or aversions, the joys or


sorrows, which those objects excited, though of all things the


most immediately present to him, could scarce ever be the objects


of his thoughts. The idea of them could never interest him so


much as to call upon his attentive consideration. The


consideration of his joy could in him excite no new joy, nor that


of his sorrow any new sorrow, though the consideration of the


causes of those passions might often excite both. Bring him into


society, and all his own passions will immediately become the


causes of new passions. He will observe that mankind approve of


some of them, and are disgusted by others. He will be elevated in


the one case, and cast down in the other; his desires and


aversions, his joys and sorrows, will now often become the causes


of new desires and new aversions, new joys and new sorrows: they


will now, therefore, interest him deeply, and often call upon his


most attentive consideration.


    Our first ideas of personal beauty and deformity, are drawn


from the shape and appearance of others, not from our own. We


soon become sensible, however, that others exercise the same


criticism upon us. We are pleased when they approve of our


figure, and are disobliged when they seem to be disgusted. We


become anxious to know how far our appearance deserves either


their blame or approbation. We examine our persons limb by limb,


and by placing ourselves before a looking-glass, or by some such


expedient, endeavour, as much as possible, to view ourselves at


the distance and with the eyes of other people. If, after this


examination, we are satisfied with our own appearance, we can


more easily support the most disadvantageous judgments of others.


If, on the contrary, we are sensible that we are the natural


objects of distaste, every appearance of their disapprobation


mortifies us beyond all measure. A man who is tolerably handsome,


will allow you to laugh at any little irregularity in his person;


but all such jokes are commonly unsupportable to one who is


really deformed. It is evident, however, that we are anxious


about our own beauty and deformity, only upon account of its


effect upon others. If we had no connexion with society, we


should be altogether indifferent about either.


    In the same manner our first moral criticisms are exercised


upon the characters and conduct of other people; and we are all


very forward to observe how each of these affects us. But we soon


learn, that other people are equally frank with regard to our


own. We become anxious to know how far we deserve their censure


or applause, and whether to them we must necessarily appear those


agreeable or disagreeable creatures which they represent us. We


begin, upon this account, to examine our own passions and


conduct, and to consider how these must appear to them, by


considering how they would appear to us if in their situation. We


suppose ourselves the spectators of our own behaviour, and


endeavour to imagine what effect it would, in this light, produce


upon us. This is the only looking-glass by which we can, in some


measure, with the eyes of other people, scrutinize the propriety


of our own conduct. If in this view it pleases us, we are


tolerably satisfied. We can be more indifferent about the


applause, and, in some measure, despise the censure of the world.


secure that, however misunderstood or misrepresented, we are the


natural and proper objects of approbation. On the contrary, if we


are doubtful about it, we are often, upon that very account, more


anxious to gain their approbation, and, provided we have not


already, as they say, shaken hands with infamy, we are altogether


distracted at the thoughts of their censure, which then strikes


us with double severity.


    When I endeavour to examine my own conduct, when I endeavour


to pass sentence upon it, and either to approve or condemn it, it


is evident that, in all such cases, I divide myself, as it were,


into two persons; and that I, the examiner and judge, represent a


different character from that other I, the person whose conduct


is examined into and judged of. The first is the spectator, whose


sentiments with regard to my own conduct I endeavour to enter


into, by placing myself in his situation, and by considering how


it would appear to me, when seen from that particular point of


view. The second is the agent, the person whom I properly call


myself, and of whose conduct, under the character of a spectator,


I was endeavouring to form some opinion. The first is the judge;


the second the person judged of. But that the judge should, in


every respect, be the same with the person judged of, is as


impossible, as that the cause should, in every respect, be the


same with the effect.


    To be amiable and to be meritorious; that is, to deserve love


and to deserve reward, are the great characters of virtue; and to


be odious and punishable, of vice. But all these characters have


an immediate reference to the sentiments of others. Virtue is not


said to be amiable, or to be meritorious, because it is the


object of its own love, or of its own gratitude; but because it


excites those sentiments in other men. The consciousness that it


is the object of such favourable regards, is the source of that


inward tranquillity and self-satisfaction with which it is


naturally attended, as the suspicion of the contrary gives


occasion to the torments of vice. What so great happiness as to


be beloved, and to know that we deserve to be beloved? What so


great misery as to be hated, and to know that we deserve to be


hated?





Chap. II





Of the love of Praise, and of that of Praise-worthiness; and of


the dread of Blame, and of that of Blame-worthiness





    Man naturally desires, not only to be loved, but to be


lovely; or to be that thing which is the natural and proper


object of love. He naturally dreads, not only to be hated, but to


be hateful; or to be that thing which is the natural and proper


object of hatred. He desires, not only praise, but


praiseworthiness; or to be that thing which, though it should be


praised by nobody, is, however, the natural and proper object of


praise. He dreads, not only blame, but blame-worthiness; or to be


that thing which, though it should be blamed by nobody, is,


however, the natural and proper object of blame.


    The love of praise-worthiness is by no means derived


altogether from the love of praise. Those two principles, though


they resemble one another, though they are connected, and often


blended with one another, are yet, in many respects, distinct and


independent of one another.


    The love and admiration which we naturally conceive for those


whose character and conduct we approve of, necessarily dispose us


to desire to become ourselves the objects of the like agreeable


sentiments, and to be as amiable and as admirable as those whom


we love and admire the most. Emulation, the anxious desire that


we ourselves should excel, is originally founded in our


admiration of the excellence of others. Neither can we be


satisfied with being merely admired for what other people are


admired. We must at least believe ourselves to be admirable for


what they are admirable. But, in order to attain this


satisfaction, we must become the impartial spectators of our own


character and conduct. We must endeavour to view them with the


eyes of other people, or as other people are likely to view them.


When seen in this light, if they appear to us as we wish, we are


happy and contented. But it greatly confirms this happiness and


contentment when we find that other people, viewing them with


those very eyes with which we, in imagination only, were


endeavouring to view them, see them precisely in the same light


in which we ourselves had seen them. Their approbation


necessarily confirms our own self-approbation. Their praise


necessarily strengthens our own sense of our own


praiseworthiness. In this case, so far is the love of


praise-worthiness from being derived altogether from that of


praise; that the love of praise seems, at least in a great


measure, to be derived from that of praise-worthiness.


    The most sincere praise can give little pleasure when it


cannot be considered as some sort of proof of praise-worthiness.


It is by no means sufficient that, from ignorance or mistake,


esteem and admiration should, in some way or other, be bestowed


upon us. If we are conscious that we do not deserve to be so


favourably thought of, and that if the truth were known, we


should be regarded with very different sentiments, our


satisfaction is far from being complete. The man who applauds us


either for actions which we did not perform, or for motives which


had no sort of influence upon our conduct, applauds not us, but


another person. We can derive no sort of satisfaction from his


praises. To us they should be more mortifying than any censure,


and should perpetually call to our minds, the most humbling of


all reflections, the reflection of what we ought to be, but what


we are not. A woman who paints, could derive, one should imagine,


but little vanity from the compliments that are paid to her


complexion. These, we should expect, ought rather to put her in


mind of the sentiments which her real complexion would excite,


and mortify her the more by the contrast. To be pleased with such


groundless applause is a proof of the most superficial levity and


weakness. It is what is properly called vanity, and is the


foundation of the most ridiculous and contemptible vices, the


vices of affectation and common lying; follies which, if


experience did not teach us how common they are, one should


imagine the least spark of common sense would save us from. The


foolish liar, who endeavours to excite the admiration of the


company by the relation of adventures which never had any


existence; the important coxcomb, who gives himself airs of rank


and distinction which he well knows he has no just pretensions


to; are both of them, no doubt, pleased with the applause which


they fancy they meet with. But their vanity arises from so gross


an illusion of the imagination, that it is difficult to conceive


how any rational creature should be imposed upon by it. When they


place themselves in the situation of those whom they fancy they


have deceived, they are struck with the highest admiration for


their own persons. They look upon themselves, not in that light


in which, they know, they ought to appear to their companions,


but in that in which they believe their companions actually look


upon them. Their superficial weakness and trivial folly hinder


them from ever turning their eyes inwards, or from seeing


themselves in that despicable point of view in which their own


consciences must tell them that they would appear to every body,


if the real truth should ever come to be known.


    As ignorant and groundless praise can give no solid joy, no


satisfaction that will bear any serious examination, so, on the


contrary, it often gives real comfort to reflect, that though no


praise should actually be bestowed upon us, our conduct, however,


has been such as to deserve it, and has been in every respect


suitable to those measures and rules by which praise and


approbation are naturally and commonly bestowed. We are pleased,


not only with praise, but with having done what is praise-worthy.


We are pleased to think that we have rendered ourselves the


natural objects of approbation, though no approbation should ever


actually be bestowed upon us: and we are mortified to reflect


that we have justly merited the blame of those we live with,


though that sentiment should never actually be exerted against


us. The man who is conscious to himself that he has exactly


observed those measures of conduct which experience informs him


are generally agreeable, reflects with satisfaction on the


propriety of his own behaviour. When he views it in the light in


which the impartial spectator would view it, he thoroughly enters


into all the motives which influenced it. He looks back upon


every part of it with pleasure and approbation, and though


mankind should never be acquainted with what he has done, he


regards himself, not so much according to the light in which they


actually regard him, as according to that in which they would


regard him if they were better informed. He anticipates the


applause and admiration which in this case would be bestowed upon


him, and he applauds and admires himself by sympathy with


sentiments, which do not indeed actually take place, but which


the ignorance of the public alone hinders from taking place,


which he knows are the natural and ordinary effects of such


conduct, which his imagination strongly connects with it, and


which he has acquired a habit of conceiving as something that


naturally and in propriety ought to follow from it. Men have


voluntarily thrown away life to acquire after death a renown


which they could no longer enjoy. Their imagination, in the mean


time, anticipated that fame which was in future times to be


bestowed upon them. Those applauses which they were never to hear


rung in their ears; the thoughts of that admiration, whose


effects they were never to feel, played about their hearts,


banished from their breasts the strongest of all natural fears,


and transported them to perform actions which seem almost beyond


the reach of human nature. But in point of reality there is


surely no great difference between that approbation which is not


to be bestowed till we can no longer enjoy it, and that which,


indeed, is never to be bestowed, but which would be bestowed, if


the world was ever made to understand properly the real


circumstances of our behaviour. If the one often produces such


violent effects, we cannot wonder that the other should always be


highly regarded.


    Nature, when she formed man for society, endowed him with an


original desire to please, and an original aversion to offend his


brethren. She taught him to feel pleasure in their favourable,


and pain in their unfavourable regard. She rendered their


approbation most flattering and most agreeable to him for its own


sake; and their disapprobation most mortifying and most


offensive.


    But this desire of the approbation, and this aversion to the


disapprobation of his brethren, would not alone have rendered him


fit for that society for which he was made. Nature, accordingly,


has endowed him, not only with a desire of being approved of, but


with a desire of being what ought to be approved of; or of being


what he himself approves of in other men. The first desire could


only have made him wish to appear to be fit for society. The


second was necessary in order to render him anxious to be really


fit. The first could only have prompted him to the affectation of


virtue, and to the concealment of vice. The second was necessary


in order to inspire him with the real love of virtue, and with


the real abhorrence of vice. In every well-formed mind this


second desire seems to be the strongest of the two. It is only


the weakest and most superficial of mankind who can be much


delighted with that praise which they themselves know to be


altogether unmerited. A weak man may sometimes be pleased with


it, but a wise man rejects it upon all occasions. But, though a


wise man feels little pleasure from praise where he knows there


is no praise-worthiness, he often feels the highest in doing what


he knows to be praise-worthy, though he knows equally well that


no praise is ever to be bestowed upon it. To obtain the


approbation of mankind, where no approbation is due, can never be


an object of any importance to him. To obtain that approbation


where it is really due, may sometimes be an object of no great


importance to him. But to be that thing which deserves


approbation, must always be an object of the highest.


    To desire, or even to accept of praise, where no praise is


due, can be the effect only of the most contemptible vanity. To


desire it where it is really due, is to desire no more than that


a most essential act of justice should be done to us. The love of


just fame, of true glory, even for its own sake, and independent


of any advantage which he can derive from it, is not unworthy


even of a wise man. He sometimes, however, neglects, and even


despises it; and he is never more apt to do so than when he has


the most perfect assurance of the perfect propriety of every part


of his own conduct. His self-approbation, in this case, stands in


need of no confirmation from the approbation of other men. It is


alone sufficient, and he is contented with it. This


self-approbation, if not the only, is at least the principal


object, about which he can or ought to be anxious. The love of


it, is the love of virtue.


    As the love and admiration which we naturally conceive for


some characters, dispose us to wish to become ourselves the


proper objects of such agreeable sentiments; so the hatred and


contempt which we as naturally conceive for others, dispose us,


perhaps still more strongly, to dread the very thought of


resembling them in any respect. Neither is it, in this case, too,


so much the thought of being hated and despised that we are


afraid of, as that of being hateful and despicable. We dread the


thought of doing any thing which can render us the just and


proper objects of the hatred and contempt of our


fellow-creatures; even though we had the most perfect security


that those sentiments were never actually to be exerted against


us. The man who has broke through all those measures of conduct,


which can alone render him agreeable to mankind, though he should


have the most perfect assurance that what he had done was for


ever to be concealed from every human eye, it is all to no


purpose. When he looks back upon it, and views it in the light in


which the impartial spectator would view it, he finds that he can


enter into none of the motives which influenced it. He is abashed


and confounded at the thoughts of it, and necessarily feels a


very high degree of that shame which he would be exposed to, if


his actions should ever come to be generally known. His


imagination, in this case too, anticipates the contempt and


derision from which nothing saves him but the ignorance of those


he lives with. He still feels that he is the natural object of


these sentiments, and still trembles at the thought of what he


would suffer, if they were ever actually exerted against him. But


if what he had been guilty of was not merely one of those


improprieties which are the objects of simple disapprobation, but


one of those enormous crimes which excite detestation and


resentment, he could never think of it, as long as he had any


sensibility left, without feeling all the agony of horror and


remorse; and though he could be assured that no man was ever to


know it, and could even bring himself to believe that there was


no God to revenge it, he would still feel enough of both these


sentiments to embitter the whole of his life: he would still


regard himself as the natural object of the hatred and


indignation of all his fellow-creatures; and, if his heart was


not grown callous by the habit of crimes, he could not think


without terror and astonishment even of the manner in which


mankind would look upon him, of what would be the expression of


their countenance and of their eyes, if the dreadful truth should


ever come to be known. These natural pangs of an affrighted


conscience are the daemons, the avenging furies, which, in this


life, haunt the guilty, which allow them neither quiet nor


repose, which often drive them to despair and distraction, from


which no assurance of secrecy can protect them, from which no


principles of irreligion can entirely deliver them, and from


which nothing can free them but the vilest and most abject of all


states, a complete insensibility to honour and infamy, to vice


and virtue. Men of the most detestable characters, who, in the


execution of the most dreadful crimes, had taken their measures


so coolly as to avoid even the suspicion of guilt, have sometimes


been driven, by the horror of their situation, to discover, of


their own accord, what no human sagacity could ever have


investigated. By acknowledging their guilt, by submitting


themselves to the resentment of their offended fellow-citizens,


and, by thus satiating that vengeance of which they were sensible


that they had become the proper objects, they hoped, by their


death to reconcile themselves, at least in their own imagination,


to the natural sentiments of mankind; to be able to consider


themselves as less worthy of hatred and resentment; to atone, in


some measure, for their crimes, and by thus becoming the objects,


rather of compassion than of horror, if possible to die in peace


and with the forgiveness of all their fellow-creatures. Compared


to what they felt before the discovery, even the thought of this,


it seems, was happiness.


    In such cases, the horror of blame-worthiness seems, even in


persons who cannot be suspected of any extraordinary delicacy or


sensibility of character, completely to conquer the dread of


blame. In order to allay that horror, in order to pacify, in some


degree, the remorse of their own consciences, they voluntarily


submitted themselves both to the reproach and to the punishment


which they knew were due to their crimes, but which, at the same


time, they might easily have avoided.


    They are the most frivolous and superficial of mankind only


who can be much delighted with that praise which they themselves


know to be altogether unmerited. Unmerited reproach, however, is


frequently capable of mortifying very severely even men of more


than ordinary constancy. Men of the most ordinary constancy,


indeed, easily learn to despise those foolish tales which are so


frequently circulated in society, and which, from their own


absurdity and falsehood, never fail to die away in the course of


a few weeks, or of a few days. But an innocent man, though of


more than ordinary constancy, is often, not only shocked, but


most severely mortified by the serious, though false, imputation


of a crime; especially when that imputation happens unfortunately


to be supported by some circumstances which give it an air of


probability. He is humbled to find that any body should think so


meanly of his character as to suppose him capable of being guilty


of it. Though perfectly conscious of his own innocence, the very


imputation seems often, even in his own imagination, to throw a


shadow of disgrace and dishonour upon his character. His just


indignation, too, at so very gross an injury, which, however, it


may frequently be improper, and sometimes even impossible to


revenge, is itself a very painful sensation. There is no greater


tormentor of the human breast than violent resentment which


cannot be gratified. An innocent man, brought to the scaffold by


the false imputation of an infamous or odious crime, suffers the


most cruel misfortune which it is possible for innocence to


suffer. The agony of his mind may, in this case, frequently be


greater than that of those who suffer for the like crimes, of


which they have been actually guilty. Profligate criminals, such


as common thieves and highwaymen, have frequently little sense of


the baseness of their own conduct, and consequently no remorse.


Without troubling themselves about the justice or injustice of


the punishment, they have always been accustomed to look upon the


gibbet as a lot very likely to fall to them. When it does fall to


them, therefore, they consider themselves only as not quite so


lucky as some of their companions, and submit to their fortune,


without any other uneasiness than what may arise from the fear of


death; a fear which, even by such worthless wretches, we


frequently see, can be so easily, and so very completely


conquered. The innocent man, on the contrary, over and above the


uneasiness which this fear may occasion, is tormented by his own


indignation at the injustice which has been done to him. He is


struck with horror at the thoughts of the infamy which the


punishment may shed upon his memory, and foresees, with the most


exquisite anguish, that he is hereafter to be remembered by his


dearest friends and relations, not with regret and affection, but


with shame, and even with horror for his supposed disgraceful


conduct: and the shades of death appear to close round him with a


darker and more melancholy gloom than naturally belongs to them.


Such fatal accidents, for the tranquillity of mankind, it is to


be hoped, happen very rarely in any country; but they happen


sometimes in all countries, even in those where justice is in


general very well administered. The unfortunate Calas, a man of


much more than ordinary constancy (broke upon the wheel and burnt


at Tholouse for the supposed murder of his own son, of which he


was perfectly innocent), seemed, with his last breath, to


deprecate, not so much the cruelty of the punishment, as the


disgrace which the imputation might bring upon his memory. After


he had been broke, and was just going to be thrown into the fire,


the monk, who attended the execution, exhorted him to confess the


crime for which he had been condemned. My Father, said Calas, can


you yourself bring yourself to believe that I am guilty?


    To persons in such unfortunate circumstances, that humble


philosophy which confines its views to this life, can afford,


perhaps, but little consolation. Every thing that could render


either life or death respectable is taken from them. They are


condemned to death and to everlasting infamy. Religion can alone


afford them any effectual comfort. She alone can tell them, that


it is of little importance what man may think of their conduct,


while the all-seeing Judge of the world approves of it. She alone


can present to them the view of another world; a world of more


candour, humanity, and justice, than the present; where their


innocence is in due time to be declared, and their virtue to be


finally rewarded: and the same great principle which can alone


strike terror into triumphant vice, affords the only effectual


consolation to disgraced and insulted innocence.


    In smaller offences, as well as in greater crimes, it


frequently happens that a person of sensibility is much more hurt


by the unjust imputation, than the real criminal is by the actual


guilt. A woman of gallantry laughs even at the well-founded


surmises which are circulated concerning her conduct. The worst


founded surmise of the same kind is a mortal stab to an innocent


virgin. The person who is deliberately guilty of a disgraceful


action, we may lay it down, I believe, as a general rule, can


seldom have much sense of the disgrace; and the person who is


habitually guilty of it, can scarce ever have any.


    When every man, even of middling understanding, so readily


despises unmerited applause, how it comes to pass that unmerited


reproach should often be capable of mortifying so severely men of


the soundest and best judgment, may, perhaps, deserve some


consideration.


    Pain, I have already had occasion to observe, is, in almost


all cases, a more pungent sensation than the opposite and


correspondent pleasure. The one, almost always, depresses us much


more below the ordinary, or what may be called the natural state


of our happiness, than the other ever raises us above it. A man


of sensibility is apt to be more humiliated by just censure than


he is ever elevated by just applause. Unmerited applause a wise


man rejects with contempt upon all occasions; but he often feels


very severely the injustice of unmerited censure. By suffering


himself to be applauded for what he has not performed, by


assuming a merit which does not belong to him, he feels that he


is guilty of a mean falsehood, and deserves, not the admiration,


but the contempt of those very persons who, by mistake, had been


led to admire him. It may, perhaps, give him some well-founded


pleasure to find that he has been, by many people, thought


capable of performing what he did not perform. But, though he may


be obliged to his friends for their good opinion, he would think


himself guilty of the greatest baseness if he did not immediately


undeceive them. It gives him little pleasure to look upon himself


in the light in which other people actually look upon him, when


he is conscious that, if they knew the truth, they would look


upon him in a very different light. A weak man, however, is often


much delighted with viewing himself in this false and delusive


light. He assumes the merit of every laudable action that is


ascribed to him, and pretends to that of many which nobody ever


thought of ascribing to him. He pretends to have done what he


never did, to have written what another wrote, to have invented


what another discovered; and is led into all the miserable vices


of plagiarism and common lying. But though no man of middling


good sense can derive much pleasure from the imputation of a


laudable action which he never performed, yet a wise man may


suffer great pain from the serious imputation of a crime which he


never committed. Nature, in this case, has rendered the pain, not


only more pungent than the opposite and correspondent pleasure,


but she has rendered it so in a much greater than the ordinary


degree. A denial rids a man at once of the foolish and ridiculous


pleasure; but it will not always rid him of the pain. When he


refuses the merit which is ascribed to him, nobody doubts his


veracity. It may be doubted when he denies the crime which he is


accused of. He is at once enraged at the falsehood of the


imputation, and mortified to find that any credit should be given


to it. He feels that his character is not sufficient to protect


him. He feels that his brethren, far from looking upon him in


that light in which he anxiously desires to be viewed by them,


think him capable of being guilty of what he is accused of. He


knows perfectly that he has not been guilty. He knows perfectly


what he has done; but, perhaps, scarce any man can know perfectly


what he himself is capable of doing. What the peculiar


constitution of his own mind may or may not admit of, is,


perhaps, more or less a matter of doubt to every man. The trust


and good opinion of his friends and neighbours, tends more than


any thing to relieve him from this most disagreeable doubt; their


distrust and unfavourable opinion to increase it. He may think


himself very confident that their unfavourable judgment is wrong:


but this confidence can seldom be so great as to hinder that


judgment from making some impression upon him; and the greater


his sensibility, the greater his delicacy, the greater his worth


in short, this impression is likely to be the greater.


    The agreement or disagreement both of the sentiments and


judgments of other people with our own, is, in all cases, it must


be observed, of more or less importance to us, exactly in


proportion as we ourselves are more or less uncertain about the


propriety of our own sentiments, about the accuracy of our own


judgments.


    A man of sensibility may sometimes feel great uneasiness lest


he should have yielded too much even to what may be called an


honourable passion; to his just indignation, perhaps, at the


injury which may have been done either to himself or to his


friend. He is anxiously afraid lest, meaning only to act with


spirit, and to do justice, he may, from the too great vehemence


of his emotion, have done a real injury to some other person;


who, though not innocent, may not have been altogether so guilty


as he at first apprehended. The opinion of other people becomes,


in this case, of the utmost importance to him. Their approbation


is the most healing balsam; their disapprobation, the bitterest


and most tormenting poison that can be poured into his uneasy


mind. When he is perfectly satisfied with every part of his own


conduct, the judgment of other people is often of less importance


to him.


    There are some very noble and beautiful arts, in which the


degree of excellence can be determined only by a certain nicety


of taste, of which the decisions, however, appear always, in some


measure, uncertain. There are others, in which the success


admits, either of clear demonstration, or very satisfactory


proof. Among the candidates for excellence in those different


arts, the anxiety about the public opinion is always much greater


in the former than in the latter.


    The beauty of poetry is a matter of such nicety, that a young


beginner can scarce ever be certain that he has attained it.


Nothing delights him so much, therefore, as the favourable


judgments of his friends and of the public; and nothing mortifies


him so severely as the contrary. The one establishes, the other


shakes, the good opinion which he is anxious to entertain


concerning his own performances. Experience and success may in


time give him a little more confidence in his own judgment. He is


at all times, however, liable to be most severely mortified by


the unfavourable judgments of the public. Racine was so disgusted


by the indifferent success of his Phaedra, the finest tragedy,


perhaps, that is extant in any language, that, though in the


vigour of his life, and at the height of his abilities, he


resolved to write no more for the stage. That great poet used


frequently to tell his son, that the most paltry and impertinent


criticism had always given him more pain, than the highest and


justest eulogy had ever given him pleasure. The extreme


sensibility of Voltaire to the slightest censure of the same kind


is well known to every body. The Dunciad of Mr Pope is an


everlasting monument of how much the most correct, as well as the


most elegant and harmonious of all the English poets, had been


hurt by the criticisms of the lowest and most contemptible


authors. Gray (who joins to the sublimity of Milton the elegance


and harmony of Pope, and to whom nothing is wanting to render


him, perhaps, the first poet in the English language, but to have


written a little more) is said to have been so much hurt, by a


foolish and impertinent parody of two of his finest odes, that he


never afterwards attempted any considerable work. Those men of


letters who value themselves upon what is called fine writing in


prose, approach somewhat to the sensibility of poets.


    Mathematicians, on the contrary, who may have the most


perfect assurance, both of the truth and of the importance of


their discoveries, are frequently very indifferent about the


reception which they may meet with from the public. The two


greatest mathematicians that I ever have had the honour to be


known to, and, I believe, the two greatest that have lived in my


time, Dr Robert Simpson of Glasgow, and Dr Matthew Stewart of


Edinburgh, never seemed to feel even the slightest uneasiness


from the neglect with which the ignorance of the public received


some of their most valuable works. The great work of Sir Isaac


Newton, his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, I have


been told, was for several years neglected by the public. The


tranquillity of that great man, it is probable, never suffered,


upon that account, the interruption of a single quarter of an


hour. Natural philosophers, in their independency upon the public


opinion, approach nearly to mathematicians, and, in their


judgments concerning the merit of their own discoveries and


observations, enjoy some degree of the same security and


tranquillity.


    The morals of those different classes of men of letters are,


perhaps, sometimes somewhat affected by this very great


difference in their situation with regard to the public.


    Mathematicians and natural philosophers, from their


independency upon the public opinion, have little temptation to


form themselves into factions and cabals, either for the support


of their own reputation, or for the depression of that of their


rivals. They are almost always men of the most amiable simplicity


of manners, who live in good harmony with one another, are the


friends of one another's reputation, enter into no intrigue in


order to secure the public applause, but are pleased when their


works are approved of, without being either much vexed or very


angry when they are neglected.


    It is not always the same case with poets, or with those who


value themselves upon what is called fine writing. They are very


apt to divide themselves into a sort of literary factions; each


cabal being often avowedly, and almost always secretly, the


mortal enemy of the reputation of every other, and employing all


the mean arts of intrigue and solicitation to preoccupy the


public opinion in favour of the works of its own members, and


against those of its enemies and rivals. In France, Despreaux and


Racine did not think it below them to set themselves at the head


of a literary cabal, in order to depress the reputation, first of


Quinault and Perreault, and afterwards of Fontenelle and La


Motte, and even to treat the good La Fontaine with a species of


most disrespectful kindness. In England, the amiable Mr Addison


did not think it unworthy of his gentle and modest character to


set himself at the head of a little cabal of the same kind, in


order to keep down the rising reputation of Mr Pope. Mr


Fontenelle, in writing the lives and characters of the members of


the academy of sciences, a society of mathematicians and natural


philosophers, has frequent opportunities of celebrating the


amiable simplicity of their manners; a quality which, he


observes, was so universal among them as to be characteristical,


rather of that whole class of men of letters, than of any


individual Mr D'Alembert, in writing the lives and characters of


the members of the French academy, a society of poets and fine


writers, or of those who are supposed to be such, seems not to


have had such frequent opportunities of making any remark of this


kind, and nowhere pretends to represent this amiable quality as


characteristical of that class of men of letters whom he


celebrates.


    Our uncertainty concerning our own merit, and our anxiety to


think favourably of it, should together naturally enough make us


desirous to know the opinion of other people concerning it; to be


more than ordinarily elevated when that opinion is favourable,


and to be more than ordinarily mortified when it is otherwise:


but they should not make us desirous either of obtaining the


favourable, or of avoiding the unfavourable opinion, by intrigue


and cabal. When a man has bribed all the judges, the most


unanimous decision of the court, though it may gain him his


law-suit, cannot give him any assurance that he was in the right:


and had he carried on his lawsuit merely to satisfy himself that


he was in the right, he never would have bribed the judges. But


though he wished to find himself in the right, he wished likewise


to gain his law-suit; and therefore he bribed the judges. If


praise were of no consequence to us, but as a proof of our own


praiseworthiness, we never should endeavour to obtain it by


unfair means. But, though to wise men it is, at least in doubtful


cases, of principal consequence upon this account; it is likewise


of some consequence upon its own account: and therefore (we


cannot, indeed, upon such occasions, call them wise men, but) men


very much above the common level have sometimes attempted both to


obtain praise, and to avoid blame, by very unfair means.


    Praise and blame express what actually are; praise-worthiness


and blameworthiness, what naturally ought to be the sentiments of


other people with regard to our character and conduct. The love


of praise is the desire of obtaining the favourable sentiments of


our brethren. The love of praiseworthiness is the desire of


rendering ourselves the proper objects of those sentiments. So


far those two principles resemble and are akin to one another.


The like affinity and resemblance take place between the dread of


blame and that of blame-worthiness.


    The man who desires to do, or who actually does, a


praise-worthy action, may likewise desire the praise which is due


to it, and sometimes, perhaps, more than is due to it. The two


principles are in this case blended together. How far his conduct


may have been influenced by the one, and how far by the other,


may frequently be unknown even to himself. It must almost always


be so to other people. They who are disposed to lessen the merit


of his conduct, impute it chiefly or altogether to the mere love


of praise, or to what they call mere vanity. They who are


disposed to think more favourably of it, impute it chiefly or


altogether to the love of praise-worthiness; to the love of what


is really honourable and noble in human conduct; to the desire,


not merely of obtaining, but of deserving the approbation and


applause of his brethren. The imagination of the spectator throws


upon it either the one colour or the other, according either to


his habits of thinking, or to the favour or dislike which he may


bear to the person whose conduct he is considering.


    Some splenetic philosophers, in judging of human nature, have


done as peevish individuals are apt to do in judging of the


conduct of one another, and have imputed to the love of praise,


or to what they call vanity , every action which ought to be


ascribed to that of praise-worthiness. I shall hereafter have


occasion to give an account of some of their systems, and shall


not at present stop to examine them.


    Very few men can be satisfied with their own private


consciousness that they have attained those qualities, or


performed those actions, which they admire and think


praise-worthy in other people; unless it is, at the same time,


generally acknowledged that they possess the one, or have


performed the other; or, in other words, unless they have


actually obtained that praise which they think due both to the


one and to the other. In this respect, however, men differ


considerably from one another. Some seem indifferent about the


praise, when, in their own minds, they are perfectly satisfied


that they have attained the praise-worthiness. Others appear much


less anxious about the praise-worthiness than about the praise.


    No man can be completely, or even tolerably satisfied, with


having avoided every thing blame-worthy in his conduct; unless he


has likewise avoided the blame or the reproach. A wise man may


frequently neglect praise, even when he has best deserved it;


but, in all matters of serious consequence, he will most


carefully endeavour so to regulate his conduct as to avoid, not


only blame-worthiness, but, as much as possible, every probable


imputation of blame. He will never, indeed, avoid blame by doing


any thing which he judges blame-worthy; by omitting any part of


his duty, or by neglecting any opportunity of doing any thing


which he judges to be really and greatly praise-worthy. But, with


these modifications, he will most anxiously and carefully avoid


it. To show much anxiety about praise, even for praise-worthy


actions, is seldom a mark of great wisdom, but generally of some


degree of weakness. But, in being anxious to avoid the shadow of


blame or reproach, there may be no weakness, but frequently the


most praise-worthy prudence.


    'Many people,' says Cicero, 'despise glory, who are yet most


severely mortified by unjust reproach; and that most


inconsistently.' This inconsistency, however, seems to be founded


in the unalterable principles of human nature.


    The all-wise Author of Nature has, in this manner, taught man


to respect the sentiments and judgments of his brethren; to be


more or less pleased when they approve of his conduct, and to be


more or less hurt when they disapprove of it. He has made man, if


I may say so, the immediate judge of mankind; and has, in this


respect, as in many others, created him after his own image, and


appointed him his vicegerent upon earth, to superintend the


behaviour of his brethren. They are taught by nature, to


acknowledge that power and jurisdiction which has thus been


conferred upon him, to be more or less humbled and mortified when


they have incurred his censure, and to be more or less elated


when they have obtained his applause.


    But though man has, in this manner, been rendered the


immediate judge of mankind, he has been rendered so only in the


first instance; and an appeal lies from his sentence to a much


higher tribunal, to the tribunal of their own consciences, to


that of the supposed impartial and well-informed spectator, to


that of the man within the breast, the great judge and arbiter of


their conduct. The jurisdictions of those two tribunals are


founded upon principles which, though in some respects resembling


and akin, are, however, in reality different and distinct. The


jurisdiction of the man without, is founded altogether in the


desire of actual praise, and in the aversion to actual blame. The


jurisdiction of the man within, is founded altogether in the


desire of praise-worthiness, and in the aversion to


blame-worthiness; in the desire of possessing those qualities,


and performing those actions, which we love and admire in other


people; and in the dread of possessing those qualities, and


performing those actions, which we hate and despise in other


people. If the man without should applaud us, either for actions


which we have not performed, or for motives which had no


influence upon us; the man within can immediately humble that


pride and elevation of mind which such groundless acclamations


might otherwise occasion, by telling us, that as we know that we


do not deserve them, we render ourselves despicable by accepting


them. If, on the contrary, the man without should reproach us,


either for actions which we never performed, or for motives which


had no influence upon those which we may have performed; the man


within may immediately correct this false judgment, and assure


us, that we are by no means the proper objects of that censure


which has so unjustly been bestowed upon us. But in this and in


some other cases, the man within seems sometimes, as it were,


astonished and confounded by the vehemence and clamour of the man


without. The violence and loudness, with which blame is sometimes


poured out upon us, seems to stupify and benumb our natural sense


of praise-worthiness and blame-worthiness; and the judgments of


the man within, though not, perhaps, absolutely altered or


perverted, are, however, so much shaken in the steadiness and


firmness of their decision, that their natural effect, in


securing the tranquillity of the mind, is frequently in a great


measure destroyed. We scarce dare to absolve ourselves, when all


our brethren appear loudly to condemn us. The supposed impartial


spectator of our conduct seems to give his opinion in our favour


with fear and hesitation; when that of all the real spectators,


when that of all those with whose eyes and from whose station he


endeavours to consider it, is unanimously and violently against


us. In such cases, this demigod within the breast appears, like


the demigods of the poets, though partly of immortal, yet partly


too of mortal extraction. When his judgments are steadily and


firmly directed by the sense of praiseworthiness and


blame-worthiness, he seems to act suitably to his divine


extraction: But when he suffers himself to be astonished and


confounded by the judgments of ignorant and weak man, he


discovers his connexion with mortality, and appears to act


suitably, rather to the human, than to the divine, part of his


origin.


    In such cases, the only effectual consolation of humbled and


afflicted man lies in an appeal to a still higher tribunal, to


that of the all-seeing Judge of the world, whose eye can never be


deceived, and whose judgments can never be perverted. A firm


confidence in the unerring rectitude of this great tribunal,


before which his innocence is in due time to be declared, and his


virtue to be finally rewarded, can alone support him under the


weakness and despondency of his own mind, under the perturbation


and astonishment of the man within the breast, whom nature has


set up as, in this life, the great guardian, not only of his


innocence, but of his tranquillity. Our happiness in this life is


thus, upon many occasions, dependent upon the humble hope and


expectation of a life to come: a hope and expectation deeply


rooted in human nature; which can alone support its lofty ideas


of its own dignity; can alone illumine the dreary prospect of its


continually approaching mortality, and maintain its cheerfulness


under all the heaviest calamities to which, from the disorders of


this life, it may sometimes be exposed. That there is a world to


come, where exact justice will be done to every man, where every


man will be ranked with those who, in the moral and intellectual


qualities, are really his equals; where the owner of those humble


talents and virtues which, from being depressed by fortune, had,


in this life, no opportunity of displaying themselves; which were


unknown, not only to the public, but which he himself could


scarce be sure that he possessed, and for which even the man


within the breast could scarce venture to afford him any distinct


and clear testimony; where that modest, silent, and unknown


merit, will be placed upon a level, and sometimes above those


who, in this world, had enjoyed the highest reputation, and who,


from the advantage of their situation, had been enabled to


perform the most splendid and dazzling actions; is a doctrine, in


every respect so venerable, so comfortable to the weakness, so


flattering to the grandeur of human nature, that the virtuous man


who has the misfortune to doubt of it, cannot possibly avoid


wishing most earnestly and anxiously to believe it. It could


never have been exposed to the derision of the scoffer, had not


the distributions of rewards and punishments, which some of its


most zealous assertors have taught us was to be made in that


world to come, been too frequently in direct opposition to all


our moral sentiments.


    That the assiduous courtier is often more favoured than the


faithful and active servant; that attendance and adulation are


often shorter and surer roads to preferment than merit or


service; and that a campaign at Versailles or St James's is often


worth two either in Germany or Flanders, is a complaint which we


have all heard from many a venerable, but discontented, old


officer. But what is considered as the greatest reproach even to


the weakness of earthly sovereigns, has been ascribed, as an act


of justice, to divine perfection; and the duties of devotion, the


public and private worship of the Deity, have been represented,


even by men of virtue and abilities, as the sole virtues which


can either entitle to reward or exempt from punishment in the


life to come. They were the virtues, perhaps, most suitable to


their station, and in which they themselves chiefly excelled; and


we are all naturally disposed to over-rate the excellencies of


our own characters. In the discourse which the eloquent and


philosophical Massillon pronounced, on giving his benediction to


the standards of the regiment of Catinat, there is the following


address to the officers: 'What is most deplorable in your


situation, Gentlemen, is, that in a life hard and painful, in


which the services and the duties sometimes go beyond the rigour


and severity. of the most austere cloisters; you suffer always in


vain for the life to come, and frequently even for this life.


Alas! the solitary monk in his cell, obliged to mortify the flesh


and to subject it to the spirit, is supported by the hope of an


assured recompence, and by the secret unction of that grace which


softens the yoke of the Lord. But you, on the bed of death, can


you dare to represent to Him your fatigues and the daily


hardships of your employment? can you dare to solicit Him for any


recompence? and in all the exertions that you have made, in all


the violences that you have done to yourselves, what is there


that He ought to place to His own account? The best days of your


life, however, have been sacrificed to your profession, and ten


years service has more worn out your body, than would, perhaps,


have done a whole life of repentance and mortification. Alas! my


brother, one single day of those sufferings, consecrated to the


Lord, would, perhaps, have obtained you an eternal happiness. One


single action, painful to nature, and offered up to Him, would,


perhaps, have secured to you the inheritance of the Saints. And


you have done all this, and in vain, for this world.'


    To compare, in this manner, the futile mortifications of a


monastery, to the ennobling hardships and hazards of war; to


suppose that one day, or one hour, employed in the former should,


in the eye of the great Judge of the world, have more merit than


a whole life spent honourably in the latter, is surely contrary


to all our moral sentiments; to all the principles by which


nature has taught us to regulate our contempt or admiration. It


is this spirit, however, which, while it has reserved the


celestial regions for monks and friars, or for those whose


conduct and conversation resembled those of monks and friars, has


condemned to the infernal all the heroes, all the statesmen and


lawgivers, all the poets and philosophers of former ages; all


those who have invented, improved, or excelled in the arts which


contribute to the subsistence, to the conveniency, or to the


ornament of human life; all the great protectors, instructors,


and benefactors of mankind; all those to whom our natural sense


of praise-worthiness forces us to ascribe the highest merit and


most exalted virtue. Can we wonder that so strange an application


of this most respectable doctrine should sometimes have exposed


it to contempt and derision; with those at least who had


themselves, perhaps, no great taste or turn for the devout and


contemplative virtues?(1*)





Chap. III





Of the Influences and Authority of Conscience





    But though the approbation of his own conscience can scarce,


upon some extraordinary occasions, content the weakness of man;


though the testimony of the supposed impartial spectator, of the


great inmate of the breast, cannot always alone support him; yet


the influence and authority of this principle is, upon all


occasions, very great; and it is only by consulting this judge


within, that we can ever see what relates to ourselves in its


proper shape and dimensions; or that we can ever make any proper


comparison between our own interests and those of other people.


    As to the eye of the body, objects appear great or small, not


so much according to their real dimensions, as according to the


nearness or distance of their situation; so do they likewise to


what may be called the natural eye of the mind: and we remedy the


defects of both these organs pretty much in the same manner. In


my present situation an immense landscape of lawns, and woods,


and distant mountains, seems to do no more than cover the little


window which I write by and to be out of all proportion less than


the chamber in which I am sitting. I can form a just comparison


between those great objects and the little objects around me, in


no other way, than by transporting myself, at least in fancy, to


a different station, from whence I can survey both at nearly


equal distances, and thereby form some judgment of their real


proportions. Habit and experience have taught me to do this so


easily and so readily, that I am scarce sensible that I do it;


and a man must be, in some measure, acquainted with the


philosophy of vision, before he can be thoroughly convinced, how


little those distant objects would appear to the eye, if the


imagination, from a knowledge of their real magnitudes, did not


swell and dilate them.


    In the same manner, to the selfish and original passions of


human nature, the loss or gain of a very small interest of our


own, appears to be of vastly more importance, excites a much more


passionate joy or sorrow, a much more ardent desire or aversion,


than the greatest concern of another with whom we have no


particular connexion. His interests, as long as they are surveyed


from this station, can never be put into the balance with our


own, can never restrain us from doing. whatever may tend to


promote our own, how ruinous soever to him. Before we can make


any proper comparison of those opposite interests, we must change


our position. We must view them, neither from our own place nor


yet from his, neither with our own eyes nor yet with his, but


from the place and with the eyes of a third person, who has no


particular connexion with either, and who judges with


impartiality between us. Here, too, habit and experience have


taught us to do this so easily and so readily, that we are scarce


sensible that we do it; and it requires, in this case too, some


degree of reflection, and even of philosophy, to convince us, how


little interest we should take in the greatest concerns of our


neighbour, how little we should be affected by whatever relates


to him, if the sense of propriety and justice did not correct the


otherwise natural inequality of our sentiments.


    Let us suppose that the great empire of China, with all its


myriads of inhabitants, was suddenly swallowed up by an


earthquake, and let us consider how a man of humanity in Europe,


who had no sort of connexion with that part of the world, would


be affected upon receiving intelligence of this dreadful


calamity. He would, I imagine, first of all, express very


strongly his sorrow for the misfortune of that unhappy people, he


would make many melancholy reflections upon the precariousness of


human life, and the vanity of all the labours of man, which could


thus be annihilated in a moment. He would too, perhaps, if he was


a man of speculation, enter into many reasonings concerning the


effects which this disaster might produce upon the commerce of


Europe, and the trade and business of the world in general. And


when all this fine philosophy was over, when all these humane


sentiments had been once fairly expressed, he would pursue his


business or his pleasure, take his repose or his diversion, with


the same ease and tranquillity, as if no such accident had


happened. The most frivolous disaster which could befal himself


would occasion a more real disturbance. If he was to lose his


little finger to-morrow, he would not sleep to-night; but,


provided he never saw them, he will snore with the most profound


security over the ruin of a hundred millions of his brethren, and


the destruction of that immense multitude seems plainly an object


less interesting to him, than this paltry misfortune of his own.


To prevent, therefore, this paltry misfortune to himself, would a


man of humanity be willing to sacrifice the lives of a hundred


millions of his brethren, provided he had never seen them? Human


nature startles with horror at the thought, and the world, in its


greatest depravity and corruption, never produced such a villain


as could be capable of entertaining it. But what makes this


difference? When our passive feelings are almost always so sordid


and so selfish, how comes it that our active principles should


often be so generous and so noble? When we are always so much


more deeply affected by whatever concerns ourselves, than by


whatever concerns other men; what is it which prompts the


generous, upon all occasions, and the mean upon many, to


sacrifice their own interests to the greater interests of others?


It is not the soft power of humanity, it is not that feeble spark


of benevolence which Nature has lighted up in the human heart,


that is thus capable of counteracting the strongest impulses of


self-love. It is a stronger power, a more forcible motive, which


exerts itself upon such occasions. It is reason, principle,


conscience, the inhabitant of the breast, the man within, the


great judge and arbiter of our conduct. It is he who, whenever we


are about to act so as to affect the happiness of others, calls


to us, with a voice capable of astonishing the most presumptuous


of our passions, that we are but one of the multitude, in no


respect better than any other in it; and that when we prefer


ourselves so shamefully and so blindly to others, we become the


proper objects of resentment, abhorrence, and execration. It is


from him only that we learn the real littleness of ourselves, and


of whatever relates to ourselves, and the natural


misrepresentations of self-love can be corrected only by the eye


of this impartial spectator. It is he who shows us the propriety


of generosity and the deformity of injustice; the propriety of


resigning the greatest interests of our own, for the yet greater


interests of others, and the deformity of doing the smallest


injury to another, in order to obtain the greatest benefit to


ourselves. It is not the love of our neighbour, it is not the


love of mankind, which upon many occasions prompts us to the


practice of those divine virtues. It is a stronger love, a more


powerful affection, which generally takes place upon such


occasions; the love of what is honourable and noble, of the


grandeur, and dignity, and superiority of our own characters.


    When the happiness or misery of others depends in any respect


upon our conduct, we dare not, as self-love might suggest to us,


prefer the interest of one to that of many. The man within


immediately calls to us, that we value ourselves too much and


other people too little, and that, by doing so, we render


ourselves the proper object of the contempt and indignation of


our brethren. Neither is this sentiment confined to men of


extraordinary magnanimity and virtue. It is deeply impressed upon


every tolerably good soldier, who feels that he would become the


scorn of his companions, if he could be supposed capable of


shrinking from danger, or of hesitating, either to expose or to


throw away his life, when the good of the service required it.


    One individual must never prefer himself so much even to any


other individual, as to hurt or injure that other, in order to


benefit himself, though the benefit to the one should be much


greater than the hurt or injury to the other. The poor man must


neither defraud nor steal from the rich, though the acquisition


might be much more beneficial to the one than the loss could be


hurtful to the other. The man within immediately calls to him, in


this case too, that he is no better than his neighbour, and that


by this unjust preference he renders himself the proper object of


the contempt and indignation of mankind; as well as of the


punishment which that contempt and indignation must naturally


dispose them to inflict, for having thus violated one of those


sacred rules, upon the tolerable observation of which depend the


whole security and peace of human society. There is no commonly


honest man who does not more dread the inward disgrace of such an


action, the indelible stain which it would for ever stamp upon


his own mind, than the greatest external calamity which, without


any fault of his own, could possibly befal him; and who does not


inwardly feel the truth of that great stoical maxim, that for one


man to deprive another unjustly of any thing, or unjustly to


promote his own advantage by the loss or disadvantage of another,


is more contrary to nature, than death, than poverty, than pain,


than all the misfortunes which can affect him, either in his


body, or in his external circumstances.


    When the happiness or misery of others, indeed, in no respect


depends upon our conduct, when our interests are altogether


separated and detached from theirs, so that there is neither


connexion nor competition between them, we do not always think it


so necessary to restrain, either our natural and, perhaps,


improper anxiety about our own affairs, or our natural and,


perhaps, equally improper indifference about those of other men.


The most vulgar education teaches us to act, upon all important


occasions, with some sort of impartiality between ourselves and


others, and even the ordinary commerce of the world is capable of


adjusting our active principles to some degree of propriety. But


it is the most artificial and refined education only, it has been


said, which can correct the inequalities of our passive feelings;


and we must for this purpose, it has been pretended, have


recourse to the severest, as well as to the profoundest


philosophy.


    Two different sets of philosophers have attempted to teach us


this hardest of all the lessons of morality. One set have


laboured to increase our sensibility to the interests of others;


another, to diminish that to our own. The first would have us


feel for others as we naturally feel for ourselves. The second


would have us feel for ourselves as we naturally feel for others.


Both, perhaps, have carried their doctrines a good deal beyond


the just standard of nature and propriety.


    The first are those whining and melancholy moralists, who are


perpetually reproaching us with our happiness, while so many of


our brethren are in misery, (2*) who regard as impious the


natural joy of prosperity, which does not think of the many


wretches that are at every instant labouring under all sorts of


calamities, in the languor of poverty, in the agony of disease,


in the horrors of death, under the insults and oppression of


their enemies. Commiseration for those miseries which we never


saw, which we never heard of, but which we may be assured are at


all times infesting such numbers of our fellow-creatures, ought,


they think, to damp the pleasures of the fortunate, and to render


a certain melancholy dejection habitual to all men. But first of


all, this extreme sympathy with misfortunes which we know nothing


about, seems altogether absurd and unreasonable. Take the whole


earth at an average, for one man who suffers pain or misery, you


will find twenty in prosperity and joy, or at least in tolerable


circumstances. No reason, surely, can be assigned why we should


rather weep with the one than rejoice with the twenty. This


artificial commiseration, besides, is not only absurd, but seems


altogether unattainable; and those who affect this character have


commonly nothing but a certain affected and sentimental sadness,


which, without reaching the heart, serves only to render the


countenance and conversation impertinently dismal and


disagreeable. And last of all, this disposition of mind, though


it could be attained, would be perfectly useless, and could serve


no other purpose than to render miserable the person who


possessed it. Whatever interest we take in the fortune of those


with whom we have no acquaintance or connexion, and who are


placed altogether out of the sphere of our activity, can produce


only anxiety to ourselves, without any manner of advantage to


them. To what purpose should we trouble ourselves about the world


in the moon? All men, even those at the greatest distance, are no


doubt entitled to our good wishes, and our good wishes we


naturally give them. But if, notwithstanding, they should be


unfortunate, to give ourselves any anxiety upon that account,


seems to be no part of our duty. That we should be but little


interested, therefore, in the fortune of those whom we can


neither serve nor hurt, and who are in every respect so very


remote from us, seems wisely ordered by Nature; and if it were


possible to alter in this respect the original constitution of


our frame, we could yet gain nothing by the change.


    It is never objected to us that we have too little


fellow-feeling with the joy of success. Wherever envy does not


prevent it, the favour which we bear to prosperity is rather apt


to be too great; and the same moralists who blame us for want of


sufficient sympathy with the miserable, reproach us for the


levity with which we are too apt to admire and almost to worship


the fortunate, the powerful, and the rich.


    Among the moralists who endeavour to correct the natural


inequality of our passive feelings by diminishing our sensibility


to what peculiarly concerns ourselves, we may count all the


ancient sects of philosophers, but particularly the ancient


Stoics. Man, according to the Stoics, ought to regard himself,


not as something separated and detached, but as a citizen of the


world, a member of the vast commonwealth of nature. To the


interest of this great community, he ought at all times to be


willing that his own little interest should be sacrificed.


Whatever concerns himself, ought to affect him no more than


whatever concerns any other equally important part of this


immense system. We should view ourselves, not in the light in


which our own selfish passions are apt to place us, but in the


light in which any other citizen of the world would view us. What


befalls ourselves we should regard as what befalls our neighbour,


or, what comes to the same thing, as our neighbour regards what


befalls us. 'When our neighbour,' says Epictetus, 'loses his


wife, or his son, there is nobody who is not sensible that this


is a human calamity, a natural event altogether according to the


ordinary course of things; but, when the same thing happens to


ourselves, then we cry out, as if we had suffered the most


dreadful misfortune. We ought, however, to remember how we were


affected when this accident happened to another, and such as we


were in his case, such ought we to be in our own.'


    Those private misfortunes, for which our feelings are apt to


go beyond the bounds of propriety, are of two different kinds.


They are either such as affect us only indirectly, by affecting,


in the first place, some other persons who are particularly dear


to us; such as our parents, our children, our brothers and


sisters, our intimate friends; or they are such as affect


ourselves immediately and directly, either in our body, in our


fortune, or in our reputation; such as pain, sickness,


approaching death, poverty, disgrace, etc.


    In misfortunes of the first kind, our emotions may, no doubt,


go very much beyond what exact propriety will admit of; but they


may likewise fall short of it, and they frequently do so. The man


who should feel no more for the death or distress of his own


father, or son, than for those of any other man's father or son,


would appear neither a good son nor a good father. Such unnatural


indifference, far from exciting our applause, would incur our


highest disapprobation. Of those domestic affections, however,


some are most apt to offend by their excess, and others by their


defect. Nature, for the wisest purposes, has rendered, in most


men, perhaps in all men, parental tenderness a much stronger


affection than filial piety. The continuance and propagation of


the species depend altogether upon the former, and not upon the


latter. In ordinary cases, the existence and preservation of the


child depend altogether upon the care of the parents. Those of


the parents seldom depend upon that of the child. Nature,


therefore, has rendered the former affection so strong, that it


generally requires not to be excited, but to be moderated; and


moralists seldom endeavour to teach us how to indulge, but


generally how to restrain our fondness, our excessive attachment,


the unjust preference which we are disposed to give to our own


children above those of other people. They exhort us, on the


contrary, to an affectionate attention to our parents, and to


make a proper return to them, in their old age, for the kindness


which they had shown to us in our infancy and youth. In the


Decalogue we are commanded to honour our fathers and mothers. No


mention is made of the love of our children. Nature had


sufficiently prepared us for the performance of this latter duty.


Men are seldom accused of affecting to be fonder of their


children than they really are. THey have sometimes been suspected


of displaying their piety to their parents with too much


ostentation. The ostentatious sorrow of widows has, for a like


reason, been suspected of insincerity. We should respect, could


we believe it sincere, even the excess of such kind affections;


and though we might not perfectly approve, we should not severely


condemn it. That it appears praise-worthy, at least in the eyes


of those who affect it, the very affectation is a proof.


    Even the excess of those kind affections which are most apt


to offend by their excess, though it may appear blameable, never


appears odious. We blame the excessive fondness and anxiety of a


parent, as something which may, in the end, prove hurtful to the


child, and which, in the mean time, is excessively inconvenient


to the parent; but we easily pardon it, and never regard it with


hatred and detestation. But the defect of this usually excessive


affection appears always peculiarly odious. The man who appears


to feel nothing for his own children, but who treats them upon


all occasions with unmerited severity and harshness, seems of all


brutes the most detestable. The sense of propriety, so far from


requiring us to eradicate altogether that extraordinary


sensibility, which we naturally feel for the misfortunes of our


nearest connections, is always much more offended by the defect,


than it ever is by the excess of that sensibility. The stoical


apathy is, in such cases, never agreeable, and all the


metaphysical sophisms by which it is supported can seldom serve


any other purpose than to blow up the hard insensibility of a


coxcomb to ten times its native impertinence. The poets and


romance writers, who best paint the refinements and delicacies of


love and friendship, and of all other private and domestic


affections, Racine and Voltaire; Richardson, Maurivaux, and


Riccoboni; are, in such cases, much better instructors than Zeno,


Chrysippus, or Epictetus.


    That moderated sensibility to the misfortunes of others,


which does not disqualify us for the performance of any duty; the


melancholy and affectionate remembrance of our departed friends;


the pang, as Gray says, to secret sorrow dear; are by no means


undelicious sensations. Though they outwardly wear the features


of pain and grief, they are all inwardly stamped with the


ennobling characters of virtue and self-approbation.


    It is otherwise in the misfortunes which affect ourselves


immediately and directly, either in our body, in our fortune, or


in our reputation. The sense of propriety is much more apt to be


offended by the excess, than by the defect of our sensibility,


and there are but very few cases in which we can approach too


near to the stoical apathy and indifference.


    That we have very little fellow-feeling with any of the


passions which take their origin from the body, has already been


observed. That pain which is occasioned by an evident cause; such


as, the cutting or tearing of the flesh; is, perhaps, the


affection of the body with which the spectator feels the most


lively sympathy. The approaching death of his neighbour, too,


seldom fails to affect him a good deal. In both cases, however,


he feels so very little in comparison of what the person


principally concerned feels, that the latter can scarce ever


offend the former by appearing to suffer with too much ease.


    The mere want of fortune, mere poverty, excites little


compassion. Its complaints are too apt to be the objects rather


of contempt than of fellow-feeling. We despise a beggar; and,


though his importunities may extort an alms from us, he is scarce


ever the object of any serious commiseration. The fall from


riches to poverty, as it commonly occasions the most real


distress to the sufferer, so it seldom fails to excite the most


sincere commiseration in the spectator. Though, in the present


state of society, this misfortune can seldom happen without some


misconduct, and some very considerable misconduct too, in the


sufferer; yet he is almost always so much pitied that he is


scarce ever allowed to fall into the lowest state of poverty; but


by the means of his friends, frequently by the indulgence of


those very creditors who have much reason to complain of his


imprudence, is almost always supported in some degree of decent,


though humble, mediocrity. To persons under such misfortunes, we


could, perhaps, easily pardon some degree of weakness; but, at


the same time, they who carry the firmest countenance, who


accommodate themselves with the greatest ease to their new


situation, who seem to feel no humiliation from the change, but


to rest their rank in the society, not upon their fortune, but


upon their character and conduct, are always the most approved


of, and never fail to command our highest and most affectionate


admiration.


    As, of all the external misfortunes which can affect an


innocent man immediately and directly, the undeserved loss of


reputation is certainly the greatest; so a considerable degree of


sensibility to whatever can bring on so great a calamity, does


not always appear ungraceful or disagreeable. We often esteem a


young man the more, when he resents, though with some degree of


violence, any unjust reproach that may have been thrown upon his


character or his honour. The affliction of an innocent young


lady, on account of the groundless surmises which may have been


circulated concerning her conduct, appears often perfectly


amiable. Persons of an advanced age, whom long experience of the


folly and injustice of the world, has taught to pay little


regard, either to its censure or to its applause, neglect and


despise obloquy, and do not even deign to honour its futile


authors with any serious resentment. This indifference, which is


founded altogether on a firm confidence in their own well-tried


and well-established characters, would be disagreeable in young


people, who neither can nor ought to have any such confidence. It


might in them be supposed to forebode, in their advancing years,


a most improper insensibility to real honour and infamy.


    In all other private misfortunes which affect ourselves


immediately and directly, we can very seldom offend by appearing


to be too little affected. We frequently remember our sensibility


to the misfortunes of others with pleasure and satisfaction. We


can seldom remember that to our own, without some degree of shame


and humiliation.


    If we examine the different shades and gradations of weakness


and self-command, as we meet with them in common life, we shall


very easily satisfy ourselves that this control of our passive


feelings must be acquired, not from the abstruse syllogisms of a


quibbling dialectic, but from that great discipline which Nature


has established for the acquisition of this and of every other


virtue; a regard to the sentiments of the real or supposed


spectator of our conduct.


    A very young child has no self-command; but, whatever are its


emotions, whether fear, or grief, or anger, it endeavours always,


by the violence of its outcries, to alarm, as much as it can, the


attention of its nurse, or of its parents. While it remains under


the custody of such partial protectors, its anger is the first


and, perhaps, the only passion which it is taught to moderate. By


noise and threatening they are, for their own ease, often obliged


to frighten it into good temper; and the passion which incites it


to attack, is restrained by that which teaches it to attend to


its own safety. When it is old enough to go to school, or to mix


with its equals, it soon finds that they have no such indulgent


partiality. It naturally wishes to gain their favour, and to


avoid their hatred or contempt. Regard even to its own safety


teaches it to do so; and it soon finds that it can do so in no


other way than by moderating, not only its anger, but all its


other passions, to the degree which its play-fellows and


companions are likely to be pleased with. It thus enters into the


great school of self-command, it studies to be more and more


master of itself, and begins to exercise over its own feelings a


discipline which the practice of the longest life is very seldom


sufficient to bring to complete perfection.


    In all private misfortunes, in pain, in sickness, in sorrow,


the weakest man, when his friend, and still more when a stranger


visits him, is immediately impressed with the view in which they


are likely to look upon his situation. Their view calls off his


attention from his own view; and his breast is, in some measure,


becalmed the moment they come into his presence. This effect is


produced instantaneously and, as it were, mechanically; but, with


a weak man, it is not of long continuance. His own view of his


situation immediately recurs upon him. He abandons himself, as


before, to sighs and tears and lamentations; and endeavours, like


a child that has not yet gone to school, to produce some sort of


harmony between his own grief and the compassion of the


spectator, not by moderating the former, but by importunately


calling upon the latter.


    With a man of a little more firmness, the effect is somewhat


more permanent. He endeavours, as much as he can, to fix his


attention upon the view which the company are likely to take of


his situation. He feels, at the same time, the esteem and


approbation which they naturally conceive for him when he thus


preserves his tranquillity; and, though under the pressure of


some recent and great calamity, appears to feel for himself no


more than what they really feel for him. He approves and applauds


himself by sympathy with their approbation, and the pleasure


which he derives from this sentiment supports and enables him


more easily to continue this generous effort. In most cases he


avoids mentioning his own misfortune; and his company, if they


are tolerably well bred, are careful to say nothing which can put


him in mind of it. He endeavours to entertain them, in his usual


way, upon indifferent subjects, or, if he feels himself strong


enough to venture to mention his misfortune, he endeavours to


talk of it as, he thinks, they are capable of talking of it, and


even to feel it no further than they are capable of feeling it.


If he has not, however, been well inured to the hard discipline


of self-command, he soon grows weary of this restraint. A long


visit fatigues him; and, towards the end of it, he is constantly


in danger of doing, what he never fails to do the moment it is


over, of abandoning himself to all the weakness of excessive


sorrow. Modern good manners, which are extremely indulgent to


human weakness, forbid, for some time, the visits of strangers to


persons under great family distress, and permit those only of the


nearest relations and most intimate friends. The presence of the


latter, it is thought, will impose less restraint than that of


the former; and the sufferers can more easily accommodate


themselves to the feelings of those, from whom they have reason


to expect a more indulgent sympathy. Secret enemies, who fancy


that they are not known to be such, are frequently fond of making


those charitable visits as early as the most intimate friends.


The weakest man in the world, in this case, endeavours to support


his manly countenance, and, from indignation and contempt of


their malice, to behave with as much gaiety and ease as he can.


    The man of real constancy and firmness, the wise and just man


who has been thoroughly bred in the great school of self-command,


in the bustle and business of the world, exposed, perhaps, to the


violence and injustice of faction, and to the hardships and


hazards of war, maintains this control of his passive feelings


upon all occasions; and whether in solitude or in society, wears


nearly the same countenance, and is affected very nearly in the


same manner. In success and in disappointment, in prosperity and


in adversity, before friends and before enemies, he has often


been under the necessity of supporting this manhood. He has never


dared to forget for one moment the judgment which the impartial


spectator would pass upon his sentiments and conduct. He has


never dared to suffer the man within the breast to be absent one


moment from his attention. With the eyes of this great inmate he


has always been accustomed to regard whatever relates to himself.


This habit has become perfectly familiar to him. He has been in


the constant practice, and, indeed, under the constant necessity,


of modelling, or of endeavouring to model, not only his outward


conduct and behaviour, but, as much as he can, even his inward


sentiments and feelings, according to those of this awful and


respectable judge. He does not merely affect the sentiments of


the impartial spectator. He really adopts them. He almost


identifies himself with, he almost becomes himself that impartial


spectator, and scarce even feels but as that great arbiter of his


conduct directs him to feel.


    The degree of the self-approbation with which every man, upon


such occasions, surveys his own conduct, is higher or lower,


exactly in proportion to the degree of self-command which is


necessary in order to obtain that self-approbation. Where little


self-command is necessary, little self-approbation is due. The


man who has only scratched his finger, cannot much applaud


himself, though he should immediately appear to have forgot this


paltry misfortune. The man who has lost his leg by a cannon shot,


and who, the moment after, speaks and acts with his usual


coolness and tranquillity, as he exerts a much higher degree of


self-command, so he naturally feels a much higher degree of


self-approbation. With most men, upon such an accident, their own


natural view of their own misfortune would force itself upon them


with such a vivacity and strength of colouring, as would entirely


efface all thought of every other view. They would feel nothing,


they could attend to nothing, but their own pain and their own


fear; and not only the judgment of the ideal man within the


breast, but that of the real spectators who might happen to be


present, would be entirely overlooked and disregarded.


    The reward which Nature bestows upon good behaviour under


misfortune, is thus exactly proportioned to the degree of that


good behaviour. The only compensation she could possibly make for


the bitterness of pain and distress is thus too, in equal degrees


of good behaviour, exactly proportioned to the degree of that


pain and distress. In proportion to the degree of the


self-command which is necessary in order to conquer our natural


sensibility, the pleasure and pride of the conquest are so much


the greater; and this pleasure and pride are so great that no man


can be altogether unhappy who completely enjoys them. Misery and


wretchedness can never enter the breast in which dwells complete


self-satisfaction; and though it may be too much, perhaps, to


say, with the Stoics, that, under such an accident as that above


mentioned, the happiness of a wise man is in every respect equal


to what it could have been under any other circumstances; yet it


must be acknowledged, at least, that this complete enjoyment of


his own self-applause, though it may not altogether extinguish,


must certainly very much alleviate his sense of his own


sufferings.


    In such paroxysms of distress, if I may be allowed to call


them so, the wisest and firmest man, in order to preserve his


equanimity, is obliged, I imagine, to make a considerable, and


even a painful exertion. His own natural feeling of his own


distress, his own natural view of his own situation, presses hard


upon him, and he cannot, without a very great effort, fix his


attention upon that of the impartial spectator. Both views


present themselves to him at the same time. His sense of honour,


his regard to his own dignity, directs him to fix his whole


attention upon the one view. His natural, his untaught and


undisciplined feelings, are continually calling it off to the


other. He does not, in this case, perfectly identify himself with


the ideal man within the breast, he does not become himself the


impartial spectator of his own conduct. The different views of


both characters exist in his mind separate and distinct from one


another, and each directing him to a behaviour different from


that to which the other directs him. When he follows that view


which honour and dignity point out to him, Nature does not,


indeed, leave him without a recompense. He enjoys his own


complete self-approbation, and the applause of every candid and


impartial spectator. By her unalterable laws, however, he still


suffers; and the recompense which she bestows, though very


considerable, is not sufficient completely to compensate the


sufferings which those laws inflict. Neither is it fit that it


should. If it did completely compensate them, he could, from


self-interest, have no motive for avoiding an accident which must


necessarily diminish his utility both to himself and to society;


and Nature, from her parental care of both, meant that he should


anxiously avoid all such accidents. He suffers, therefore, and


though, in the agony of the paroxysm, he maintains, not only the


manhood of his countenance, but the sedateness and sobriety of


his judgment, it requires his utmost and most fatiguing


exertions, to do so.


    By the constitution of human nature, however, agony can never


be permanent; and, if he survives the paroxysm, he soon comes,


without any effort, to enjoy his ordinary tranquillity. A man


with a wooden leg suffers, no doubt, and foresees that he must


continue to suffer during the reminder of his life, a very


considerable inconveniency. He soon comes to view it, however,


exactly as every impartial spectator views it; as an


inconveniency under which he can enjoy all the ordinary pleasures


both of solitude and of society. He soon identifies himself with


the ideal man within the breast, he soon becomes himself the


impartial spectator of his own situation. He no longer weeps, he


no longer laments, he no longer grieves over it, as a weak man


may sometimes do in the beginning. The view of the impartial


spectator becomes so perfectly habitual to him, that, without any


effort, without any exertion, he never thinks of surveying his


misfortune in any other view.


    The never-failing certainty with which all men, sooner or


later, accommodate themselves to whatever becomes their permanent


situation, may, perhaps, induce us to think that the Stoics were,


at least, thus far very nearly in the right; that, between one


permanent situation and another, there was, with regard to real


happiness, no essential difference: or that, if there were any


difference, it was no more than just sufficient to render some of


them the objects of simple choice or preference; but not of any


earnest or anxious desire: and others, of simple rejection, as


being fit to be set aside or avoided; but not of any earnest or


anxious aversion. Happiness consists in tranquillity and


enjoyment. Without tranquillity there can be no enjoyment; and


where there is perfect tranquillity there is scarce any thing


which is not capable of amusing. But in every permanent


situation, where there is no expectation of change, the mind of


every man, in a longer or shorter time, returns to its natural


and usual state of tranquillity. In prosperity, after a certain


time, it falls back to that state; in adversity, after a certain


time, it rises up to it. In the confinement and solitude of the


Bastile, after a certain time, the fashionable and frivolous


Count de Lauzun recovered tranquillity enough to be capable of


amusing himself with feeding a spider. A mind better furnished


would, perhaps, have both sooner recovered its tranquillity, and


sooner found, in its own thoughts, a much better amusement.


    The great source of both the misery and disorders of human


life, seems to arise from over-rating the difference between one


permanent situation and another. Avarice over-rates the


difference between poverty and riches: ambition, that between a


private and a public station: vain-glory, that between obscurity


and extensive reputation. The person under the influence of any


of those extravagant passions, is not only miserable in his


actual situation, but is often disposed to disturb the peace of


society, in order to arrive at that which he so foolishly


admires. The slightest observation, however, might satisfy him,


that, in all the ordinary situations of human life, a


well-disposed mind may be equally calm, equally cheerful, and


equally contented. Some of those situations may, no doubt,


deserve to be preferred to others: but none of them can deserve


to be pursued with that passionate ardour which drives us to


violate the rules either of prudence or of justice; or to corrupt


the future tranquillity of our minds, either by shame from the


remembrance of our own folly, or by remorse from the horror of


our own injustice. Wherever prudence does not direct, wherever


justice does not permit, the attempt to change our situation, the


man who does attempt it, plays at the most Unequal of all games


of hazard, and stakes every thing against scarce any thing. What


the favourite of the king of Epirus said to his master, may be


applied to men in all the ordinary situations of human life. When


the King had recounted to him, in their proper order, all the


conquests which he proposed to make, and had come to the last of


them; And what does your Majesty propose to do then? said the


Favourite. -- I propose then, said the King, to enjoy myself with


my friends, and endeavour to be good company over a bottle. --


And what hinders your Majesty from doing so now? replied the


Favourite. In the most glittering and exalted situation that our


idle fancy can hold out to us, the pleasures from which we


propose to derive our real happiness, are almost always the same


with those which, in our actual, though humble station, we have


at all times at hand, and in our power. except the frivolous


pleasures of vanity and superiority, we may find, in the most


humble station, where there is only personal liberty, every other


which the most exalted can afford; and the pleasures of vanity


and superiority are seldom consistent with perfect tranquillity,


the principle and foundation of all real and satisfactory


enjoyment. Neither is it always certain that, in the splendid


situation which we aim at, those real and satisfactory pleasures


can be enjoyed with the same security as in the humble one which


we are so very eager to abandon. examine the records of history,


recollect what has happened within the circle of your own


experience, consider with attention what has been the conduct of


almost all the greatly unfortunate, either in private or public


life, whom you may have either read of, or heard of, or remember;


and you will find that the misfortunes of by far the greater part


of them have arisen from their not knowing when they were well,


when it was proper for them to sit still and to be contented. The


inscription upon the tomb-stone of the man who had endeavoured to


mend a tolerable constitution by taking physic; 'I was well, I


wished to be better; here I am; may generally be applied with


great justness to the distress of disappointed avarice and


ambition.


    It may be thought a singular, but I believe it to be a just


observation, that, in the misfortunes which admit of some remedy,


the greater part of men do not either so readily or so


universally recover their natural and usual tranquillity, as in


those which plainly admit of none. In misfortunes of the latter


kind, it is chiefly in what may be called the paroxysm, or in the


first attack, that we can discover any sensible difference


between the sentiments and behaviour of the wise and those of the


weak man. In the end, Time, the great and universal comforter,


gradually composes the weak man to the same degree of


tranquillity which a regard to his own dignity and manhood


teaches the wise man to assume in the beginning. The case of the


man with the wooden leg is an obvious example of this. In the


irreparable misfortunes occasioned by the death of children, or


of friends and relations, even a wise man may for some time


indulge himself in some degree of moderated sorrow. An


affectionate, but weak woman, is often, upon such occasions,


almost perfectly distracted. Time, however, in a longer or


shorter period, never fails to compose the weakest woman to the


same degree of tranquillity as the strongest man. In all the


irreparable calamities which affect himself immediately and


directly, a wise man endeavours, from the beginning, to


anticipate and to enjoy before-hand, that tranquillity which he


foresees the course of a few months, or a few years, will


certainly restore to him in the end.


    In the misfortunes for which the nature of things admits, or


seems to admit, of a remedy, but in which the means of applying


that remedy are not within the reach of the sufferer, his vain


and fruitless attempts to restore himself to his former


situation, his continual anxiety for their success, his repeated


disappointments upon their miscarriage, are what chiefly hinder


him from resuming his natural tranquillity, and frequently render


miserable, during the whole of his life, a man to whom a greater


misfortune, but which plainly admitted of no remedy, would not


have given a fortnight's disturbance. In the fall from royal


favour to disgrace, from power to insignificancy, from riches to


poverty, from liberty to confinement, from strong health to some


lingering, chronical, and perhaps incurable disease, the man who


struggles the least, who most easily and readily acquiesces in


the fortune which has fallen to him, very soon recovers his usual


and natural tranquility, and surveys the most disagreeable


circumstances of his actual situation in the same light, or,


perhaps, in a much less unfavourable light, than that in which


the most indifferent spectator is disposed to survey them.


Faction, intrigue, and cabal, disturb the quiet of the


unfortunate statesman. extravagant projects, visions of gold


mines, interrupt the repose of the ruined bankrupt. The prisoner,


who is continually plotting to escape from his confinement,


cannot enjoy that careless security which even a prison can


afford him. The medicines of the physician are often the greatest


torment of the incurable patient. The monk who, in order to


comfort Joanna of Castile, upon the death of her husband Philip,


told her of a King, who, fourteen years after his decease, had


been restored to life again, by the prayers of his afflicted


queen, was not likely, by his legendary tale, to restore


sedateness to the distempered mind of that unhappy Princess. She


endeavoured to repeat the same experiment in hopes of the same


success; resisted for a long time the burial of her husband, soon


after raised his body from the grave, attended it almost


constantly herself, and watched, with all the impatient anxiety


of frantic expectation, the happy moment when her wishes were to


be gratified by the revival of her beloved Philip.(3*)


    Our sensibility to the feelings of others, so far from being


inconsistent with the manhood of self-command, is the very


principle upon which that manhood is founded. The very same


principle or instinct which, in the misfortune of our neighbour,


prompts us to compassionate his sorrow; in our own misfortune,


prompts us to restrain the abject and miserable lamentations of


our own sorrow. The same principle or instinct which, in his


prosperity and success, prompts us to congratulate his joy; in


our own prosperity and success, prompts us to restrain the levity


and intemperance of our own joy. In both cases, the propriety of


our own sentiments and feelings seems to be exactly in proportion


to the vivacity and force with which we enter into and conceive


his sentiments and feelings.


    The man of the most perfect virtue, the man whom we naturally


love and revere the most, is he who joins, to the most perfect


command of his own original and selfish feelings, the most


exquisite sensibility both to the original and sympathetic


feelings of others. The man who, to all the soft, the amiable,


and the gentle virtues, joins all the great, the awful, and the


respectable, must surely be the natural and proper object of our


highest love and admiration.


    The person best fitted by nature for acquiring the former of


those two sets of virtues, is likewise best fitted for acquiring


the latter. The man who feels the most for the joys and sorrows


of others, is best fitted for acquiring the most complete control


of his own joys and sorrows. The man of the most exquisite


humanity, is naturally the most capable of acquiring the highest


degree of self-command. He may not, however, always have acquired


it; and it very frequently happens that he has not. He may have


lived too much in ease and tranquillity. He may have never been


exposed to the violence of faction, or to the hardships and


hazards of war. He may have never experienced the insolence of


his superiors, the jealous and malignant envy of his equals, or


the pilfering injustice of his inferiors. When, in an advanced


age, some accidental change of fortune exposes him to all these,


they all make too great an impression upon him. He has the


disposition which fits him for acquiring the most perfect


self-command; but he has never had the opportunity of acquiring


it. exercise and practice have been wanting; and without these no


habit can ever be tolerably established. Hardships, dangers,


injuries, misfortunes, are the only masters under whom we can


learn the exercise of this virtue. But these are all masters to


whom nobody willingly puts himself to school.


    The situations in which the gentle virtue of humanity can be


most happily cultivated, are by no means the same with those


which are best fitted for forming the austere virtue of


self-command. The man who is himself at ease can best attend to


the distress of others. The man who is himself exposed to


hardships is most immediately called upon to attend to, and to


control his own feelings. In the mild sunshine of undisturbed


tranquillity, in the calm retirement of undissipated and


philosophical leisure, the soft virtue of humanity flourishes the


most, and is capable of the highest improvement. But, in such


situations, the greatest and noblest exertions of self-command


have little exercise. Under the boisterous and stormy sky of war


and faction, of public tumult and confusion, the sturdy severity


of self-command prospers the most, and can be the most


successfully cultivated. But, in such situations, the strongest


suggestions of humanity must frequently be stifled or neglected;


and every such neglect necessarily tends to weaken the principle


of humanity. As it may frequently be the duty of a soldier not to


take, so it may sometimes be his duty not to give quarter; and


the humanity of the man who has been several times under the


necessity of submitting to this disagreeable duty, can scarce


fail to suffer a considerable diminution. For his own ease, he is


too apt to learn to make light of the misfortunes which he is so


often under the necessity of occasioning; and the situations


which call forth the noblest exertions of self-command, by


imposing the necessity of violating sometimes the property, and


sometimes the life of our neighbour, always tend to diminish, and


too often to extinguish altogether, that sacred regard to both,


which is the foundation of justice and humanity. It is upon this


account, that we so frequently find in the world men of great


humanity who have little self-command, but who are indolent and


irresolute, and easily disheartened, either by difficulty or


danger, from the most honourable pursuits; and, on the contrary


men of the most perfect self-command, whom no difficulty can


discourage, no danger appal, and who are at all times ready for


the most daring and desperate enterprises, but who, at the same


time, seem to be hardened against all sense either of justice or


humanity.


    In solitude, we are apt to feel too strongly whatever relates


to ourselves: we are apt to over-rate the good offices we may


have done, and the injuries we may have suffered: we are apt to


be too much elated by our own good, and too much dejected by our


own bad fortune. The conversation of a friend brings us to a


better, that of a stranger to a still better temper. The man


within the breast, the abstract and ideal spectator of our


sentiments and conduct, requires often to be awakened and put in


mind of his duty, by the presence of the real spectator: and it


is always from that spectator, from whom we can expect the least


sympathy and indulgence, that we are likely to learn the most


complete lesson of self-command.


    Are you in adversity? Do not mourn in the darkness of


solitude, do not regulate your sorrow according to the indulgent


sympathy of your intimate friends; return, as soon as possible,


to the day-light of the world and of society. Live with


strangers, with those who know nothing, or care nothing about


your misfortune; do not even shun the company of enemies; but


give yourself the pleasure of mortifying their malignant joy, by


making them feel how little you are affected by your calamity,


and how much you are above it.


    Are you in prosperity? Do not confine the enjoyment of your


good fortune to your own house, to the company of your own


friends, perhaps of your flatterers, of those who build upon your


fortune the hopes of mending their own; frequent those who are


independent of you, who can value you only for your character and


conduct, and not for your fortune. Neither seek nor shun, neither


intrude yourself into nor run away from the society of those who


were once your superiors, and who may be hurt at finding you


their equal, or, perhaps, even their superior. The impertinence


of their pride may, perhaps, render their company too


disagreeable: but if it should not, be assured that it is the


best company you can possibly keep; and if, by the simplicity of


your unassuming demeanour, you can gain their favour and


kindness, you may rest satisfied that you are modest enough, and


that your head has been in no respect turned by your good


fortune.


    The propriety of our moral sentiments is never so apt to be


corrupted, as when the indulgent and partial spectator is at


hand, while the indifferent and impartial one is at a great


distance.


    Of the conduct of one independent nation towards another,


neutral nations are the only indifferent and impartial


spectators. But they are placed at so great a distance that they


are almost quite out of sight. When two nations are at variance,


the citizen of each pays little regard to the sentiments which


foreign nations may entertain concerning his conduct. His whole


ambition is to obtain the approbation of his own fellow-citizens;


and as they are all animated by the same hostile passions which


animate himself, he can never please them so much as by enraging


and offending their enemies. The partial spectator is at hand:


the impartial one at a great distance. In war and negotiation,


therefore, the laws of justice are very seldom observed. Truth


and fair dealing are almost totally disregarded. Treaties are


violated; and the violation, if some advantage is gained by it,


sheds scarce any dishonour upon the violator. The ambassador who


dupes the minister of a foreign nation, is admired and applauded.


The just man who disdains either to take or to give any


advantage, but who would think it less dishonourable to give than


to take one; the man who, in all private transactions, would be


the most beloved and the most esteemed; in those public


transactions is regarded as a fool and an idiot, who does not


understand his business; and he incurs always the contempt, and


sometimes even the detestation of his fellow-citizens. In war,


not only what are called the laws of nations, are frequently


violated, without bringing (among his own fellow-citizens, whose


judgments he only regards) any considerable dishonour upon the


violator; but those laws themselves are, the greater part of


them, laid down with very little regard to the plainest and most


obvious rules of justice. That the innocent, though they may have


some connexion or dependency upon the guilty (which, perhaps,


they themselves cannot help), should not, upon that account,


suffer or be punished for the guilty, is one of the plainest and


most obvious rules of justice. In the most unjust war, however,


it is commonly the sovereign or the rulers only who are guilty.


The subjects are almost always perfectly innocent. Whenever it


suits the conveniency of a public enemy, however, the goods of


the peaceable citizens are seized both at land and at sea; their


lands are laid waste, their houses are burnt, and they


themselves, if they presume to make any resistance, are murdered


or led into captivity; and all this in the most perfect


conformity to what are called the laws of nations.


    The animosity of hostile factions, whether civil or


ecclesiastical, is often still more furious than that of hostile


nations; and their conduct towards one another is often still


more atrocious. What may be called the laws of faction have often


been laid down by grave authors with still less regard to the


rules of justice than what are called the laws of nations. The


most ferocious patriot never stated it as a serious question,


Whether faith ought to be kept with public enemies? -- Whether


faith ought to be kept with rebels? Whether faith ought to be


kept with heretics? are questions which have been often furiously


agitated by celebrated doctors both civil and ecclesiastical. It


is needless to observe, I presume, that both rebels and heretics


are those unlucky persons, who, when things have come to a


certain degree of violence, have the misfortune to be of the


weaker party. In a nation distracted by faction, there are, no


doubt, always a few, though commonly but a very few, who preserve


their judgment untainted by the general contagion. They seldom


amount to more than, here and there, a solitary individual,


without any influence, excluded, by his own candour, from the


confidence of either party, and who, though he may be one of the


wisest, is necessarily, upon that very account, one of the most


insignificant men in the society. All such people are held in


contempt and derision, frequently in detestation, by the furious


zealots of both parties. A true party-man hates and despises


candour; and, in reality, there is no vice which could so


effectually disqualify him for the trade of a party-man as that


single virtue. The real, revered, and impartial spectator,


therefore, is, upon no occasion, at a greater distance than


amidst the violence and rage of contending parties. To them, it


may be said, that such a spectator scarce exists any where in the


universe. Even to the great Judge of the universe, they impute


all their own prejudices, and often view that Divine Being as


animated by all their own vindictive and implacable passions. Of


all the corrupters of moral sentiments, therefore, faction and


fanaticism have always been by far the greatest.


    Concerning the subject of self-command, I shall only observe


further, that our admiration for the man who, under the heaviest


and most unexpected misfortunes, continues to behave with


fortitude and firmness, always supposes that his sensibility to


those misfortunes is very great, and such as it requires a very


great effort to conquer or command. The man who was altogether


insensible to bodily pain, could deserve no applause from


enduring the torture with the most perfect patience and


equanimity. The man who had been created without the natural fear


of death, could claim no merit from preserving his coolness and


presence of mind in the midst of the most dreadful dangers. It is


one of the extravagancies of Seneca, that the Stoical wise man


was, in this respect, superior even to a God; that the security


of the God was altogether the benefit of nature, which had


exempted him from suffering; but that the security of the wise


man was his own benefit, and derived altogether from himself and


from his own exertions.


    The sensibility of some men, however, to some of the objects


which immediately affect themselves, is sometimes so strong as to


render all self-command impossible. No sense of honour can


control the fears of the man who is weak enough to faint, or to


fall into convulsions, upon the approach of danger. Whether such


weakness of nerves, as it has been called, may not, by gradual


exercise and proper discipline, admit of some cure, may, perhaps,


be doubtful. It seems certain that it ought never to be trusted


or employed.





Chap. IV





Of the Nature of Self-deceit, and of the Origin and Use of


general Rules





    In order to pervert the rectitude of our own judgments


concerning the propriety of our own conduct, it is not always


necessary that the real and impartial spectator should be at a


great distance. When he is at hand, when he is present, the


violence and injustice of our own selfish passions are sometimes


sufficient to induce the man within the breast to make a report


very different from what the real circumstances of the case are


capable of authorising.


    There are two different occasions upon which we examine our


own conduct, and endeavour to view it in the light in which the


impartial spectator would view it: first, when we are about to


act; and secondly, after we have acted. Our views are apt to be


very partial in both cases; but they are apt to be most partial


when it is of most importance that they should be otherwise.


    When we are about to act, the eagerness of passion will


seldom allow us to consider what we are doing, with the candour


of an indifferent person. The violent emotions which at that time


agitate us, discolour our views of things; even when we are


endeavouring to place ourselves in the situation of another, and


to regard the objects that interest us in the light in which they


will naturally appear to him, the fury of our own passions


constantly calls us back to our own place, where every thing


appears magnified and misrepresented by self-love. Of the manner


in which those objects would appear to another, of the view which


he would take of them, we can obtain, if I may say so, but


instantaneous glimpses, which vanish in a moment, and which, even


while they last, are not altogether just. We cannot even for that


moment divest ourselves entirely of the heat and keenness with


which our peculiar situation inspires us, nor consider what we


are about to do with the complete impartiality of an equitable


judge. The passions, upon this account, as father Malebranche


says, all justify themselves, and seem reasonable and


proportioned to their objects, as long as we continue to feel


them.


    When the action is over, indeed, and the passions which


prompted it have subsided, we can enter more coolly into the


sentiments of the indifferent spectator. What before interested


us is now become almost as indifferent to us as it always was to


him, and we can now examine our own conduct with his candour and


impartiality. The man of to-day is no longer agitated by the same


passions which distracted the man of yesterday: and when the


paroxysm of emotion, in the same manner as when the paroxysm of


distress, is fairly over, we can identify ourselves, as it were,


with the ideal man within the breast, and, in our own character,


view, as in the one case, our own situation, so in the other, our


own conduct, with the severe eVes of the most impartial


spectator. But our judgments now are often of little importance


in comparison of what they were before; and can frequently


produce nothing but vain regret and unavailing repentance;


without always securing us from the like errors in time to come.


It is seldom, however, that they are quite candid even in this


case. The opinion which we entertain of our own character depends


entirely on our judgments concerning our past conduct. It is so


disagreeable to think ill of ourselves, that we often purposely


turn away our view from those circumstances which might render


that judgment unfavourable. He is a bold surgeon, they say, whose


hand does not tremble when he performs an operation upon his own


person; and he is often equally bold who does not hesitate to


pull off the mysterious veil of self-delusion, which covers from


his view the deformities of his own conduct. Rather than see our


own behaviour under so disagreeable an aspect, we too often,


foolishly and weakly, endeavour to exasperate anew those unjust


passions which had formerly misled us; we endeavour by artifice


to awaken our old hatreds, and irritate afresh our almost


forgotten resentments: we even exert ourselves for this miserable


purpose, and thus persevere in injustice, merely because we once


were unjust, and because we are ashamed and afraid to see that we


were so.


    So partial are the views of mankind with regard to the


propriety of their own conduct, both at the time of action and


after it; and so difficult is it for them to view it in the light


in which any indifferent spectator would consider it. But if it


was by a peculiar faculty, such as the moral sense is supposed to


be, that they judged of their own conduct, if they were endued


with a particular power of perception, which distinguished the


beauty or deformity of passions and affections; as their own


passions would be more immeDiately exposed to the view of this


faculty, it would judge with more accuracy concerning them, than


concerning those of other men, of which it had only a more


distant prospect.


    This self-deceit, this fatal weakness of mankind, is the


source of half the disorders of human life. If we saw ourselves


in the light in which others see us, or in which they would see


us if they knew all, a reformation would generally be


unavoidable. We could not otherwise endure the sight.


    Nature, however, has not left this weakness, which is of so


much importance, altogether without a remedy; nor has she


abandoned us entirely to the delusions of self-love. Our


continual observations upon the conduct of others, insensibly


lead us to form to ourselves certain general rules concerning


what is fit and proper either to be done or to be avoided. Some


of their actions shock all our natural sentiments. We hear every


body about us express the like detestation against them. This


still further confirms, and even exasperates our natural sense of


their deformity. It satisfies us that we view them in the proper


light, when we see other people view them in the same light. We


resolve never to be guilty of the like, nor ever, upon any


account, to render ourselves in this manner the objects of


universal disapprobation. We thus naturally lay down to ourselves


a general rule, that all such actions are to be avoided, as


tending to render us odious, contemptible, or punishable, the


objects of all those sentiments for which we have the greatest


dread and aversion. Other actions, on the contrary, call forth


our approbation, and we hear every body around us express the


same favourable opinion concerning them. Every body is eager to


honour and reward them. They excite all those sentiments for


which we have by nature the strongest desire; the love, the


gratitude, the admiration of mankind. We become ambitious of


performing the like; and thus naturally lay down to ourselves a


rule of another kind, that every opportunity of acting in this


manner is carefully to be sought after.


    It is thus that the general rules of morality are formed.


They are ultimately founded upon experience of what, in


particular instances, our moral faculties, our natural sense of


merit and propriety, approve, or disapprove of. We do not


originally approve or condemn particular actions; because, upon


examination, they appear to be agreeable or inconsistent with a


certain general rule. The general rule, on the contrary, is


formed, by finding from experience, that all actions of a certain


kind, or circumstanced in a certain manner, are approved or


disapproved of. To the man who first saw an inhuman murder,


committed from avarice, envy, or unjust resentment, and upon one


too that loved and trusted the murderer, who beheld the last


agonies of the dying person, who heard him, with his expiring


breath, complain more of the perfidy and ingratitude of his false


friend, than of the violence which had been done to him, there


could be no occasion, in order to conceive how horrible such an


action was, that he should reflect, that one of the most sacred


rules of conduct was what prohibited the taking away the life of


an innocent person, that this was a plain violation of that rule,


and consequently a very blamable action. His detestation of this


crime, it is evident, would arise instantaneously and antecedent


to his having formed to himself any such general rule. The


general rule, on the contrary, which he might afterwards form,


would be founded upon the detestation which he felt necessarily


arise in his own breast, at the thought of this, and every other


particular action of the same kind.


    When we read in history or romance, the account of actions


either of generosity or of baseness, the admiration which we


conceive for the one, and the contempt which we feel for the


other, neither of them arise from reflecting that there are


certain general rules which declare all actions of the one kind


admirable, and all actions of the other contemptible. Those


general rules, on the contrary, are all formed from the


experience we have had of the effects which actions of all


different kinds naturally produce upon us.


    An amiable action, a respectable action, an horrid action,


are all of them actions which naturally excite for the person who


performs them, the love, the respect, or the horror of the


spectator. The general rules which determine what actions are,


and what are not, the objects of each of those sentiments, can be


formed no other way than by observing what actions actually and


in fact excite them.


    When these general rules, indeed, have been formed, when they


are universally acknowledged and established, by the concurring


sentiments of mankind, we frequently appeal to them as to the


standards of judgment, in debating concerning the degree of


praise or blame that is due to certain actions of a complicated


and dubious nature. They are upon these occasions commonly cited


as the ultimate foundations of what is just and unjust in human


conduct; and this circumstance seems to have misled several very


eminent authors, to draw up their systems in such a manner, as if


they had supposed that the original judgments of mankind with


regard to right and wrong, were formed like the decisions of a


court of judicatory, by considering first the general rule, and


then, secondly, whether the particular action under consideration


fell properly within its comprehension.


    Those general rules of conduct, when they have been fixed in


our mind by habitual reflection, are of great use in correcting


the misrepresentations of self-love concerning what is fit and


proper to be done in our particular situation. The man of furious


resentment, if he was to listen to the dictates of that passion,


would perhaps regard the death of his enemy, as but a small


compensation for the wrong, he imagines, he has received; which,


however, may be no more than a very slight provocation. But his


observations upon the conduct of others, have taught him how


horrible all such sanguinary revenges appear. Unless his


education has been very singular, he has laid it down to himself


as an inviolable rule, to abstain from them upon all occasions.


This rule preserves its authority with him, and renders him


incapable of being guilty of such a violence. Yet the fury of his


own temper may be such, that had this been the first time in


which he considered such an action, he would undoubtedly have


determined it to be quite just and proper, and what every


impartial spectator would approve of. But that reverence for the


rule which past experience has impressed upon him, checks the


impetuosity of his passion, and helps him to correct the too


partial views which self-love might otherwise suggest, of what


was proper to be done in his situation. If he should allow


himself to be so far transported by passion as to violate this


rule, yet, even in this case, he cannot throw off altogether the


awe and respect with which he has been accustomed to regard it.


At the very time of acting, at the moment in which passion mounts


the highest, he hesitates and trembles at the thought of what he


is about to do: he is secretly conscious to himself that he is


breaking through those measures of conduct which, in all his cool


hours, he had resolved never to infringe, which he had never seen


infringed by others without the highest disapprobation, and of


which the infringement, his own mind forebodes, must soon render


him the object of the same disagreeable sentiments. Before he can


take the last fatal resolution, he is tormented with all the


agonies of doubt and uncertainty; he is terrified at the thought


of violating so sacred a rule, and at the same time is urged and


goaded on by the fury of his desires to violate it. He changes


his purpose every moment; sometimes he resolves to adhere to his


principle, and not indulge a passion which may corrupt the


remaining part of his life with the horrors of shame and


repentance; and a momentary calm takes possession of his breast,


from the prospect of that security and tranquillity which he will


enjoy when he thus determines not to expose himself to the hazard


of a contrary conduct. But immediately the passion rouses anew,


and with fresh fury drives him on to commit what he had the


instant before resolved to abstain from. Wearied and distracted


with those continual irresolutions, he at length, from a sort of


despair, makes the last fatal and irrecoverable step; but with


that terror and amazement with which one flying from an enemy,


throws himself over a precipice, where he is sure of meeting with


more certain destruction than from any thing that pursues him


from behind. Such are his sentiments even at the time of acting;


though he is then, no doubt, less sensible of the impropriety of


his own conduct than afterwards, when his passion being gratified


and palled, he begins to view what he has done in the light in


which others are apt to view it; and actually feels, what he had


only foreseen very imperfectly before, the stings of remorse and


repentance begin to agitate and torment him.





Chap. V





Of the influence and authority of the general Rules of Morality,


and that they are justly regarded as the Laws of the Deity





    The regard to those general rules of conduct, is what is


properly called a sense of duty, a principle of the greatest


consequence in human life, and the only principle by which the


bulk of mankind are capable of directing their actions. Many men


behave very decently, and through the whole of their lives avoid


any considerable degree of blame, who yet, perhaps, never felt


the sentiment upon the propriety of which we found our


approbation of their conduct, but acted merely from a regard to


what they saw were the established rules of behaviour. The man


who has received great benefits from another person, may, by the


natural coldness of his temper, feel but a very small degree of


the sentiment of gratitude. If he has been virtuously educated,


however, he will often have been made to observe how odious those


actions appear which denote a want of this sentiment, and how


amiable the contrary. Though his heart therefore is not warmed


with any grateful affection, he will strive to act as if it was,


and will endeavour to pay all those regards and attentions to his


patron which the liveliest gratitude could suggest. He will visit


him regularly. he will behave to him respectfully; he will never


talk of him but with expressions of the highest esteem, and of


the many obligations which he owes to him. And what is more, he


will carefully embrace every opportunity of making a proper


return for past services. He may do all this too without any


hypocrisy or blamable dissimulation, without any selfish


intention of obtaining new favours, and without any design of


imposing either upon his benefactor or the public. The motive of


his actions may be no other than a reverence for the established


rule of duty, a serious and earnest desire of acting, in every


respect, according to the law of gratitude. A wife, in the same


manner, may sometimes not feel that tender regard for her husband


which is suitable to the relation that subsists between them. If


she has been virtuously educated, however, she will endeavour to


act as if she felt it, to be careful, officious, faithful, and


sincere, and to be deficient in none of those attentions which


the sentiment of conjugal affection could have prompted her to


perform. Such a friend, and such a wife, are neither of them,


undoubtedly, the very best of their kinds; and though both of


them may have the most serious and earnest desire to fulfil every


part of their duty, yet they will fail in many nice and delicate


regards, they will miss many opportunities of obliging, which


they could never have overlooked if they had possessed the


sentiment that is proper to their situation. Though not the very


first of their kinds, however, they are perhaps the second; and


if the regard to the general rules of conduct has been very


strongly impressed upon them, neither of them will fail in any


very essential part of their duty. None but those of the happiest


mould are capable of suiting, with exact justness, their


sentiments and behaviour to the smallest difference of situation,


and of acting upon all occasions with the most delicate and


accurate propriety. The coarse clay of which the bulk of mankind


are formed, cannot be wrought up to such perfection. There is


scarce any man, however, who by discipline, education, and


example, may not be so impressed with a regard to general rules,


as to act upon almost every occasion with tolerable decency, and


through the whole of his life to avoid any considerable degree of


blame.


    Without this sacred regard to general rules, there is no man


whose conduct can be much depended upon. It is this which


constitutes the most essential difference between a man of


principle and honour and a worthless fellow. The one adheres, on


all occasions, steadily and resolutely to his maxims, and


preserves through the whole of his life one even tenour of


conduct. The other, acts variously and accidentally, as humour,


inclination, or interest chance to be uppermost. Nay, such are


the inequalities of humour to which all men are subject, that


without this principle, the man who, in all his cool hours, had


the most delicate sensibility to the propriety of conduct, might


often be led to act absurdly upon the most frivolous occasions,


and when it was scarce possible to assign any serious motive for


his behaving in this manner. Your friend makes you a visit when


you happen to be in a humour which makes it disagreeable to


receive him: in your present mood his civility is very apt to


appear an impertinent intrusion; and if you were to give way to


the views of things which at this time occur, though civil in


your temper, you would behave to him with coldness and contempt.


What renders you incapable of such a rudeness, is nothing but a


regard to the general rules of civility and hospitality, which


prohibit it. That habitual reverence which your former experience


has taught you for these, enables you to act, upon all such


occasions, with nearly equal propriety, and hinders those


inequalities of temper, to which all men are subject, from


influencing your conduct in any very sensible degree. But if


without regard to these general rules, even the duties of


politeness, which are so easily observed, and which one can


scarce have any serious motive to violate, would yet be so


frequently violated, what would become of the duties of justice,


of truth, of chastity, of fidelity, which it is often so


difficult to observe, and which there may be so many strong


motives to violate? But upon the tolerable observance of these


duties, depends the very existence of human society, which would


crumble into nothing if mankind were not generally impressed with


a reverence for those important rules of conduct.


    This reverence is still further enhanced by an opinion which


is first impressed by nature, and afterwards confirmed by


reasoning and philosophy, that those important rules of morality


are the commands and laws of the Deity, who will finally reward


the obedient, and punish the transgressors of their duty.


    This opinion or apprehension, I say, seems first to be


impressed by nature. Men are naturally led to ascribe to those


mysterious beings, whatever they are, which happen, in any


country, to be the objects of religious fear, all their own


sentiments and passions. They have no other, they can conceive no


other to ascribe to them. Those unknown intelligences which they


imagine but see not, must necessarily be formed with some sort of


resemblance to those intelligences of which they have experience.


During the ignorance and darkness of pagan superstition, mankind


seem to have formed the ideas of their divinities with so little


delicacy, that they ascribed to them, indiscriminately, all the


passions of human nature, those not excepted which do the least


honour to our species, such as lust, hunger, avarice, envy,


revenge. They could not fail, therefore, to ascribe to those


beings, for the excellence of whose nature they still conceived


the highest admiration, those sentiments and qualities which are


the great ornaments of humanity, and which seem to raise it to a


resemblance of divine perfection, the love of virtue and


beneficence, and the abhorrence of vice and injustice. The man


who was injured, called upon Jupiter to be witness of the wrong


that was done to him, and could not doubt, but that divine being


would behold it with the same indignation which would animate the


meanest of mankind, who looked on when injustice was committed.


The man who did the injury, felt himself to be the proper object


of the detestation and resentment of mankind; and his natural


fears led him to impute the same sentiments to those awful


beings, whose presence he could not avoid, and whose power he


could not resist. These natural hopes and fears, and suspicions,


were propagated by sympathy, and confirmed by education; and the


gods were universally represented and believed to be the


rewarders of humanity and mercy, and the avengers of perfidy and


injustice. And thus religion, even in its rudest form, gave a


sanction to the rules of morality, long before the age of


artificial reasoning and philosophy. That the terrors of religion


should thus enforce the natural sense of duty, was of too much


importance to the happiness of mankind, for nature to leave it


dependent upon the slowness and uncertainty of philosophical


researches.


    These researches, however, when they came to take place,


confirmed those original anticipations of nature. Upon whatever


we suppose that our moral faculties are founded, whether upon a


certain modification of reason, upon an original instinct, called


a moral sense, or upon some other principle of our nature, it


cannot be doubted, that they were given us for the direction of


our conduct in this life. They carry along with them the most


evident badges of this authority, which denote that they were set


up within us to be the supreme arbiters of all our actions, to


superintend all our senses, passions, and appetites, and to judge


how far each of them was either to be indulged or restrained. Our


moral faculties are by no means, as some have pretended, upon a


level in this respect with the other faculties and appetites of


our nature, endowed with no more right to restrain these last,


than these last are to restrain them. No other faculty or


principle of action judges of any other. Love does not judge of


resentment, nor resentment of love. Those two passions may be


opposite to one another, but cannot, with any propriety, be said


to approve or disapprove of one another. But it is the peculiar


office of those faculties now under our consideration to judge,


to bestow censure or applause upon all the other principles of


our nature. They may be considered as a sort of senses of which


those principles are the objects. Every sense is supreme over its


own objects. There is no appeal from the eye with regard to the


beauty of colours, nor from the ear with regard to the harmony of


sounds, nor from the taste with regard to the agreeableness of


flavours. Each of those senses judges in the last resort of its


own objects. Whatever gratifies the taste is sweet, whatever


pleases the eye is beautiful, whatever soothes the ear is


harmonious. The very essence of each of those qualities consists


in its being fitted to please the sense to which it is addressed.


It belongs to our moral faculties, in the same manner to


determine when the ear ought to be soothed, when the eye ought to


be indulged, when the taste ought to be gratified, when and how


far every other principle of our nature ought either to be


indulged or restrained. What is agreeable to our moral faculties,


is fit, and right, and proper to be done; the contrary wrong,


unfit, and improper. The sentiments which they approve of, are


graceful and becoming: the contrary, ungraceful and unbecoming.


The very words, right, wrong, fit, improper, graceful,


unbecoming, mean only what pleases or displeases those faculties.


    Since these, therefore, were plainly intended to be the


governing principles of human nature, the rules which they


prescribe are to be regarded as the commands and laws of the


Deity, promulgated by those vice-gerents which he has thus set up


within us. All general rules are commonly denominated laws: thus


the general rules which bodies observe in the communication of


motion, are called the laws of motion. But those general rules


which our moral faculties observe in approving or condemning


whatever sentiment or action is subjected to their examination,


may much more justly be denominated such. They have a much


greater resemblance to what are properly called laws, those


general rules which the sovereign lays down to direct the conduct


of his subjects. Like them they are rules to direct the free


actions of men: they are prescribed most surely by a lawful


superior, and are attended too with the sanction of rewards and


punishments. Those vice-gerents of God within us, never fail to


punish the violation of them, by the torments of inward shame,


and self-condemnation; and on the contrary, always reward


obedience with tranquillity of mind, with contentment, and


self-satisfaction.


    There are innumerable other considerations which serve to


confirm the same conclusion. The happiness of mankind, as well as


of all other rational creatures, seems to have been the original


purpose intended by the Author of nature, when he brought them


into existence. No other end seems worthy of that supreme wisdom


and divine benignity which we necessarily ascribe to him; and


this opinion, which we are led to by the abstract consideration


of his infinite perfections, is still more confirmed by the


examination of the works of nature, which seem all intended to


promote happiness, and to guard against misery. But by acting


according to the dictates of our moral faculties, we necessarily


pursue the most effectual means for promoting the happiness of


mankind, and may therefore be said, in some sense, to co-operate


with the Deity, and to advance as far as in our power the plan of


Providence. By acting other ways, on the contrary, we seem to


obstruct, in some measure, the scheme which the Author of nature


has established for the happiness and perfection of the world,


and to declare ourselves, if I may say so, in some measure the


enemies of God. Hence we are naturally encouraged to hope for his


extraordinary favour and reward in the one case, and to dread his


vengeance and punishment in the other.


    There are besides many other reasons, and many other natural


principles, which all tend to confirm and inculcate the same


salutary doctrine. If we consider the general rules by which


external prosperity and adversity are commonly distributed in


this life, we shall find, that notwithstanding the disorder in


which all things appear to be in this world, yet even here every


virtue naturally meets with its proper reward, with the


recompense which is most fit to encourage and promote it; and


this too so surely, that it requires a very extraordinary


concurrence of circumstances entirely to disappoint it. What is


the reward most proper for encouraging industry, prudence, and


circumspection? Success in every sort of business. And is it


possible that in the whole of life these virtues should fail of


attaining it? Wealth and external honours are their proper


recompense, and the recompense which they can seldom fail of


acquiring. What reward is most proper for promoting the practice


of truth, justice, and humanity? The confidence, the esteem, and


love of those we live with. Humanity does not desire to be great,


but to be beloved. It is not in being rich that truth and justice


would rejoice, but in being trusted and believed, recompenses


which those virtues must almost always acquire. By some very


extraordinary and unlucky circumstance, a good man may come to be


suspected of a crime of which he was altogether incapable, and


upon that account be most unjustly exposed for the remaining part


of his life to the horror and aversion of mankind. By an accident


of this kind he may be said to lose his all, notwithstanding his


integrity and justice; in the same manner as a cautious man,


notwithstanding his utmost circumspection, may be ruined by an


earthquake or an inundation. Accidents of the first kind,


however, are perhaps still more rare, and still more contrary to


the common course of things than those of the second; and it


still remains true, that the practice of truth, justice, and


humanity is a certain and almost infallible method of acquiring


what those virtues chiefly aim at, the confidence and love of


those we live with. A person may be very easily misrepresented


with regard to a particular action; but it is scarce possible


that he should be so with regard to the general tenor of his


conduct. An innocent man may be believed to have done wrong:


this, however, will rarely happen. On the contrary, the


established opinion of the innocence of his manners, will often


lead us to absolve him where he has really been in the fault,


notwithstanding very strong presumptions. A knave, in the same


manner, may escape censure, or even meet with applause, for a


particular knavery, in which his conduct is not understood. But


no man was ever habitually such, without being almost universally


known to be so, and without being even frequently suspected of


guilt, when he was in reality perfectly innocent. And so far as


vice and virtue can be either punished or rewarded by the


sentiments and opinions of mankind, they both, according to the


common course of things, meet even here with something more than


exact and impartial justice.


    But though the general rules by which prosperity and


adversity are commonly distributed, when considered in this cool


and philosophical light, appear to be perfectly suited to the


situation of mankind in this life, yet they are by no means


suited to some of our natural sentiments. Our natural love and


admiration for some virtues is such, that we should wish to


bestow on them all sorts of honours and rewards, even those which


we must acknowledge to be the proper recompenses of other


qualities, with which those virtues are not always accompanied.


Our detestation, on the contrary, for some vices is such, that we


should desire to heap upon them every sort of disgrace and


disaster, those not excepted which are the natural consequences


of very different qualities. Magnanimity, generosity, and


justice, command so high a degree of admiration, that we desire


to see them crowned with wealth, and power, and honours of every


kind, the natural consequences of prudence, industry, and


application; qualities with which those virtues are not


inseparably connected. Fraud, falsehood, brutality, and violence,


on the other hand, excite in every human breast such scorn and


abhorrence, that our indignation rouses to see them possess those


advantages which they may in some sense be said to have merited,


by the diligence and industry with which they are sometimes


attended. The industrious knave cultivates the soil; the indolent


good man leaves it uncultivated. Who ought to reap the harvest?


who starve, and who live in plenty? The natural course of things


decides it in favour of the knave: the natural sentiments of


mankind in favour of the man of virtue. Man judges, that the good


qualities of the one are greatly over-recompensed by those


advantages which they tend to procure him, and that the omissions


of the other are by far too severely punished by the distress


which they naturally bring upon him; and human laws, the


consequences of human sentiments, forfeit the life and the estate


of the industrious and cautious traitor, and reward, by


extraordinary recompenses, the fidelity and public spirit of the


improvident and careless good citizen. Thus man is by Nature


directed to correct, in some measure, that distribution of things


which she herself would otherwise have made. The rules which for


this purpose she prompts him to follow, are different from those


which she herself observes. She bestows upon every virtue, and


upon every vice, that precise reward or punishment which is best


fitted to encourage the one, or to restrain the other. She is


directed by this sole consideration, and pays little regard to


the different degrees of merit and demerit, which they may seem


to possess in the sentiments and passions of man. Man, on the


contrary, pays regard to this only, and would endeavour to render


the state of every virtue precisely proportioned to that degree


of love and esteem, and of every vice to that degree of contempt


and abhorrence, which he himself conceives for it. The rules


which she follows are fit for her, those which he follows for


him: but both are calculated to promote the same great end, the


order of the world, and the perfection and happiness of human


nature.


    But though man is thus employed to alter that distribution of


things which natural events would make, if left to themselves;


though, like the gods of the poets, he is perpetually


interposing, by extraordinary means, in favour of virtue, and in


opposition to vice, and, like them, endeavours to turn away the


arrow that is aimed at the head of the righteous, but to


accelerate the sword of destruction that is lifted up against the


wicked; yet he is by no means able to render the fortune of


either quite suitable to his own sentiments and wishes. The


natural course of things cannot be entirely controlled by the


impotent endeavours of man: the current is too rapid and too


strong for him to stop it; and though the rules which direct it


appear to have been established for the wisest and best purposes,


they sometimes produce effects which shock all his natural


sentiments. That a great combination of men should prevail over a


small one; that those who engage in an enterprise with


forethought and all necessary preparation, should prevail over


such as oppose them without any; and that every end should be


acquired by those means only which Nature has established for


acquiring it, seems to be a rule not only necessary and


unavoidable in itself, but even useful and proper for rousing the


industry and attention of mankind. Yet, when, in consequence of


this rule, violence and artifice prevail over sincerity and


justice, what indignation does it not excite in the breast of


every human spectator? What sorrow and compassion for the


sufferings of the innocent, and what furious resentment against


the success of the oppressor? We are equally grieved and enraged


at the wrong that is done, but often find it altogether out of


our power to redress it. When we thus despair of finding any


force upon earth which can check the triumph of injustice, we


naturally appeal to heaven, and hope, that the great Author of


our nature will himself execute hereafter, what all the


principles which he has given us for the direction of our


conduct, prompt us to attempt even here; that he will complete


the plan which he himself has thus taught us to begin; and will,


in a life to come, render to every one according to the works


which he has performed in this world. And thus we are led to the


belief of a future state, not only by the weaknesses, by the


hopes and fears of human nature, but by the noblest and best


principles which belong to it, by the love of virtue, and by the


abhorrence of vice and injustice.


    'Does it suit the greatness of God,' says the eloquent and


philosophical bishop of Clermont, with that passionate and


exaggerating force of imagination, which seems sometimes to


exceed the bounds of decorum; 'does it suit the greatness of God,


to leave the world which he has created in so universal a


disorder? To see the wicked prevail almost always over the just;


the innocent dethroned by the usurper; the father become the



victim of the ambition of an unnatural son; the husband expiring


under the stroke of a barbarous and faithless wife? From the


height of his greatness ought God to behold those melancholy


events as a fantastical amusement, without taking any share in


them? Because he is great, should he be weak, or unjust, or


barbarous? Because men are little, ought they to be allowed


either to be dissolute without punishment, or virtuous without


reward? O God! if this is the character of your Supreme Being; if


it is you whom we adore under such dreadful ideas; I can no


longer acknowledge you for my father, for my protector, for the


comforter of my sorrow, the support of my weakness, the rewarder


of my fidelity. You would then be no more than an indolent and


fantastical tyrant, who sacrifices mankind to his insolent


vanity, and who has brought them out of nothing, only to make


them serve for the sport of his leisure and of his caprice.'


    When the general rules which determine the merit and demerit


of actions, come thus to be regarded as the laws of an


All-powerful Being, who watches over our conduct, and who, in a


life to come, will reward the observance, and punish the breach


of them; they necessarily acquire a new sacredness from this


consideration. That our regard to the will of the Deity ought to


be the supreme rule of our conduct, can be doubted of by nobody


who believes his existence. The very thought of disobedience


appears to involve in it the most shocking impropriety. How vain,


how absurd would it be for man, either to oppose or to neglect


the commands that were laid upon him by Infinite Wisdom, and


Infinite Power. How unnatural, how impiously ungrateful not to


reverence the precepts that were prescribed to him by the


infinite goodness of his Creator, even though no punishment was


to follow their violation. The sense of propriety too is here


well supported by the strongest motives of self-interest. The


idea that, however we may escape the observation of man, or be


placed above the reach of human punishment, yet we are always


acting under the eye, and exposed to the punishment of God, the


great avenger of injustice, is a motive capable of restraining


the most headstrong passions, with those at least who, by


constant reflection, have rendered it familiar to them.


    It is in this manner that religion enforces the natural sense


of duty: and hence it is, that mankind are generally disposed to


place great confidence in the probity of those who seem deeply


impressed with religious sentiments. Such persons, they imagine,


act under an additional tie, besides those which regulate the


conduct of other men. The regard to the propriety of action, as


well as to reputation, the regard to the applause of his own


breast, as well as to that of others, are motives which they


suppose have the same influence over the religious man, as over


the man of the world. But the former lies under another


restraint, and never acts deliberately but as in the presence of


that Great Superior who is finally to recompense him according to


his deeds. A greater trust is reposed, upon this account, in the


regularity and exactness of his conduct. And wherever the natural


principles of religion are not corrupted by the factious and


party zeal of some worthless cabal; wherever the first duty which


it requires, is to fulfil all the obligations of morality;


wherever men are not taught to regard frivolous observances, as


more immediate duties of religion, than acts of justice and


beneficence; and to imagine, that by sacrifices, and ceremonies,


and vain supplications, they can bargain with the Deity for


fraud, and perfidy, and violence, the world undoubtedly judges


right in this respect, and justly places a double confidence in


the rectitude of the religious man's behaviour.





Chap. VI





In what cases the Sense of Duty ought to be the sole of our


conduct; and in what cases it ought to concur with other motives





    Religion affords such strong motives to the practice of


virtue, and guards us by such powerful restraints from the


temptations of vice, that many have been led to suppose, that


religious principles were the sole laudable motives of action. We


ought neither, they said, to reward from gratitude, nor punish


from resentment; we ought neither to protect the helplessness of


our children, nor afford support to the infirmities of our


parents, from natural affection. All affections for particular


objects, ought to be extinguished in our breast, and one great


affection take the place of all others, the love of the Deity,


the desire of rendering ourselves agreeable to him, and of


directing our conduct, in every respect, according to his will.


We ought not to be grateful from gratitude, we ought not to be


charitable from humanity, we ought not to be public-spirited from


the love of our country, nor generous and just from the love of


mankind. The sole principle and motive of our conduct in the


performance of all those different duties, ought to be a sense


that God has commanded us to perform them. I shall not at present


take time to examine this opinion particularly; I shall only


observe, that we should not have expected to have found it


entertained by any sect, who professed themselves of a religion


in which, as it is the first precept to love the Lord our God


with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength,


so it is the second to love our neighbour as we love ourselves;


and we love ourselves surely for our own sakes, and not merely


because we are commanded to do so. That the sense of duty should


be the sole principle of our conduct, is no where the precept of


Christianity; but that it should be the ruling and the governing


one, as philosophy, and as, indeed, common sense directs. It may


be a question, however, in what cases our actions ought to arise


chiefly or entirely from a sense of duty, or from a regard to


general rules; and in what cases some other sentiment or


affection ought to concur, and have a principal influence.


    The decision of this question, which cannot, perhaps, be


given with any very great accuracy, will depend upon two


different circumstances; first, upon the natural agreeableness or


deformity of the sentiment or affection which would prompt us to


any action independent of all regard to general rules; and,


secondly, upon the precision and exactness, or the looseness and


inaccuracy, of the general rules themselves.





    I. First, I say, it will depend upon the natural


agreeableness or deformity of the affection itself, how far our


actions ought to arise from it, or entirely proceed from a regard


to the general rule.


    All those graceful and admired actions, to which the


benevolent affections would prompt us, ought to proceed as much


from the passions themselves, as from any regard to the general


rules of conduct. A benefactor thinks himself but ill requited,


if the person upon whom he has bestowed his good offices, repays


them merely from a cold sense of duty, and without any affection


to his person. A husband is dissatisfied with the most obedient


wife, when he imagines her conduct is animated by no other


principle besides her regard to what the relation she stands in


requires. Though a son should fail in none of the offices of


filial duty, yet if he wants that affectionate reverence which it


so well becomes him to feel, the parent may justly complain of


his indifference. Nor could a son be quite satisfied with a


parent who, though he performed all the duties of his situation,


had nothing of that fatherly fondness which might have been


expected from him. With regard to all such benevolent and social


affections, it is agreeable to see the sense of duty employed


rather to restrain than to enliven them, rather to hinder us from


doing too much, than to prompt us to do what we ought. It gives


us pleasure to see a father obliged to check his own fondness, a


friend obliged to set bounds to his natural generosity, a person


who has received a benefit, obliged to restrain the too sanguine


gratitude of his own temper.


    The contrary maxim takes place with regard to the malevolent


and unsocial passions. We ought to reward from the gratitude and


generosity of our own hearts, without any reluctance, and without


being obliged to reflect how great the propriety of rewarding:


but we ought always to punish with reluctance, and more from a


sense of the propriety of punishing, than from any savage


disposition to revenge. Nothing is more graceful than the


behaviour of the man who appears to resent the greatest injuries,


more from a sense that they deserve, and are the proper objects


of resentment, than from feeling himself the furies of that


disagreeable passion; who, like a judge, considers only the


general rule, which determines what vengeance is due for each


particular offence; who, in executing that rule, feels less for


what himself has suffered, than for what the offender is about to


suffer; who, though in wrath, remembers mercy, and is disposed to


interpret the rule in the most gentle and favourable manner, and


to allow all the alleviations which the most candid humanity


could, consistently with good sense, admit of.


    As the selfish passions, according to what has formerly been


observed, hold, in other respects, a sort of middle place,


between the social and unsocial affections, so do they likewise


in this. The pursuit of the objects of private interest, in all


common, little, and ordinary cases, ought to flow rather from a


regard to the general rules which prescribe such conduct, than


from any passion for the objects themselves; but upon more


important and extraordinary occasions, we should be awkward,


insipid, and ungraceful, if the objects themselves did not appear


to animate us with a considerable degree of passion. To be


anxious, or to be laying a plot either to gain or to save a


single shilling, would degrade the most vulgar tradesman in the


opinion of all his neighbours. Let his circumstances be ever so


mean, no attention to any such small matters, for the sake of the


things themselves, must appear in his conduct. His situation may


require the most severe oeconomy and the most exact assiduity:


but each particular exertion of that oeconomy and assiduity must


proceed, not so much from a regard for that particular saving or


gain, as for the general rule which to him prescribes, with the


utmost rigour, such a tenor of conduct. His parsimony to-day must


not arise from a desire of the particular three-pence which be


will save by it, nor his attendance in his shop from a passion


for the particular ten-pence which he will acquire by it: both


the one and the other ought to proceed solely from a regard to


the general rule, which prescribes, with the most unrelenting


severity, this plan of conduct to all persons in his way of life.


In this consists the difference between the character of a miser


and that of a person of exact oeconomy and assiduity. The one is


anxious about small matters for their own sake; the other attends


to them only in consequence of the scheme of life which he has


laid down to himself.


    It is quite otherwise with regard to the more extraordinary


and important objects of self-interest. A person appears


mean-spirited, who does not pursue these with some degree of


earnestness for their own sake. We should despise a prince who


was not anxious about conquering or defending a province. We


should have little respect for a private gentleman who did not


exert himself to gain an estate, or even a considerable office,


when he could acquire them without either meanness or injustice.


A member of parliament who shews no keenness about his own


election, is abandoned by his friends, as altogether unworthy of


their attachment. Even a tradesman is thought a poor-spirited


fellow among his neighbours, who does not bestir himself to get


what they call an extraordinary job, or some uncommon advantage.


This spirit and keenness constitutes the difference between the


man of enterprise and the man of dull regularity. Those great


objects of self-interest, of which the loss or acquisition quite


changes the rank of the person, are the objects of the passion


properly called ambition; a passion, which when it keeps within


the bounds of prudence and justice, is always admired in the


world, and has even sometimes a certain irregular greatness,


which dazzles the imagination, when it passes the limits of both


these virtues, and is not only unjust but extravagant. Hence the


general admiration for heroes and conquerors, and even for


statesmen, whose projects have been very daring and extensive,


though altogether devoid of justice; such as those of the


Cardinals of Richlieu and of Retz. The objects of avarice and


ambition differ only in their greatness. A miser is as furious


about a halfpenny, as a man of ambition about the conquest of a


kingdom.





    II. Secondly, I say, it will depend partly upon the precision


and exactness, or the looseness and inaccuracy of the general


rules themselves, how far our conduct ought to proceed entirely


from a regard to them.


    The general rules of almost all the virtues, the general


rules which determine what are the offices of prudence, of


charity, of generosity, of gratitude, of friendship, are in many


respects loose and inaccurate, admit of many exceptions, and


require so many modifications, that it is scarce possible to


regulate our conduct entirely by a regard to them. The common


proverbial maxims of prudence, being founded in universal


experience, are perhaps the best general rules which can be given


about it. To affect, however, a very strict and literal adherence


to them would evidently be the most absurd and ridiculous


pedantry. Of all the virtues I have just now mentioned, gratitude


is that, perhaps, of which the rules are the most precise, and


admit of the fewest exceptions. That as soon as we can we should


make a return of equal, and if possible of superior value to the


services we have received, would seem to be a pretty plain rule,


and one which admitted of scarce any exceptions. Upon the most


superficial examination, however, this rule will appear to be in


the highest degree loose and inaccurate, and to admit of ten


thousand exceptions. If your benefactor attended you in your


sickness, ought you to attend him in his? or can you fulfil the


obligation of gratitude, by making a return of a different kind?


If you ought to attend him, how long ought you to attend him? The


same time which he attended you, or longer, and how much longer?


If your friend lent you money in your distress, ought you to lend


him money in his? How much ought you to lend him? When ought you


to lend him? Now, or to-morrow, or next month? And for how long a


time? It is evident, that no general rule can be laid down, by


which a precise answer can, in all cases, be given to any of


these questions. The difference between his character and yours,


between his circumstances and yours, may be such, that you may be


perfectly grateful, and justly refuse to lend him a halfpenny:


and, on the contrary, you may be willing to lend, or even to give


him ten times the sum which he lent you, and yet justly be


accused of the blackest ingratitude, and of not having fulfilled


the hundredth part of the obligation you lie under. As the duties


of gratitude, however, are perhaps the most sacred of all those


which the beneficent virtues prescribe to us, so the general


rules which determine them are, as I said before, the most


accurate. Those which ascertain the actions required by


friendship, humanity, hospitality, generosity, are still more


vague and indeterminate.


    There is, however, one virtue of which the general rules


determine with the greatest exactness every external action which


it requires. This virtue is justice. The rules of justice are


accurate in the highest degree, and admit of no exceptions or


modifications, but such as may be ascertained as accurately as


the rules themselves, and which generally, indeed, flow from the


very same principles with them. If I owe a man ten pounds,


justice requires that I should precisely pay him ten pounds,


either at the time agreed upon, or when he demands it. What I


ought to perform, how much I ought to perform, when and where I


ought to perform it, the whole nature and circumstances of the


action prescribed, are all of them precisely fixt and determined.


Though it may be awkward and pedantic, therefore, to affect too


strict an adherence to the common rules of prudence or


generosity, there is no pedantry in sticking fast by the rules of


justice. On the contrary, the most sacred regard is due to them;


and the actions which this virtue requires are never so properly


performed, as when the chief motive for performing them is a


reverential and religious regard to those general rules which


require them. In the practice of the other virtues, our conduct


should rather be directed by a certain idea of propriety, by a


certain taste for a particular tenor of conduct, than by any


regard to a precise maxim or rule; and we should consider the end


and foundation of the rule, more than the rule itself. But it is


otherwise with regard to justice: the man who in that refines the


least, and adheres with the most obstinate stedfastness to the


general rules themselves, is the most commendable, and the most


to be depended upon. Though the end of the rules of justice be,


to hinder us from hurting our neighbour, it may frequently be a


crime to violate them, though we could pretend, with some pretext


of reason, that this particular violation could do no hurt. A man


often becomes a villain the moment he begins, even in his own


heart, to chicane in this manner. The moment he thinks of


departing from the most staunch and positive adherence to what


those inviolable precepts prescribe to him, he is no longer to be


trusted, and no man can say what degree of guilt he may not


arrive at. The thief imagines he does no evil, when he steals


from the rich, what he supposes they may easily want, and what


possibly they may never even know has been stolen from them. The


adulterer imagines he does no evil, when he corrupts the wife of


his friend, provided he covers his intrigue from the suspicion of


the husband, and does not disturb the peace of the family. When


once we begin to give way to such refinements, there is no


enormity so gross of which we may not be capable.


    The rules of justice may be compared to the rules of grammar;


the rules of the other virtues, to the rules which critics lay


down for the attainment of what is sublime and elegant in


composition. The one, are precise, accurate, and indispensable.


The other, are loose, vague, and indeterminate, and present us


rather with a general idea of the perfection we ought to aim at,


than afford us any certain and infallible directions for


acquiring it. A man may learn to write grammatically by rule,


with the most absolute infallibility; and so, perhaps, he may be


taught to act justly. But there are no rules whose observance


will infallibly lead us to the attainment of elegance or


sublimity in writing; though there are some which may help us, in


some measure, to correct and ascertain the vague ideas which we


might otherwise have entertained of those perfections. And there


are no rules by the knowledge of which we can infallibly be


taught to act upon all occasions with prudence, with just


magnanimity, or proper beneficence: though there are some which


may enable us to correct and ascertain, in several respects, the


imperfect ideas which we might otherwise have entertained of


those virtues.


    It may sometimes happen, that with the most serious and


earnest desire of acting so as to deserve approbation, we may


mistake the proper rules of conduct, and thus be misled by that


very principle which ought to direct us. It is in vain to expect,


that in this case mankind should entirely approve of our


behaviour. They cannot enter into that absurd idea of duty which


influenced us, nor go along with any of the actions which follow


from it. There is still, however, something respectable in the


character and behaviour of one who is thus betrayed into vice, by


a wrong sense of duty, or by what is called an erroneous


conscience. How fatally soever he may be misled by it, he is


still, with the generous and humane, more the object of


commiseration than of hatred or resentment. They lament the


weakness of human nature, which exposes us to such unhappy


delusions, even while we are most sincerely labouring after


perfection, and endeavouring to act according to the best


principle which can possibly direct us. False notions of religion


are almost the only causes which can occasion any very gross


perversion of our natural sentiments in this way; and that


principle which gives the greatest authority to the rules of


duty, is alone capable of distorting our ideas of them in any


considerable degree. In all other cases common sense is


sufficient to direct us, if not to the most exquisite propriety


of conduct, yet to something which is not very far from it; and


provided we are in earnest desirous to do well, our behaviour


will always, upon the whole, be praise-worthy. That to obey the


will of the Deity, is the first rule of duty, all men are agreed.


But concerning the particular commandments which that will may


impose upon us, they differ widely from one another. In this,


therefore, the greatest mutual forbearance and toleration is due;


and though the defence of society requires that crimes should be


punished, from whatever motives they proceed, yet a good man will


always punish them with reluctance, when they evidently proceed


from false notions of religious duty. He will never feel against


those who commit them that indignation which he feels against


other criminals, but will rather regret, and sometimes even


admire their unfortunate firmness and magnanimity, at the very


time that he punishes their crime. In the tragedy of Mahomet, one


of the finest of Mr Voltaire's, it is well represented, what


ought to be our sentiments for crimes which proceed from such


motives. In that tragedy, two young people of different sexes, of


the most innocent and virtuous dispositions, and without any


other weakness except what endears them the more to us, a mutual


fondness for one another, are instigated by the strongest motives


of a false religion, to commit a horrid murder, that shocks all


the principles of human nature. A venerable old man, who had


expressed the most tender affection for them both, for whom,


notwithstanding he was the avowed enemy of their religion, they


had both conceived the highest reverence and esteem, and who was


in reality their father, though they did not know him to be such,


is pointed out to them as a sacrifice which God had expressly


required at their hands, and they are commanded to kill him.


While they are about executing this crime, they are tortured with


all the agonies which can arise from the struggle between the


idea of the indispensableness of religious duty on the one side,


and compassion, gratitude, reverence for the age, and love for


the humanity and virtue of the person whom they are going to


destroy, on the other. The representation of this exhibits one of


the most interesting, and perhaps the most instructive spectacle


that was ever introduced upon any theatre. The sense of duty,


however, at last prevails over all the amiable weaknesses of


human nature. They execute the crime imposed upon them; but


immediately discover their error, and the fraud which had


deceived them, and are distracted with horror, remorse, and


resentment. Such as are our sentiments for the unhappy Seid and


Palmira, such ought we to feel for every person who is in this


manner misled by religion, when we are sure that it is really


religion which misleads him, and not the pretence of it, which is


made a cover to some of the worst of human passions.


    As a person may act wrong by following a wrong sense of duty,


so nature may sometimes prevail, and lead him to act right in


opposition to it. We cannot in this case be displeased to see


that motive prevail, which we think ought to prevail, though the


person himself is so weak as to think otherwise. As his conduct,


however, is the effect of weakness, not principle, we are far


from bestowing upon it any thing that approaches to complete


approbation. A bigoted Roman Catholic, who, during the massacre


of St Bartholomew, had been so overcome by compassion, as to save


some unhappy Protestants, whom he thought it his duty to destroy,


would not seem to be entitled to that high applause which we


should have bestowed upon him, had he exerted the same generosity


with complete self-approbation. We might be pleased with the


humanity of his temper, but we should still regard him with a


sort of pity which is altogether inconsistent with the admiration


that is due to perfect virtue. It is the same case with all the


other passions. We do not dislike to see them exert themselves


properly, even when a false notion of duty would direct the


person to restrain them. A very devout Quaker, who upon being


struck upon one cheek, instead of turning up the other, should so


far forget his literal interpretation of our Saviour's precept,


as to bestow some good discipline upon the brute that insulted


him, would not be disagreeable to us. We should laugh and be


diverted with his spirit, and rather like him the better for it.


But we should by no means regard him with that respect and esteem


which would seem due to one who, upon a like occasion, had acted


properly from a just sense of what was proper to be done. No


action can properly be called virtuous, which is not accompanied


with the sentiment of self-approbation.





NOTES:





1. See Voltaire.





                Vous y grillez sage et docte Platon,


                Divin Homere, eloquent Ciceron, etc.





2. See Thomson's Seasons, Winter:


                'Ah! little think the gay licentious proud, etc.





See also Pascal.





3. See Robertson's Charles V. vol. ii, pp. 14 and 15. first edition.




